Go ogle 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the Copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to Copyright or whose legal Copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken Steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's System: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in Copyright varies from country to country, and we can't off er guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's Information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the füll text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . google . com/ 



LEIBNIZ 
THE MONADOLOGY, Etc. 

LATTA 



HENRY FROWDE, M.A. 

FUBLISHBR TO THB UNIVBRSITY OF OZFOKU 




LONDON, EDINBURGH, AND NEW YORK 



LEIBNIZ 
THE MONADOLOGY 



AND 

OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS 



TRANSLATED 

WITH INTRODUCTION AND NO TES :"• 

BY 

. ROBERT LATTA, M.A., D.Phil. (Edin.)],': - 

LECTURER IN LOGIC AND METAPHYSICS AT THE 
UNIVERSITY OF ST. ANDREWS 




AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
1898 



PRINTED AT THE C&ARENDON PRESS 

BY HORACE HART, M.A. 
PRINTBR TO THE UNIVERSITY 



• • • •• 
• • • 



» • • • • • • 



• • • 

• •••• 



10 0896 



• • • 



* *• * 
« • • • • 



PREFACE 



In this country Leibniz has received less attention 
than any other of the great philosophers. Mr. Merz 
has given, in a small volume, a general outline of 
Leibniz's thought and work, Professor Sorley has 
written for the ETKyydopaedia Britannica a remark- 
ably, clear, but brief , account of his philosophy, and 
there are American translations of the Novbveaux 
Essais and of some of his philosophical papers. That 
is very nearly the whole of English writing about 
him. Yet few philosophical Systems stand so much 
in need of exposition as that of Leibniz. His theories 
have to be extracted from seven large volnmes of 
correspondence, criticism, magazine articles, and other 
discursive writings, and it is only in recent years that 
this material has been made fully available by the 
publication of Gerhardt*s edition. No complete and 
detailed acconnt of Leibniz's philosopHy has hitherto 
been published in English, and accordingly I have 
written a very füll Introduction to this book, with 
illustrative foot-notes, consisting mainly of transla- 
tions from Leibniz himself. 

The endeavour of the book is to make the 
Monadology clear to students. I cannot agree with 
Dillmann in treating it as of little importance. 

A 3 



vi 



PEEFACE 



Leibniz himself expressly iDtended it to be a com- 
pact and ordered statement of the views he liad 
expounded in many scattei-ed papera and in hin 
somewhat desultory Tkeodicie, the only book he 
pubHshed, There is evidenee of this m Iiis coire- 
spondence and in the fact that he annotated the 
Monadology with references to passages in the 
Tkiöduie. My original intention was to publish 
a translation of these passages along with the 
Monadology, but on re-consideration it seemed better 
to translate aeveral ahort papers illuatrating different 
parts of Leibniz'a System and explaining its growth, 
Thus the Monadology, as being the centre of the 
book, is printed first of the translations (although 
in date it is last), while the other writings follow in 
chronological order. The only disadvantage of thif* 
an^angement is that it places the Prindples of Naivere 
and of Grace^ which is most akin to the Monadology, 
farthest away from it 

If I might venture to snggeet to the stndent the 
way in which the book should be read, I would 
recommend him first to read Part I of the Intro- 
duetion, then the Monadology (without the notes), 
afterwards Parts II and III of the Introdnetion, 
the Monadology again (with the notes), the other 
translationSj and finally Part IV of the Introduction, 
in which I have endeavoured to ' place * the philosophj^ 
of Leibniz in relation to the Systems which came 
before and after his. 

My indebtedness to authors is so great and variecl 
that I cannot acknowledge it in detail; but I may 
mention m specially helpful to me the worka of 
Boutroux, Dillmann, Nourisson, Nolen, and Stein. 
My thanks are due to Professor Jones, of Glasgow, 



PREFACE 



vii 



who read the Introduction in manuscript, for much 
valuable Suggestion and eritieism; and I am more 
than grateful to Professor Ritehie, of St. Andrews, 
who read the whole book, both in manuscript and in 
proof, and to whom it owes numerous improvements 
as well in form aa in matter. 

I have adopted the spelling 'Leibniz' in place of 
the traditional 'Leibnitz,' because the former was 
invariably used by Leibniz in signing his own name. 

It ought perhaps also to be mentioned that Parts 
II and III of the Introduction were accepted by the 
University of Edinburgh as a thesis for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy. 

ROBERT LATTA. 



University of St. Andrews, 
Juney 1898 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



PAOB 

Preface V 

Introduction : 

Part I. Life and Works of Leibniz . . . . i 
„ II. General Principles of the Philosophy of 

Leibniz . 21 

„ III. Detailed Statement of the Philosophy of 

Leibniz 74 

A. Leibnlz's Mathematics in relation to his 

Philosophy 74 

B. Matter 86 

C. Organism 108 

D. Self-Consclousness ..... 120 
Theory of Elnowledge . . . . lai 
Ethics 137 

„ IV. Historical and Critical Estimate of the Phi- 
losophy of Leibniz . . . .151 
Appendix A. Explanation of the Pre-established 

Harmony 200 

„ B. Formation of the Idea of Space . . 202 

„ C. Meaning of Cause 204 

„ D. Leibniz 's Logic 206 

„ E. Kant on his relation to Leibniz . . 208 

The Monadology 215 

Appendix F. Leibniz and Bayle on the multiplicity 

in the Monad 272 

„ G. Proof of the Existence of God . . 274 

On the Notions of Right and Justice . . . 281 



X 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

New System of the nature op Substances and of 

the communication between them . . . 297 . 

EXPLANATION OF THE NeW SySTBM .... 319 

Appendix H. On the Elements of Extension . . 329 

Third Explanation of the New System . . . 331 

On the Ultimate Origination op Things . . . 337 

Appendix I. Growth of Leibniz's Theories regarding 

Force and Motion .... 351 

New Essays on the Human Understanding— Intro- 

duction 355 

Principles of Nature and op Grace .... 405 

Index 425 



ABBEEVIATIONS 



E. God, Guü. Leibnitii cpera phüosophica quae extant laiinaj gdUica, ger- 
manica omnia, ed. J. E. Erdmann. Berlin, 1840. 

G. Die philosophischen Schriften von O, W. LeibniZj herausgegeben von 
C. J. Gerhardt. Berlin, 1875-90. 

G. Math. Leibnisens mathematische Schriften^ herausgegeben von C. J. 
Gerhardt. Berlin and Halle, 1850-63. 

Dutens. G. G. Leibnitii opera omnia, nunc primum coHecta, studio 
Ludovici Dutens. Geneva, 1768. 

Klopp. Die Werke von Leihniz, herausgegeben von Onno Klopp. 
Hanover, 1864-77. 

Foucher de Careil. (Euvres de Leibniz, publiees pour la premi^e fois 
d*apr^8 les maniLscrits originavtXj par A. Foucher de Careil. Paris, 
1859-75. 

MoUat. Rechtsphilosophisches aus Leibnizens ungedruckten Schrißen, von 
Dr. Georg Mollat. Leipzig, 1885. 



INTRODUCTION 



PAET L 

THE LIFE AND WORKS OP LEIBNIZ. 

His Boyhood, 

On June 21, 1646, two years before the elose of 
the Thirty Years' War, Grottfried Wilhelm Leibniz was 
born at Leipzig. His family was of Bohemian origin ; 
but his ancestors for several generations had lived in 
Saxony and Prussia, and his father was a Professor of 
Philosophy in the University of Leipzig. Leibniz was 
only six years of age when his father died ; and, though 
in his early years he had the training of a pious mother, 
she also passed away before he had completed his Univer- 
sity studies. The boys of Leipzig in Leibniz's time 
appear to have been brought up on * the picture-book of 
Comenius and the little Catechism ' (Luther's) ; but the 
soul of Leibniz already sought strenger meat, and having 
found in the house an illustrated copy of Livy, of which 
he could not thoroughly understand a single line, he 
managed to get a tolerable idea of its contents, supple- 
menting his scanty Latin by a study of the pictures and 
some judicious guessing. As an indirect result of this 
precocity, his father's library was thrown open to him, 
and he wandered at will from volume to volume, finding 
(as was ever characteristic of him) some good in all^ 

^ ' It is characteristic of me to hold Opposition (^Widerlegen) as o£ 

B 



nTTRODTTCnON 



Providence or Fortune seemed to eay to him, ToUej lege; 
and it ia significant for the philosophy to come that he 
tumed first to ihe Äncients^ to Cicero, Quintüian, Seneca, 
Pliny, Herodotws. Xenophon, Plato, tli0 historiaiis of the 
Koman Empirej and the Fathers of tho Church- Of tbese 
he teils ns that *he untJerstood at first nothing, then 
gradually something, and ünally enoiigh ' ; but uncon- 
sciously his mind was coloured by their style and thought, 
'as men Walking in the sun have their faces browned 
witbout knowing it/ and under their inspiration he made 
it the rule of his lifo ever to seek clearness in apeaking 
and a oseful pui^ose in acting (in verbis claritas, in rebus 
tmis), Thus at fourteen years of age he was counted by 
his fellows a prodigy of learning and ability, and already 
his reading of Logic and inten se determination towards 
clearness of thought and speech had led him to ideas 
which were afterwards developed into the snggestion of 
a logical Calculus and an * Alphabet of Concepts' as 
means to the discovery of tniih K 

University Liß. 

At fifteen years of age Leibniz became a student at the 
University of Leipzig, andabout the sametimehe became 

little accotint, e:xpOfiitir>ii (Baflegen) fta of much nefiount, nnd when 
A now book comea into my hands I look for wliat 1 ean leani 
fi-om it, nöt for what 1 Cftn criti^i^ in it/ Schreiben an Wagner 
(1696) (E, 435 b ; vii, 526). 

* *■ B^jfore I r€iached the school-clasB Sn whicli Logic waa tnuglit. 
I was de«p in tbe iiistormzia and poets ; for I Imd begun to rcRd 
the histflrianä almost as aooji 1 was able to read at all, and in 
versfi I found groat pleasure and mse ; but &3 bood as I began 
loam Iiogic I found myself ^eatly^ ercited by th© divi^ion and 
Order of thoughts whicb 1 perceived fchürein, 1 immediately began 
to notjce, so far as a boy of thirttiGn could, tbat there mtist h& a 
gr^at deal in it, I took the greate^^t pleasui^ m the Predieament^ ' 
(i, e, the Categories) ' which came befortj as a muster-roll of all 
the things in the woHdj and I turned to ^'Logics" ofail aorta to 
find tho be&t and mmt detailed form of this list. I ofien osked 
myaelf and my achoolföllowa to which Prediaament and also to 
which ßub-claae tJiiä or that thing might belong/ Schreiben an 
Q, Waffner (EL 420 a ; Vit, 516), 



LIFE AND WORKS 



3 



acquainted with the works of some of the modern philo- 
sophers, beginning with Bacon's De Äugmentis Sdentiartm. 
At this time also, as he himself teils us, he read with 
interest the works of Cardan and Campanella and the 
suggestions of a better philosophy in Kepler, Galileo, and 
Descartes. But he was no * reading-machine, all wound 
up and going/ He thought for himself : he read in order 
to * weigh and consider.' And thus in after-years he re- 
calls how, when he was fifteen years of age, he walked 
alone in a wood near Leipzig, called the Eosenthal, to 
consider whether or not he should retain in his philo- 
sophy the 'Substantial Forms' of the Scholastics\ 
Although his favourite teacher at Leipzig was Jacob 
Thomasius, a Professor of Philosophy, deeply versed in 
ancient and scholastic learning, the private reading of 
Leibniz at first prevailed in his thought and he turned 
from the older philosophies to * mechanism * and mathe- 
matics. The * Substantial Forms ' were for the time set 
aside, to reappear, transmuted, in later years. His 
scholastic studies, however, bore fruit in the earliest of 
his published writings, a graduation thesis with the 
significant title De principio individui, in which he de- 
fended the Nominalist position. Intending to devote him- 
self to the profession of law, he went for a year (in 1663) 
to Jena, where the mathematician, Erhard Weigel, was 
lecturing on * the Law of Nature,' or what we should now 
call Jurisprudenee in general. Doubtless the influence 
of Weigel tended to confirm Leibniz's mathematical 
bent, and he still continued his study of history. In 
1666 the University of Leipzig, ostensibly on the ground 
of his youth, refused to give him the Doctorate in Law ; 
but his thesis. De casihus perplexis in jure, was immediately 
accepted by the University of Altdorf (near Nürnberg), 
where he declined the offer of a professorship. Thus 
ended his connexion with Leipzig. 



* Lettre ä M, Remond (1714) (E. 702 a ; G. iii. 606). 
B 2 



4 



INTRODUCnOH 



Bmmhurg and tjw EUcior of Mainz, 

In Kürnberg, at that time the Capital of a small 
republic, which had suftered less than many other 
German States from the Thii-ty Yeare' War, Leibniz spent 
a year, in the course of which bis extensive cnriosity led 
hini to beeome a niember of a seeret society of the 
Rosicrueians, who were tiying to find the philosüpher's 
stone. Fontenelle teils us that Leibniz*s method of 
gaining admisaion to th© socioty was to collect from 
books on alehemy all tbe niost obscure phraaes h© could 
find and to mako of them an unintolligibla letter, which 
he produced as evidence of his fitness for membership. 
The society was so inipressed that it immediately ap- 
pointed him to be its aecretary. The chief gain to Leibniz 
appears to have been that through this society he becarne 
acq[uainted with Baron yon Boineburg, *one of the most 
celebmted diplomatists of his age/ who had formerly 
been minister to the Elector and Ai'chbishop of Mainz^ 
the most powerful man in the Empire. With Boineburg 
Leibniz went to Pi-ankfort^ where he wrote and pub- 
lished a papor on legal education, which was the moans 
of introdueing him to the archbishop, in whose aervice 
he remained for some time* This was the beginning of 
hiß career a diplomatist, The long war had left 
Germany in ruiiis^ and, ere there was time to rebuild, 
the whole empire was threatened by the immense power 
of Louis XIV, who was dreaming of world-wide sway. 
The Elector of Mainz, says Leibniz, *had seen the miseries 
of Germanyj whose ruins were still snioking ; he was one 
of those who had laboured most to bring back rest to the 
land, from which life seemed almost to ha%'e gone^ The 
country was (as one mighfc hardly say) peopled " with 
little children^ and if wmr were to break out again {as 
might be ejspected when Sweden was iiritated and France 
threataning) there was every reason to fear that this seed 
of a new population would be deatroyed and a great part 



LIFE AND WORKS 



5 



of poor Germany left almost without inhabitant \* The 
treaty of Westphalia had secured peace and some measure 
of political unity, but it pointed also to an ecclesiastical 
reunion, yet to be realized, which to men like the Elector 
of Mainz and Boineburg seemed the best means of re- 
storing power and happiness to the country. Negotiations 
for the reunion of Roman Gatholics and Protestants had 
already been begun, and thus early in his diplomatic 
career Leibniz took part in the work of conciliation 
which in various ways he continued throughout his life. 
At the Suggestion of Boineburg he made a special study 
of the doctrine of transubstantiation, with the result 
(expressed in a letter to Arnauld in 1671) that he found 
it impossible to reeoncile the Cartesian view of material 
substance as pure extension either with the Boman 
Catholic or with the Lutheran doctrine. He accord- 
ingly formed the piu*pose of discovering a theoiy of 
substance which should satisfy both, and should thus 
become a philosophieal basis for the reconciliation of the 
Churches. 

Paris and London, 

Presently events occurred which led him away from 
Mainz and gave him new opportunities of study and of 
intercourse with leamed men. Leibniz and his friends 
feit strongly the neoessity of drawing into safe Channels 
the military ambitions of Louis XIV, and accordingly 
Leibniz prepared a most elaborate work in which he 
suggested to the King of France the advantages that 
would arise from a conquest of Egypt, and tried to con- 
vince hira that it was more worthy of a Christian king 
to fight the unchristian Türks than to harass a poor 
little people like the Dutchl This book was never 

* From a letter of Leibniz, quoted by Foucher de Careil, vol. iv. 
Introduetion, p. xx. 

^ This Projet de Oonquete de VBgypie was published by Foucher de 
Careil, vol. v. It shows a most remarkable knowledge regarding 
the «täte of the country and its possibilities, and so clever are the 



6 



INTRODUCTION 



actually presented to King Loiiis^ bufc Leibniz in 167? 
went by invitation to Paiis to explaia Iiis project His 
ad vice waa no t taken ; but he remained in Paris for 
four yeat-Sj during which he devoted himself to the study 
of the higher mathematics * and to the discussion of the 
Carteaian phUo&ophy. He had already corresponded with 
Amauld, and he now met also Huygens and Male- 
branehe, At this tinic^ aays Leibniz himself, *kw and 
hiatoiy were my forte ^/ But intercöurae with Huygens 
and the study of the mathematical works of Pascal intro- 
duced him to the problema of modern mathematics* 
Huygens, he teils us^, * had no taste for metaphysics/ 
but Leibniz learned from him mathematical methods 
and principles which influenced the growth of his pliilo- 
sophy, and which aet him on the way to the diacQvery of 
the Differential Cakulus, At this time also Leibniz in- 
vented a calculating machine, öuperior to that of Pascal^ 
which eould only add and subtract^ while his own machine 
could also multiply, divide, and extraet ruots. And in 
other ways the residence of Leibniz in Paris greatly 
aifected his life-work, For instance, it probably led to 
his writing so much in French. He had already, in his 
essay on the philosophical style of Nizolius (1670), advo- 
cated the uae of the Oerman language for philosophical 
and other works. But in the time of Louis XIV Paris 
waB the intellectual centre of Europe, and to write for 
the World was to write in French. While, therefore, 

plana whieh it suggesta thafc Napoleon waa at one time auppoaed 
to hav© borrowed ita ideaa for hia campa^ign. Tiiough this has 
been shown to be a mistake, the coincidence between the suggested 
expedition of Louis XIV and the actual expedition of Napoleon 
sufficiontly noteworthy* 

* ^Th© merit of an aiithor in mathematics cannot be disputcd, as 
it can in öther Bubjects. This is the reuson why I remained aome 
tune in France, in order to perfect myself in mathematics^ and 
1 gav© my time to these scienoea not on thoir own aceount, bnt in 
order to mako tliom contribute to the advaneement of piety/ Leitr* 
m Duc Jean Fr4ä4ric (undated) (Klopp, iv» 450). 

' Lettre ä la Comt^ase de Kilmar^gg 5,1716) (Dutetks, iii, 456) ► 

* 70a b j G, iii, 607. 



LIFE AND WORKS 



7 



Leibnijg has rightly been called *th« father of German 
philosophy,' he is only to a very small extent a German 
author. 

The four years' residence of Leibniz in Paris waö 
broken by a brief visit to England in the early months 
of 1673. Leibniz had akeady sought ihe favour of Eng- 
liah leaming by dedicating one of bis publications to the 
Eoyal Society, and he had also been greatly interested in 
the philosophy of Hobbes, with which to a great extent 
he found himself in agreement, especially as regards 
questions of physics, although he was strongly opposed 
to his political theoriea In 1670 he wrote a letter 
to HobbeSy to which he received no answer, and after- 
wards he began another letter, but left it unfinished. It 
has recently been maintained that, up to the year 1670, 
Leibniz was *more deeply affected by Hobbes than by 
any other of the leading spirits of the new time \' When 
Leibniz visited London, Hobbes was still living there, 
but he was eighty-five years of age, and some years 
earlier Leibniz had heard from his countryman Olden- 
burg, who was secretary of the Royal Society, that 
Hobbes was in his dotage. Accordingly it is not sur- 
prising that they did not meet. Apart from Oldenburg, 
the man with whom Leibniz seems to have had most 
intercourse during this visit to London was Robert Boyle, 
the famous physicist ; but there is no reason to suppose 
that Leibniz gained much from his stay in England, 
except an additional Stimulus to the study of the higher 
mathematics, which he carried on more systematically 
after his return to Paris. As a fitting conclusion of his 
Parisian period came th^ discovery of the Differential 
Calculus, which was practically accomplished by Leibniz 

* See Tönnies in Phüos, Monatsheße, vol. xxiii. pp. 557-573. Cf. 
Leibniz's Letter to Hobbes (1670) (G. i. 85) : 'I constantly maintain 
among my friends, and, with the help of God, I will always publicly 
maintain also, that I know no writer who has philosophized more 
accurately, more; dearly, and more elegantly than you, not evea 
ezoepting a man of such excellent genius as Descartes himself.' 



lOTRODUGTTON 



in 1676- There can be no doubt that Newton was in 
possGssion of a aimilar method as early as 1665. He at 
first made known only some of the resuUs of tlie method, 
and not the method itaelf. Henc© an attempt has been 
made to show that Leihniz got hints of the method 
during hia first visit to England, and that he was thiia 
more or loss a plagiarist of Newton. But there is nothing 
to confirm this, and a füll consideration makea it much 
more likely that eaeh discovered the method indepen- 
dently. Leibni/. published his aceount of the method in 
1684 : Newton'^ wa,'^ first pnbiished in 1693, To Newton 
belongs the glory of priority, whatever that may be 
Worth ; .while the form whieh Leibniz gave to the Cal- 
culus, the names and the signs which he used, have come 
to he nniversally employed in preferenc© to tbose of 
Newton \ 

Visit to Spinoza. 

Shortly before Leibniz went to London, Boineburg 
died ; and the visit to London was unexpectedly brought 
to an end in March, 1673, by the death of the Archbishop 
of Mainz* Leibniz was now without an official position, 
and during the next few yeai-a he made varioua unsue- 
eeasful attemptö to obtain a diplomatic appointment. At 
last in 16^6, he somewhat reluctantly accepted the post 
of librarian to the Duke of Brunswick at Hanover, which 
was to be his home during the reraainder of his life, 
During the earlier years of his residence in Paris, Leibniz 
had given much attention to the philosophy of Descartes 
and the Cartesians, with the result that he became more 
and more convinced of ita insufficiency^ In his en- 

^ S©o Merz, Leibniz (Blaekwood's Philosophical Clasaics), ch, iii, 
and V, Cf, Guliraüör'B LeibniUj L 170 aqq. 

A few yearä »fter (in 1679) Leibniz writesi to Philipp: *Aa to 
th© philosophy of DesscarteB I hav© no heaitation m öaying abero- 
lutely that it JeÄds to atheism' (G. iv. a8t). And in the same 
yeÄT he writos to Malebranch© that, whüe in m^ny reapecta he 
admires DesiiarteS) he is ' eonviuced th&t his mechanica is füll of 



LIFE AND WORKS 



9 



deayour after a more satisfactory metaphysic he after- 
wards made a considerable study of Plato, and in 1676 
he translated the Phaedo and the I%eaetetus. Towards 
the end of 1675 Leibniz became acquainted with the 
young Bohemian nobleman, Tschirnhausen, Spinoza's 
acute eritic and correspondent, who was at that time in 
Paris^ and who had earlier in the same year written 
some of the remarkable letters on account of which his 
name will always be associated with that of Spinoza \ 
Leibniz had already (in 1671) written to Spinoza from 
Frankfort about a question of optics ; but now Tschirn- 
hausen seems to ha^e aroused in him the hope that 
a Solution of the diffieulties of Gartesianism might be 
found in the unpublished System of Spinoza. In 
November, 1675, a medical Mend of Spinoza in Amster- 
dam (G. H. Schuller) wrote to him : * Von Tschirnhausen 
further mentions that he has found at Paris a man called 
Leibniz, remarkably leamed and most skilled in various 
Sciences, as also free fcom the vulgär prejudices of 
theology. With him he has formed an intimate aequain- 
tance, foimded on the fact that Leibniz labours with him 
to pursue the perfection of the intellect, and, in fact, 
reckons nothing better or more useful. Von Tschimhausen 
says that he is most practised in ethics, and speaks with- 
out any impulse derived from the passions, but by the 
sole dictate of reasoo. He adds that he is most skilled in 
physics, and also in metaphysical studies concerning God 
and the souL Finally, he concludes that he is most 
worthy of having communicated to him the master's 
writings, if you will first give your permissicwa, for he 
believes that the author will thence gain a great ad- 
vantage, as he promises to show at length, if the master 
be so pleased. But if not, do not doubt in the least that 

errors, his physics is too hastj, his geometryis too limited, and 
his metaphysics has .all these faults combined' (G. i. 328). 

* Itetters, 57 sqq. Van Vlofcein and Land, vol. ii. p. 204 ; Bruder, 
vol. ii. p, 331 (Letters, 61 sqq.). 



xo 



lOTEODirCTIOK 



he will lionourably keep them concealed he haa 
promised^ as in fact he has not made the slightest men- 
tion üf them, LeibnLs^ also bighly values the Theohgtco- 
Fölitkal TrmtisCy oo the subjeet of which be once wrote 
the master a ktter, if he is noi mistaken ^' Spinoza, in 
reply, recolLects having sonie correspondenee with Leibnisti 
but Leibniz was at that tim© a counsellor at Frankfort, 
and Spinoza would like to know, before entrusting his 
writinga to him, wbat ha is doing in Franee, and he 
would also like to have Tscbirnhausen's opinion of 
Leibniz, after a longer and more intimate acquaintance, 
Spinoxa'ö sbyne,^ had probably no other eifect than to 
whet the curiosity of Leibniz, and accordingly, wben he 
left Paris in October, 1676, be went for a week to 
London (where he met for the first tima Kowton^s friend 
Collins) and tben erossed to Amsterdam, where he stayed 
four weeks with Schuller, eagerly reading and criticizing 
every writing of Spinoza's which Scbuller eould give 
him, Ät last, in November, Leibniz obtained an inter- 
view with Spinoza at the Hague, where he seems to have 
spent some time. Tbey bad many conyersations together 
regardiug philo sophical matter of wbicb Leibniz bat* 
left bardly any rocord exeept the remark that ' Spinom 
did not quite elearly aee the defects of Descartes" 
lawa of motion ; he was surprised when I began to show 
him that tbey were inconsistent with the equality of 
cause and effeet'/ Tbo persistence of Leibniz ultimately 
induced Spinoza to show bim the MS. of the Ethks 
(or at least a portion of it), and he seema even to 
have bad permiseion to make a oopy of the leading 
definitions, axioms, and propositions ^, Wbat at tbia time 
most dissatisfied Leibniz was SpinosEa's treatment of 
Final Cauaes. His recent etndy of Plato had irapressed 

* Letter 70, Van Yloten and Land, vol. ii. p, 235, 

^ Spiaozü diüd in the following year, aud auon afUirwards th^ 
Ethks wati publkhed. 



LIFE AND WORKS 



II 



Leibniz with the value of teleological considerations, and 
he was already seeking in that direction an escap^ from 
the imperfections of the mechanical view of things. But 
his general hostility to Spmoza's aystem did not show 
itself until ten years later, when he had settled the 
essentud points of his own doctrine of substance. At 
this time Leibniz was still seeking light in every 
quarter. 

Besidence in Hanover. Correspondence and Grmth qf 
his System. 

Leibniz arrived at Hanover in the last days of 1676. 
Efferts liad already been made to convert him to the 
Boman Catholic feith, and he had begun a correspondence 
with Eellisson (a distinguished convert from Protes- 
tantism) in the hope of finding some means of Church 
reunion. This correspondence led to others, of which the 
most important was one with Bossuet. But, though 
Leibniz was more or less occupied with these discussions 
throughout the rest of his life, nothing practical came of 
them. Bossuet's attitude in the discussion was only too 
well expressed in his exclamation regarding Leibniz: 
ütinam ex nostris esset! *Would that he were one of 
US ! ' And Leibniz was too much of a scientific inquirer 
to unite two opposed religious communions. He might 
draw up a statement of dogma to which both sides could 
assent \ but inevitably it would express the real belief of 
neither. The endeavour to convert Leibniz was not given 
up for a very long time, and a brief visit of his to Kome 
in 1689 seems to have caused a flutter of excitement. 
He was offered the librarianship of the Vatican and other 
posts with a vista of preferment ; but conversion was so 
far from his mind that we hear of him bringing from 
the Catacombs a piece of glass, reddened with the blood 
of martyrs, in order to submit it to chemical analysis ! 

* He actually attempted this, in what has been grandiloquently 
called the Systema Theologxcum, written in 1686. 



12 



INTROBUCTION 



It was du ring the early years of his residence in 
Hanover that Leibniz woiked out the leading ^6ms of 
hiß System. Dkappointed in his hope of finding in 
Bpinoza a saviour from th© ©rrors of Deacartes, and being 
the rather conßrmed, by Spinoza's conclusionsj in his 
conyiction of the insufficiency of any meraly meehanicml 
interpretation of things, he turned with renewed iiiterest 
to Flato\ with the result that towarda 1680 he bad 
r^ached the conception of sübstaiiee as esseiitially adk^ 
force. It IS possible also that, in spite of bis general 
dissatisfaction with Spinoza^s position, some of Spinoza's 
ideas (such as that of the cmatm or self-preserving 
tendency of things) may haye contributed to the develop- 
meat of his new view of substanca One furfcher step 
was needed to complete the theory, namely, the recogni- 
tion that the force constituting a euhstaneö is not a 
universal world-prineiple, tut something individual — 
that there are substances which are forces. To this position 
he seems to bave attained about 1684 or a little later, 
through a return to the consideration of Aristotle and the 
Peripatetic Schools, wbose views he had set aaide in hh 
boyhood, nearly twenty-fiTe years before. The main ideas 
of bis pbilosöphy {snch as his coneeption of * simple 
substance ' and his pre-established harmony) were ürst 
stated in the correspondence with Arnauld, which took 
place between r68ö and 1690. Thia correspondence, 
however, was not published as a whole until 1846 ; and 
tbe learned world was firat made aware that Leibniz had 
worked out a pbÜosophical System of his own by two 
papers which he published in 1695— one (the Specimen 
Bffnaimmm) in the Leipzig Acta Eruditomm, and the 
other {the Systhne Nomeau) in the Freneh Journal des 
Savüfits. Leibniz uses the tezm ' monad ^ f or the firat 
time in 1 697, 

* *0f all the ancient philoaophers I find Plato the inoat satis- 
faefcory in regard to metaphysica/ Lettre ä U. Seurffvet (17 14) t^« 
723 a j iii. 568). 



LIFE AND WORKS 



13 



The ' Nouveaux Essais ' and the * TModkee. ' 

Having thus definitely fixed his philosophieal System 
and having published its leading principle», Leibniz 
gradually expounded it in detail, for the most part by 
means of correspondence and criticism. Hitherto he 
had given most attention to ontological or purely meta- 
physical problems. But now he began to consider more 
carefully the theory of knowledge and the psyehologieal 
que»tions that are connected with it. Locke's Essay was 
publi^ied in 1690, and a few years afkerwards Leibnia 
read it, writing (as was his eustom) notes and comments 
as he read. Some of these criticisms were in 1697 sent 
to Locke, who treated them with contempt, and made no 
reply^ Li 1703 Leibniz wrote the Nouveavx Essais sur 
VEntendement humain, a long dialogue, in which the views 
of Locke and ^f himself are set in contrast throughout 
a discussion dealing with the subjeets ©f Locke's Essay 
chapter by chapter. This book was evidently intended 
to call fofth a rejoinder from Locke. But before it was 
ready for publieation Locke died (in 1 704) ; and Leibniz, 
saying that he ^ greatly disliked Publishing refutations of 
dead authors,' and that he now 'preferred to publish his 
thoughts independently of another pei-son's,' allowed the 
Nouveaux Essais to remain in manuseript, so that the 
book was first published by Easpe in 1765, nearly fifty 
years after Leibniz's death^ 

After writing some other papers on psyehologieal and 

^ In 1697 he writes to Thomas Burnet of Kemnay: *I have 
changed and changed again, according as new light came to me ; 
and it is only about twelre years since I found wh^t satisfies me, and 
arrived at demonstrations regarding matters which did not seem 
eapable of demonstration.' (G. iii. 205. ) 

Leibniz (in 1714) says that he was not surprised at Locke's 
disdain. *The difference between our principles was somewhat 
too great, and what I maintained seemed to him to be paradox/ 
He adds that Locke ^had subtlety and dexterity, and he had 
a kind of superficial metaphysics which he knew how to make the 
most of ; but he did not know the method of mathematicians.' 
Ltttre ä Remmd (E, 703 b ; G. iii. 6is). 



14 



INTHODUCTION 



epistemological aubjeets, Leibniz, in 1710, published his 
Thcodi€t% the one great work of his wliich was printed 
in bis bfetime. It was writtea, not contiTiuoualy, but at 
intervala, in a very diffuse and discursive style, and its 
pnrpose was to develop the prineiplea of its authors 
pbiloaophy in maintaining, against the axguments of 
Pierre Bayle, the harmony of faith and reason, and to 
*vindicate the waya of God to man.' The writing of 
the Theoäicee was suggested to Leibniz as the reault of 
conversations with Queen Sophia Charlotte of Prussia, 
who also induced Ii im to write various other philo- 
sophical papera, and who encouraged him in his plana 
for the founding of an Aeaderay at Berlin, Besides the 
exposition of bis system which he gives in such elaborate 
works as the Nomeaux Essais and the Theodicee, Leibniz 
met the objections of eritics and suggeated new applications 
of his principles in the courae of a varied correspondence, 
On questions of matliematics and physics in their con- 
nexion with metaphysics, lie corresponded with John 
Bernouilli for more than twenty years (from 1694 to 
1716), and for ten years (i 706-1716) he diacussed with 
Des Bosses the possibility of combining bis phüosophy 
of ßubstanee with the presuppoaitions of the doctrine 
of transubstantiation» Further, among many other epi- 
stolary d iscussionS j mention may he made of Leibniz 's 
correapondence, dunng the last two yeara of his life, 
with Bourguet on the chief doetrinea of his philosophy, 
with special reference to biological questions, and with 
Clarke on space and time and the Divine attributes. 

Fmnding of Amäemks, Closmg Years. 

The amazing intellectual activity of Leibniz found 
expression in many other writings, Düring the greater 
part of his residence at Hanover he worked at a hiatoiy 
of the house of Brunswick, in connexion with which he 
travelled much and ranaacked the libraries of Germany 
and Italy. He suggeated the development of mining in 



LIFE AND WORKS 



15 



the Harz Mountains, and in connexion with this he 
studied and wrote on geological subjects and on the 
currency. But, above all, the interest of Leibniz in these 
later years lay in the endeavour to extend science and 
civilization throughout Europe. With this end in view, 
he, who (according to Trederick the Ghreat) was an 
Academy in himself, succeeded after much effort in 
obtaining the foundation of an Academy at Berlin, of 
which he himself was appointed the first president 
(1700). Afterwards he made long-continued but un- 
successful attempts to induce the King of Poland, the 
Czar, and the Emperor to found similar Academies at 
Dresden, St. Petersburg, and Vienna. He had inter- 
views with Peter the Great, whom he expected to 
become 'the Selon of Kussia,' and he lived for some 
time in Vienna, where he tried to bring about an alliance 
between the Czar and the Emperor. Charles VI favoured 
his projeets for the founding of leamed societies, and he 
was also strongly aupported by Prince Eugene of Savoy, 
for whom in 17 14 he wrote the Monadologie (or, as 
Gerhardt maintains, the Principes de la Nature et de la 
Gräce). But Europe was füll of wars and rumours of 
wars, and the peaceful plaais of Leibnk were set aside. 
The Berlin Academy had a struggUng existence, and no 
other was founded until long after Leibniz's death. 

The happiest years of the lifo of Leibniz were now 
Over. The Duke of Brunswick^ died in 1698, and 
Leibniz seems gradually to have lost favour with his son 
and successor, our George L After the death of his 
friends, Hhe two Electresses,' Sophia and Sophia Charlotte 
(the mother and the sister of George I), Leibniz's position 
became intolerable. George I succeeded to the English 
crown in 17 14, and his prejudices against Leibniz, shown 
in his displeasure on account of the latter's residence in 
Vienna, were encouraged by some of Newton's friends, 

* Successor of the duke who had originally appointed Leibniz to 
the librarianship at Hanover. 



lOTEODUCTION 



whom he möt in Englan<3. Leibniz thought of leaving 
Hanover; but in later years his health had been some- 
what broken, and on November 14, 17 16, he died during 
an attack of gout His secr^tary, Eckhart, invited al] 
the people of tbe Court to his funer al, but not one of 
them came^ and Eck hart alone followöd his master^s body 
to the grave. An acquaintance of Leibniz, John Ker of 
Keraland \ who had come to Hanover on the very day 
©f Leibniz^s death^ says that he was buried ' more likö 
a robber tban, what he really was, the ornament of his 
country/ No minister of religio n was present ; for 
Leibniz was parms deorum eultor et infrequensj and his 
absence from church was counted to liiin for iiTeligion, 
so that from prlests and peüplo h© got the nickname 
Lövenix (the Low German for Glaubet nichts^ believer in 
nothing). The BerMn Acadomy and the Eoyal Society 
of London took no notlce of his death ; but a year 
ai'torwards Fönten eile* com memo rat ed it in a fine oration^ 
deliverad before the Parisian Academy. 

Personal Characterisiks, 

As to the personal characteristies of Leibniz^ Eckhart 
teils US that he was of middle height^ with a somewhat 
large head, dark-brown hair, and small but very sharp 
eycs. He was near-sighted, but had no difiieulty in 
reading^ and himself wrote a very smaU hand. His lungs 
were not strong, and he had a thin but clear voice» "with 
a diificulty in pronouncing gutturals. He was broad- 
shouldered and always walked with his head bent for- 
-ward, so that he looked like a man with a humped back. 
In £gure he was siim rather than stout^ and his legs 

* A leader of iho Scottisli Cameroniaiia. He liyed on politicai 
intrigue, and Tvhen his re^^ourcea in England ^vei-© failing Jiini he 
presented to th^ Kmpt ror, throupli LeibiiiÄ, a project for privateor- 
ing and biiccii nee ring again h(t th© Spaniarda i» tli© Pacific, In 
th© pQUHml Memmr tioutaining Kor'ö propowals tliüro 18 a tui'iou« 
medley of j eligioua ooiisideratjona and ihe hop© of galn. Cf* Fouoher 
d© Cai^il, iv. ^72 sqq. 




LIFE AND WORKS 



17 



were crooked. His household airangements (if they can 
be called * arrangements ') were very irregulär. He had 
no fixed höurs for meals, but, when a convenient oppor- 
tunity came in the course of his studies, he sent out for 
something to eat. He once made a proposal of marriage 
(when he was fiffcy years of age), but the lady took time to 
consider, and (Fontenelle says) 'this gave Leibniz also 
time to consider, and he never married.' He slept little, 
but well : he often spent the night in his chair, and 
sometimes he would remain in it for several days at a 
tima This enabled him to do a great deal of work ; but 
it led to illness, for which, disliking physicians, he em- 
ployed remedies more ' heroic ' than wise. He enjoyed 
intercourse with all sorts and conditions of nien, believing 
that he could always leam something, even from the 
most Ignorant. ' Cmn Socrate semp^r ad discendum paratus 
sum.' * He spoke well of everybody,' says Eckhart, *and 
made the best of everjrthing ' (er kehrte alles mm Besten). 
He often congratuJates himself on being self-taugM 
(avToBidaKTos), and thus able to avoid acquiescence in super- 
ficial, ready-made knowledge and to strike out paths of 
his own. Tor he is ever (he teils us) * eager to penetrate 
into all things more deeply than is usually done iuid to 
find something new.' 

* When,' says Diderot, * one considers oneself and 
compares one's talents with those of a Leibniz, one is 
tempted to throw books away and seek some hidden 
comer of the world where one may die in peace. This 
man's mind was a foe of disorder : the most entangled 
things feil into order when they entered it. He com- 
bined two great qualities which are almost incompatible 
with one another — the spirit of discovery and that of 
method ; and the most determined and varied study, 
through which he accumulated knowledge of the most 
widely differing kinds, weakened neither the one quality 
nor the other. In the füllest meaning these words can 
bear, he was a philosopher and a mathematician V 
' Encydopediej (Euvres (Ass^zat's ed.)» vol. xy. p. 440. 
C 



INTRODUCTION 



The Works ofLeümw. 

Many of the most important philosophical works of 
Leibnise were not published tili after Ms death, Large 
quantities of manu Script were preserved in the Royal 
Library at Hanover, and successive oditors have €on- 
tinually drawn upon it for publication, The cliief editions 
of the philosophical works are that of Erdmann (1840) 
and that of Gerhardt {1875-go), the latter being the 
most complete. In 1866 Janet published an edition in 
French, containing the principal works as they are given 
in Erdmann, with the addition of the correspondenoe 
betwesD Leibniz and Arnanldj which had not been pub- 
lished Tvhen Erdmaiin's edition appeare<3, The mathe- 
maiical works wer© published by Gerhardt in seven 
volumes (1850-63). Of the historical and political works 
Onno Klopp published ten volii mea {1864-77). ^^^u ch er 
de Careil also published in seven Tolumes {1859-75) 
some of Leibniz's political works^ along with his corre- 
fipondence on the reunion of Christendom and his writings 
in eonnexion with the founding of academies. In addition 
to these may be mentioned the old edition of Dutens in 
siz volumes {1768), which contains some things not in- 
cluded in any of the others, and the booklet of Mollat 
(1885), containing some papers of Leibniz on ethics and 
jurisprudenca 

The folIo\ving are the principal philosophical works of 
Leibnizj with the dates at which they were written or 
published. The letters J» S. indicate those which appeared 
in the Journal des Savants, and the letters Ä, E. those 
which appeared in the Äeta Erud'dorum* Those marked 
with an asterisk were published in Leibniz's lifetime. 

€&rr^(mdenc6 with Philipp and otherA r^arding ike Fhilosophy o/Ikscaries^ 

16 79 -Sa (In French») G. iv. 281 aqq. 
*Meditattmes de Cognüio?iej Veriiate et Ideü, A- E. 16S4. G. iv, 433 1 E. 79. 
€onrespond$vce with ÄtntMdt 1686-90, flu Frengli.) G, ii, i, Pub- 

lialied by Grotefend, 1846. 



LIFE AND WORKS 



*ExtraU c^une Lettre ä M, Bayle. Published in tbe Nouvdles de la 

B^mbligue des Lettresj 1687. G. iii. 51 ; E. 104. 
JDe Vera Methodo Philosophiae et Thedtogiae^ 1690. G. vü. 323 ; E. 109. 
*Si VEssence du Corps consiste dans Vitendue^ J. S. 1691 and 1693. 

G. iy. 464; E. iia. 
Animadversiones in partem generalem Priwyipwrum Cartesianorumy 1692. 

Published by Guhrauer, 1844. G. iv. 350. Mentioned by 

Leibniz in a letter to Bemouilli, 1697. 
*De Notionibus Juris et JustÜiae, preface to Codex Juris Gentium Bipto- 

maticuSf published in 1693. E. 118. 
*l)e Primae Philosophiae Emendatione et de NoUone Substantiaey A. E. 1694. 

G. iv. 468 ; E. lai. 
*SysUme Nouveau de la Nature et de la Communicaiion des Sübstances, 

J. S. 1695. G. iv. 471 ; E. 124.. Also three tdaircissements du 

Nouveau Systeme, J. S. 16964 
Schreiben an Gabriel Wagner vom Nutzen der VemunftkunM oder Logik, 

1696k Published by Guhrauer, 1838. G. vii. 514 ; E. 418. 
De Berum Origitiatione radicalif 1697. G. vii. 303 ; E. 147. Published 

by Erdmann, 1840. 
*I>e ipsa Natura, sive de Vi insita Adionibusque Creaturarum, A. E. 1698. 

G. iv. 504 ; E. 154. 
Yarious papers (without titles) on Cartesianism, written between 

1700 and 1702. G. iv. 393 sqq. ; E. 177. 
ConsideratUms sur la Docffrine d^un Esprit üniversel unique, 1702. G. vi. 

529 ; E. 178. Published by Erdmann, 1840. 
Sur ce qui passe les Sens et 2b MatUre (Letter to Queen Sophia Charlotte 

of Prussia), 1702. G. vi. 488. 
Nouveaux Essais sur VEntendement humain, 1704. G. v. 41 ; E. 194. 

Published by Raspe, 1765. 
*Considiraiion8 sur les Prirwipes de Vis et sur les Natur es plastiques (Histoire 

des Ouvrages des SavantSj 1705). G. vi. 539 ; E. 429. 
Ad rev. Patrem des Bosses Epistolae 71, 1706-16. G. ii. 291 ; E. 434, &c. 

E. gives 29 only. Dutens gives 70. 
De Modo disHnguendi Phaenomena realia ab imaginariis» G. vii. 319 ; 

E. 443. 

Animadversiones ad Joh. G, Wachteri Librum de recondita Hebraeorum phUo- 
Sophia, c. 1708 (including the ^Refutation of Spinoza'). Pub- 
lished by Foucher de Careil, 1854. 

Commentatio de Anima Brutorum, 17 10. G. vii. 328 ; E. 463. Published 
by Kortholt, 1735. 

^Essais de Theodicee sur la BonU de Dieu, la Liberte de VHomme et VOrigine 
du Mal, 17 IG. G. vi. I ; E. 468. 

Von der Glückseligkeit, 17 10 (?). G. vii. 86 ; E. 671. Published by 
Guhrauer, 1838. 

C 2 



20 



INTRODUCTION 



Principes de la Naiure et de la Grdceyfondes en Raison, 17 14. G. tL 598 ; 

E. 714. First published in L'Europe Sawmtey Nov. 1718. 
La Monadologie, 1714. G. vi. 607 ; E. 705. Germ, trans. Köhler 

(Jena), 1720. Lat. trans. A. E. 1721. Original French in E. 

1840. 

Correspondence uriih Nichoias Remond, 1713-16. (In French.) G. iii. 
599 ; E. 701, &c. 

Correspondence wifh Bourfftiety 1709-16. (In French.) G. iii. 539; 
E. 718, &e. 

Correspondence with Qarke, 17 15- 16. (In French.) G. vii. 347 ; 
E. 746, 



PAET II. 



<G^£N£RAX PBINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF LEIBNIZ. 

Statement of Leibtiijs^s Problem : How can that which is 
cöntintwus consist of indivisible Elements? 

In the preface to his TModMe ^ Leibniz declares that 
'there are two famous labyrinths, in which our reason 
offcen goes astray : th^ one relates to the great question 
of Itberty and necessUy, especially in regard to the 
production and origin of the other consists in the 
discussion of . continuity and of the indivisible points which 
appear to be its elements, and this question involyes the 
consideration of the infinite. The former of these perplexes 
aLmost all the human race, the latter daims the attention 
of philosophers alone.' Accordingly, while a right under- 
standing of the principle of continuity is of the utmost 
speculative importance, the practical value of a true 
knowledge of necessity is equally great. Thus, Leibniz 
makes his TModicöe an investigation of the meaning of 
liberty and necessity, while in others of his writings he 
offers a Solution of the problem which he describes as the 
special perplexity of philosophers. 

It is this latter problem with which we are here mainly 
concerned. The philosophical work of Leibniz was an 
endeavour to reconcile the notion of substance as con- 
tinuom with the contrary notion of substance as consisting 
of indivisible dcments. The Opposition of these two notions 
* E. 470 a ; G. vi. 29. 



22 



INTEODUCnON 



eeemed to Mm to arisö from an inadequate conception of 
Bubatance, and tlio task he set himsßlf was tbat of 
deepening tbe current notion of substance* or^ as he Mm- 
seif would have put it, finding a better hypothesis than 
that "wMch had satisfied hiE Caiiesian predecessora, 

Stated in another way tbe problem is : How are we to 
Interpret tbe relation of whole and parts so that tbe 
continuity or complete unity of tbe whole shall not be in 
conflict with the definiteneaa or real diversity of the 
parts ? To say that the whole is continuous or reallj one 
seenis to mean that^ if it is divisible at all, it is infinitely 
divisible. If it were not infinitely divisible^ it would 
eoiisist of insoluble ultimate elements, and would thua be 
diacontlniious. Accordingly, if the whole be really con- 
tinuous there seem to be no fixed boundaries or lines of 
divißion witMn it, that is to aay, no real, but only 
arbitrary parte \ 

On the other band, if the whole conaiata of real parta 
and not merely poasible sabdivisions, these parts must 
be definite, bounded, separate from one anotherj and 
consequently tbe whole which they constitute must be^ 
not a real contmuouB unity, but a mere eolleetion or 
arbitrary unity- Nevertbeless, we cannot hoM eitber that 
the whole is real and tbe partB unreal, or that the partä 
are real and tbe whole unreal. 

QtmntUatwe or extensive Notian of Substance held hy Bes- 
caries and Spimm, m the one Jiand, and ht/ the Ätamists 
m the otlier, 

The philosopby of Spinoza^ witb its cardinal principle 
that 'Determination is negation,* praotioally amounted 
to an aaser tion of the uMty and contmuifcy of the whole 
at tbe expense of the reality of the parts. According to 

^ For instance, the Bpectrum is confcinuous. There is no liniit 
to tho number of varieties of colour that may be discriminated In 
th© rainbow : the uaual division into seven coloura is ßn arbitrary 
arratigement made by observers. It probably originated in a sug- 
gegted analogy with the mualt^al scale. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



23 



Spinoza, *sabstance' is *tliat which is in itself and is 
conceived through itself; in other words, that, the 
conception of which does not need the conception of 
another thing from which it must be formed \' That 
is to say, substance is the unconditioned, or that which 
is not conditioned or determined by anything other 
than itself. There is ambiguity in the statement. It 
may mean either that substance is self-rconditioned or 
that it is absolutely unconditioned, to the exclusion of all 
determination. In the one case substance would be a 
real System of r^ciprocal determinations ; in the other, it 
would be unbroken being, to which every determination 
is foreign. The latter is the dominant aspect of substance 
in the philosophy of Spinoza. That aspect alone is con- 
sistent with the principle that 'Determination is negation.' 
Consequently his position amounts to saying that sub- 
stance can have no real parts. For the very meaning of 
a part implies that iLsaust be determined or conditioned 
by other parts ^. 

In miAmb^ Opposition to this, there is the theory of 
atoms and the void, which Leibniz teils ns at one time 
charmed his imagination ^. To affirm the real existence 
of indivisible material atoms is to deny the infinite 
divisibility of matter. Accordingly, if the atoms con- 
stitute the ultimate reality of the world, its iinity is 
destroyed, its continuity becomes an illusion. However 
numerous the atoms may be, they can together constitute 
no true unity, 'but only a coUection or heaping up of 
parts ad infimtmn,^^ Atomism thus endeavours to establish 
the reality of the parts at the expense of the whole. 

It is necessary, then, to lay bare the presuppositions 
of these contrary theories in order to find the elements of 
truth in each and to reconcile them in a more compre- 
hensive yiew. The doctrine of Spinoza is the consistent 



^ jE^Äics, Part i. def. 3, Haie White's Tr. 
' Ibid. Part i. prop. 12 and 13. 

* üfw) System, § 3. * Loc, dt. 



24 



IlTERODUCTION 



logieal devdopment of tH© prindples involved in the 
Position of Descartes In thie connexion it is Deaeartes's 
special theories thai Leibniz has mostly in view, although 
his arguments are equally applicable to the more thorough 
metaphysic of Spinoza. * Spinoza,' he tellä us, ' haa done 
nothing but cultivat« certain aceds of the philosophy of 
Descaxtes*/ Deseartes endeavoured to reach absolute 
metaphysical cei-tainty by a niethod which was after- 
wards more clearly and fuüy applied by Spinoza, wbo 
defined it in his great principle that ' Determination is 
negation.' The essenee of Descartes's method of doubt 
is the endeavour to attain certainty by Stripping from 
experience (as it is given in common consciousness) all 
specific qualities or determinations, on th© gronnd that 
no oontradiction in terms is involved in regarding ©ach of 
these qualities by it>self ajs non-existent or other than it 
is* The i-esult of the method is to give, as the residual 
liltimate certainty ^ nothing but the instrument by whieh 
the process of Stripping has beeu cai-ried out^ viz, the 

* * (kLrtesiaiiae discipliim6 iniemperantia Spinozas dootHnam j?ort(; in 
ha£ senimtia ti>tum repmre esi Lmbnüivtm ' (Lemoinej i^id Sit mcUetia 
apud Lmbmttum^ p. 5s). *Th© philosophy of Dbaöartös , . * seema to 
lead straight to the o|jmions of Spinoza, who dared to aaj what 
Doscartös cari^fuUj avoided/ (Ö. iv. 346» ) 

^ Lettre ä i*Ahb4 Nicais$ (1697) (K 139 ; G-- ii- 5^3^- Leibnii, 
espe<^ially in hia t^arUer days^ i'ecog;nized that his* philosophy had 
mueh in common wlth that of Spinoza, although, aa time went oiij 
it becftine moie ftnd more evident to liim that they were fundjv- 
mentally at varianjce. Thue^ in an early letter f February^ 1678I, we 
find Leibniz writing : ' I ünd in it * [the Ethics] ' plonty of äne 
thoughU agreeing with mine, kuown to somo of jny frienda 

who ar© alsio friends of Spinoza. But ther© ai'© also paradoxoa 
whlch Beüm to me unreal and not even plausible, Aa, for «xample, 
that there is only ono Bubstanco, namely 6od ; that created thingä 
are modea or accidenta of God ; that our mind has no wider outloolc 
\jnihü ampliiis percipere] after thia life ; that God Himeelf thinka 
indeed, bnt nevortheless neither understand^ nor wills , that all 
thingä happen by a certain neces^lty of fat© ; that God acta not for 
an end but by a certain neceasity of nature, whieh ia TorbaUy to 
retain, but really to giv© up^ provideuce and imuiortality. 1 rogard 
thk boot aa a dangeroaa ono for people who will givG themselvea 
the trouble to go dfeeply into it, for others do not care to under- 
et&nd it.' Archiv für GescAkhk d, Ffiilosophie^ voL iii. p. 75* 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



25 



thinking Ego, without any specific thought. If we 
challenge the reality of this instrüment, we do so by 
means of the instrüment itself, änd so involve ourselves 
in self-contradiction; The thinking Ego cannot be thought - 
non-existent : to think its non>^xistenee would be a con- 
tradiction in terms. Spinoza's advance upon this was 
merely to pass from Descartes's practical method of 
attaining truth (namely, the discarding of specific deter- 
minations) to the general metaphysical principle which 
the method implied, the principle, namely, that th^ 
essence or reality of a thing is that which remains affcer 
the differences in its states and qualities have been 
thought away, or that which is common to all its forms 
and manifestations, and consequently that the ultimate 
reality or substance is that which is free from all specific 
determinations, that which includes or is common to 
everything because it is not (specially) anything. _ • 

Now when we rigorously apply this' principle, that the 
reality of substance is that which remains after all 
specific or diflferential qualities have been removed, we 
are left with nothing but quantity — either, as in the case 
of Spinoza, quantity of substance in general ^ ; or, as 
in the case of Descartes, quantity of a specific substance, 
that is to say quMatity of one quality, Thus Descartes's 
Position is that in addition to the one true and perfect 
substance, God, whose existence is externally imcon- 
ditioned, there are two created substances, whose exis- 
tente is not conditioned by anything finite, but by infinite 

^ It ifi true that Spinoza regards substance as indivisible, in the 
sense that it has no real parts ; and this maj seem inconsistent 
with the contention that Spinoza's substance is merely quantita- 
tive. But the contradiction is Spinoza's : it is a fragment of the 
great fissure of inconsistency that traverses his whole system, 
namely, the confounding of a substance possessing infinite attri- 
butes with a substance whose reality is reached by the exclusion 
of all specific determinations. If we hold strictly to the second of 
these Views of substance, then substance can be said to be in- 
divisible only on the ground that there is nothing to divido. Of. 
Spinoza, Ethics, Part i. prop. 12 and 13, with Traäatus de InteUedus 
EmendcUionej 108, ii. iii. 



26 



INTRODUCTION 



substance alone. These are bodöy substance aad think- 
ing substance» Tliey are mutuälly oppoaite : the one is 
what the other ia not. Neither is conditioned by the 
other nor dependent upon it. The essential attribute 
of bodiiy substance is extension, that of tbmking sub- 
stance ia thought- All the specific qualitiea of created 
things are reducible to one or other of these as a common 
quality; and consequently the esaance or reality of 
created substance com es to be either extension without 
specific Contents or thought without a specific objeet. 
In other words, bodily substance is quanÜty of one 
determination, namely extension ; whUe thinking sub- 
stance is quantity of one other determination, nameJy 
thought Thus the presupposition of the Cartesian 
Systems ia a purely quantitative rehition of whole and 
parts K 

The same presupposition in another form imderlies 
the Atomist phüosophy. The atoms are material par* 
ticlesy and the whole consists of their a^gregatiom If 
the theoiy is self-consistent they must be regarded aa 



* Cf* Descartes, Frincipia, P&ri ii. § 8 ; * Quaiitity and number 
differ only in thouglit [ratione] from that which hiis quanfcity and 
is numbered/ ^ m * It will bo «asy to discern tliat it is tho aame 
extension whieh constitutes tlie natura of body aa of apace, and 
that theee two things are mutually diversö only as tbe nßfcure of 
the genus and speoiea diffors froin that of the individttalt provided 
we reflect on the Idea we haye of any body, taking a stone for 
eiatnple, and rojeet all that is not esäcnfcial to the natniMJ of body. 
In the firat place, then, hardness may be r^jected, hecause if the 
etons were liquefied or reduced to powder it would no longer 
possesa hardne&Sj and yet would not coasse to hö a body ; colour aliso 
may bü thrown ont of acconnt^ because wo have frequently seen 
aton^a so transparent as to havc no colour i agiiin^wo may reject 
weight^ because we have tlie cuso of fire, which, though very light, 
19 still a body ; and finallyj we may reject cold, heat^ and all the 
other qualitiea of this sort^ ©ither becaus© they are not oonsidered 
as in Iho atone^ of b«causef with the ehange.of theao qualities, the 
stone ig not supposed to haye Joat the nature of body. After this 
examin ation wo sMll find that nothing remaina in the idea of 
body, excopt that Ii is something ©xtended in leagth^ breadth, and 
döpth ; and thia aomothing is compriaed in our idea of spaee» not 
only of that wbich ia füll of body, bnt even of what ia callod void 
Space' (Yeitoh's Tr»). Cf. Pnncipiaj Part i. §| 51-S3, 63-65. 




GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



27 



homogeneous, and the specific qualities of things must 
arise from the variety of their combinations. They could 
not all really exist and be different from one another 
without some of them being complex. And in any case 
the very essence of the theory is that the whole should 
be taken as a sum or totality, a quantity of parts. 

Leibnijs's nonrqumtitative or intensive Notion of Suhstance, 
develqped through critidsm of Cartesian and Atomist views 
regarding material Sübstance. 

Accordingly, the essence of Leibniz's argument is 
that a quantitative conception of the relation of whole 
and parts affords. an inadequate theory of substance. 
The common element in the contrary positions of the 
Oartesians and the Atomists is the explicit or implicit 
redu<3tion of qualitative to quantitative diflFerences \ And 
it appears to Leibniz that the Solution of the dilemma 
is to be found in the opposite hypothesis, namely, that 
the essence of substance is non-quantitative, and that 
the relation of whole and p^s must be conceived as 
intensive rather than \extensive, Thus a ^simple sub- 
stance ' has no parts, i. e. no quantitative elements \ 
and yet it must comprehend a manifold in unity ^ ; that 
is to say, it must be real, it must be something, it must 
be qualitative, specifically determined. 

While the general principle of Leibniz's argument 
may be stated in this way, he actually develops it through 
criticism of Bescartes's theory of material substance. To 
regard matter as ultimately pure extension is to make 
it essentially a substance with nothing more than a 
shadow of quality. An extended nothing is meaningless. 
An extended somethvng must have quality. And to call 

* The mechanical view of things ^has two forma: Cartesianism 
and Atomism. . . . The one, which makes matter continuous, may 
be called geometricai mechanism ; the other, which makes it dis- 
continuous, may be called arithmeticai mechanism.' E. Boutroux, 
La Monadologie de LeibnUz, &o,, p. 36. 

^ Monadology, §1. ' Ibid. § la. 



28 



IWTBODUCTION 



that quaHty extension itaelf is merely to cover up the 
difficulty with a name : aii_fisl;aiide£L_£xteaaioa is mnch 
the sanie_as a_sliadejd sbadow of nothmg, ^ In my 
opinion corporeal substance consists in something quite 
other than being extended and occupying a place i we 
mustj in fact, ask ourselves ivhat it is that oecupiea the 
place \' 'Those who hold that the extended m itself 
a aubstan^e transpose the order of the words üb well aa 
of the thoughts* Besides extension thei^e must be an 
object whicb is extended^ that is to aay a substance 
which can be repeated or continued. For extension 
means nothing but a repetition or a continued multi* 
plicity of that which ie spread out, &pluraUt^^ contmuity^ 
and coexktmce of paris ] and oonsequently it [extension] 
is not sufficient to explain the very nature of extended 
or repeated subsfcaneej the notion of which is anterior 
to that of ita repetition 

Ägain, it can not be said that pure extension haa any 
real parts. There can be no real unit of mere extension 
It would be an erroneous couception to regard mathe- 
matical surfacea as made up of real lines, and these lines 
as made up of real points. The Hne is the limit of the 
Bürface, and the point is the limit of the line. A mathe- 

* Epistdaad Schuknhurgium (1698) (G» Math. vii. 84:21. 

^ Extraii d'um ktüre (^1693) (E, 114b ; G. iv, 467V Cf. Lotzfi, Ificrn- 
cosmitd^ blL iii. ch. 4, § 2 I Eng. Trans. voL j, p. 356). Cf. also Excmm 
des princfpea du R. P. MakbranckB (c. 1711) (E. 6gi a ; G> vi, 5Ö0} : 
^Arüte. But do you not think that the destruction of extension, 
which carrieg with it that of body^ proves that body conaists only 
in extenaioa? Fhüwrite. It provesi öuly that extenaion entera into 
the casonce ör natura of body ; but not that it constitutes its whole 
es&ence. Siwiilarly, magnitude enters into thö oas^nae of ext^ension, 
but iä not. äquivalent to it ; for number, tim^j motion have alflo 
magnitude^ ünd yet they aro not estenaion/ AIbo (E. 69a b ; G. vL 
504) : 'Extension is nöthing but an abstractiön and requit^ some- 
thing which ia «xt«nded. . . . It presuppoaes some quality, som^a 
attribute, sorae naturö in the thing, which quality exten de or 
diflusea itself along witli thö thing, continuea itaelf/ 

^ * You aro right in saying that all magnltudea \grand&ur$] may 
be divided ad iijjfnitum, None of them ia 00 Bmall that we eannot 
conceive in it an infinity of divisions whioh will uever b© exhanated,' 
Letirs ä i^'oücÄcr (1693) (ü 115 a ; G. i. 403;. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



29 



matical point may, then, be regarded as indivisible, but 
only because there is nothing in it to divido. It cannot 
bo a real unit, f or there is nothing to determine its unity. 
We should have to conceive it as the unit of that whose 
•sola characteristic is to consist of units, to be a quantity. 
For such is, strictly speaking, the nature of Descartes's 
'extension.' Thus, as Leibniz puts it, ^ mathematical 
points are exact ' [i. e. indivisible] ; * but they are only 
modalities\' that is to «ay abstractions imd not real 
existences \ 

Now, while Leibniz regards the part» of Cartesian 
extension as thus indivisible without being real, he 
maintains on the other band that the parts to which 
Atomism reduces material substance are real only if 
they are not indivisible. Their claim to be indivisible 
rests upon the supposition that they are infinitely hard. 
But hardness is a relative term. There is no absolute 
hardness, as there is no absolute motion or rest. And 
thus infinite hardness is a self^ontradictory conception. 
' By an atom,' says Leibniz, ' I understand a corpuscle, 

' New System, § 11. 

* Cf. EpisfxHa ad Berrumllium (1698) (G. Math. iii. .535 ) : * Indeed 
many years ago I proved that a number or sum of all numbers 
inyolyes a contradiction, if it be taken as one whole. And the 
same is true of an absolutely greatest number and an absolutely 
least number or an absolutely smallest fraction. . • . Now, just as 
there is no (given) numerical element or smallest part of unity or 
least among numbers, so there is no (given) least line or lineal 
element ; for a line, as a unity, can be cut into parts or fractions. . . . 
Suppose that in a line there are aotually \f ^, ^, -j^, &c, and 
that all the terms of this series actually exist. You infer from 
this that there is also an absolutely infinite term, but I think 
nothing eise foUows from it than that there actually exists any 
assignable finite fraction, however small. . . . And indeed I conceive 
points, not as elements of a line, but as limits, or negations of 
further progress, or as ends [termint] of a line.' Cf. Lettre ä Poucher 
(1693) (^. 118 a ; G. i. 416). * As to indivisible points in the sense 
of the mere extremities of a time or a line, we cannot conceive in 
them new extremities, nor parts, whether actual or potential. 
Thus points are neither large nor small, and no leap is needed to 
pass them. Yet the continuous, though it has everywhere such 
indivisible points, is not composed of them.' Ct Ezplanaäon qf the 
New System^ i, note. 



3Ö 



INTEODUCTION 



mentaUy diviaible indeed, but which a<!tually neither is 
iior has been divided* Not that it cannot be actually 
divided ; for such atoms do not occur^ sine 9 they would 
demand perföct hardness. But it suffioes for my defini- 
tion that fcher© should ba corpuscleg, wbose particles hav© 
neyer been separated, from the foundation of the world 
to the present day^' Evoiy material atom most be at 
least ideaüy divisible, if it be real * The atoms of matter 
- . , are stül composed of parts, öince the invincible 
attachment of one parfc to another (if one conld rational] y 
conceive or suppoßB it) would in no way destroy their 
diTersity V 

How the EeMion of Whoh and Parts is ta he eomeived. 
The real md indwmhle Unit of Suhstance {Mmaä^. 
^ Perceptim ' and ' Appetit ton/ 

Leibniz's problem thus takes tho form of an attompt 
to find a Unit of substance which shall avoid the imper- 
feetioEö of both the Carteaian and Atomist theory* This 
nnit must be at once real and indivisible, Its reality 
must be of such a kind that it does not conflict with its 
indivisibilLty, and it must be indivisible in a sense which 
is consistent with the continuity of the whole* The basia 
of its reality cannot be quantity, for no quantity ia 
indiYisible. And its indivisibility cannot be exclusive 
particularity in space or time, for indivisible points in 
Space or time may form an aggregate but cannot become 
a cantinuum. Th© nnit of substance must then be inten- 
sive rather than extensive, and the continuity of the 
whole must be not a mere empty homogeneity, but a 

1 Epistda <id BemimUivm (1697) (G» Uath. Mi. 443)- 
^ New System j | ii* Cf* Lettre ä Hartsosker (1710) (ö. iii* 507) i 
* Nothing ia lai^e or fimall^ except hy compariäoiiT so that auch 
& particle as an atom is aa considerabl© m itself, and in relation to 
others proportionately Um (and eonaequently, in the sighfc of God), 
aa onr visible syatem is conaiderable in relation to iL Atoms ara 
the effect of the woakneEsa of cur imagination^ which likes io i-est 
und to haaton to an end in subdividing or analyslng. It not bO 
in nature, wbioh comes irom in^nit^ and goea bo jn&nity.' 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



continuity through infinite degrees of intension. The 
Word * intension, ' however, does not help us much. It 
must be more preeisely defined. 

The antinomy between whole and parts, which was 
the issue of the quantitative or extensive view of sub- 
stanee, had its roots in the conception of whole and parts 
as inevitably exclusive of one another, the whole being 
regarded as prior to the parts or the parts as prior to the 
whole. That is to say, either, as in the view of Spinoza, 
the parts are to be deduced, in a purely analytic way, 
from the whole as self-evidently given, or, as in the 
Atomist doctrine, the whole is a secondary construction, 
of a purely synthetic Jdnd, from the primary parts. In , ^unS'f 
contrast with this the intensive doctrine of substance i r-. 
which regards determination as primary or essential 
amounts to a declaration that whole and part are in- 
separable. All specific determinations, states, or func- 
tions are determinations, states, or functions of the whole, 
not in the sense that they are ultimately reducible to one 
vague determination which is common to everything, but 
in the sense that the whole is expressed, sj^nbolized, and 
therefore in some way included in each, however specific, 
individual, limited it may be. Thus the parts are not 
determined or characterized without reference to the 
whole, and the whole is not a mere vague aggregate of 
independent parts. In some sense each part must con- 
tain the whole within itself, each unit must include an 
infinite manifold. The whole Stands not merely in a 
mechanical, but in a dynamic relation to the part. The 
whole is not merely other than the part, but in some 
way passes into it and expresses itself through it. ' That, 
in general, is the conception of substance as essentially | ; 
intensive rather than extensive. 

There is here an approach to the modern conception of 
organlsm as more adequate to the expression of substance 
than are merely mechanical conceptions \ But the special 

^ Leibniz does hold that all real substances are organic (cf. p. io8). 



32 



INTEODUCnON 



an^le at which L^ibniz regards hin proHem prevents him 
from developing this, His early imaginative liking for 
*atonia and the Toid/ whan fixst he *freed himself from 
tbe yoke of Aristotle \' ihe love of historical System and 
of well-grounded hypothesis which set his wliole intel- 
lectual characfeer in revolt against Spinoza's abstract unity 
and his purely a priori deductions, probably also the 
influenee of bis Scholas tie training with its auggestiona 
of an infinite multiplicity of ^ substantial forms' — all 
» resulted in a tendency to emphasize rather the elements 
of reality than its wholenesa. That there can he no real 
wholo withont real units, js Leibniz's guiding thought ^ 
and aecordingly his question does not primarily take the 
form : ' What must be the nature of a whole whkh 
expresses itself in each of its parts ? * It rather is : 
^1 ' What must be tbe nature of a part or unit which can in 
' some way contain or express tbe whole w ithin itaelf ? ' 

Kow the part cannot contain the whole within itself 
actually and fuUy, in äU its realizod completeness ; for 
tbus the distinetion between wbole and part would 
\ vanisb. Tbe part mitst, tborefore, eontain the whole 
I potentially and idGally or by means of representation. 
The relation of whole and parts is not to be conceived 
as one of greater and less^ of thing contairdng and things 

But the nofciön of org aniam, &s he uses it, is much morü than 
it hflö sitic© become* According to Leihniz anything is an organj^m 
if it has a *floul' or priaciple of unity ^ that is to say, if it iä other 
than a mere aggregatf:^ of independertt elements, 
* Neic Sysiem^ | 3. 

^ €t Lettre ä Arnauld (1687) (G. ii. 97): ' Eveiy machiDe pre- 
supposes somö äubatance in the pieees from whieh it ia made, and 
there is no manifold withont real im its. In short, I take aa 
axLomatic thig jdentical pröpoaition, in which the difference is 
entirely a mntter of accent, namely, that what is not really one 
[t/n] being ia not really a [itn] being. It haa always been thought 
that unity [fnn] and being are reciprocal thinga. Being " is one 
thing, "beings** is anotberj but the phiral preanppoges th© 
Singular, and wher© there is not one being there will ütill leas be 
several belngs/ * Being and unity are conyertible terms [em 
unum cmvertuntury Episi. ad dm B<^$es (1706) (E. 435 b ; ii. 304). 
The phrase is used by Nicholas of Cosa, De ^daigm/rm^ C^44<*)j ü- 7- 



OEKmtAL PBINCIPLES 



33 



containedy but rather as a relattion of symbolized and 
Symbols, sign and thing signified. That is to say, the 
part must be a representation of iihe whole from some 
partioular point of view, a »j^nbol or expression of the 
whole, and the part must contain the whole in such 
a way that the whole might be unfolded entirely from 
within it \ 

Thus the part must have a certain spontaneity or power 
of acting from within itself, and in virtue of this Leibniz 
describes the individual substance as essentially a ' förce * 
rather than a quantity. This intensive essence or force 
in the part (or individual substance) appears in two waya 
As representative or symbolic of the whole, the part, 
Leibniz's terminology, has 'Perception,' while, in so far 
as in the part the potential whole tends to reahze itself, 
the part is said to liave * Appetition/ Both of these I 
characteristics must belong to it, for, if it had' perception 
alone, the part would merely represent one aspect of the 
whole, like an unchanging picture. It is in virtue of its 
appetition that the part is able to realizQ the life of the 
whole, to unfold spontaneously from within itself all the 
variations of that which it represents \ 

This new Atom or unit of substance (the 'simple 
substance ' in Iiis own phrase) Leibniz calls ja Monad ^ 

• ^ Although, as a matter of fact, it never is so unfölded. Prae- 
dicatum inest aubjecto ; but, in the case of any actual thing, to deyelop 
the predicate aut of the subject would involve An infinite analysis. 
We here touch a fundamental inconsistency in Leibniz's thought. 

* Cf. Be Änima Brutorum, 12 (E. 464 b ; ö. vii. 330) : ^Not only is 
the variety of the object represented in that which has perception .; 
but there is also Variation in the representation itself, since that 
which is to be represented yarie$.' 

• Cf. Epititola ad B. C. Wagnerum (1710) (E. 466 a ; G. vii. 529) : 
. . Monads, and, so to speak, metaphysical atoms, without parts.' 

Also Beplique aux Eeßeodons de Bqyle (1702) (E. 186 b ; G. iv. 561) .: 
*In fact, 'I regard souls, or rather Monads, as atoms of substance, 
since, in my opinion, there are no atoms of matter in nature and the 
smallest portion of matter has still parts.* See also New System, 
§§3 and Leibniz says that he applies the term * Monad ' to the 
simple substance, because it is unum per se. De ipsa natura (1698) 
(E. 158 a ; G. iv. 511). But * Monads are not to be confounded with 
atoms. Atoms (as pepple imagine them) -have shapes ; Monads no 



34 INTRODUCTION^ 

The Word is almost as old as European philosophy, and 
haa varied greatly in meaning and application- Shortly 
before the time of Leibniz the term was used by Giordano 
Bruno, whose Monads were ultimate spherical points, 
regarded as possessing both spiritual and material eharac- 
teristics. There are some parts of the philosophy of 
Erimo with .whicb the doctrine of Leibniz hus affinity, 
as, for instance, Bruno's contention that there is nothing, 
howeyer littl© or valueless, that does not contain in it 
life or sonL Bat Leibniz repeatedly attacka the doctrine 
of a world-soul, which is Biuno's central conception, 
Thns, in adopting the term *Monad/ Leibniz may be said 
to have taken from Bruno little more than tho name \ 

The Monad, then, has perception, but not necessarily 
in th© sense of conseiousness, For eonaciousness is not 
the esse nee of perception, but merely an additional 
deterniination belonging to certain kinds or degrees of 
• perception. Conscious percoption is called by Leibniz 
* Apperception/ But the essence of pei-ception in general 
is that in it we have a unity varioualy modifled or a unity 
which appears in a multiplicity of relations» * I have 
many ideas [ Vorstellungml wealth of thoughts is in me ; 
and yet I remain, in spit© of this variety, one^' But 
it is not necessarily because I am conscious of many 
thoughts or many objecta that I ^perceive' and thua 
e^bit a multiphcity in unity. All representation is 

moT& have sl shape ttan Souls have» TTiey are not parts of bodles, 
but presuppoäitions of them.' Epistdu ad Bierlingium (1712) (G. 
vii, 503). 

^ Professoi- Ludwig Stein^ in Iiis Leümi^ und Sptnosa^ has Hhown 
that the term ^ Monad * was actuaUy suggeeted to Loibniz^ not by 
the writings of Erano, but by Leibniz' 3 contempöraTyj Fran^>i8 
Mercuro Van Helmont [1618-1699), wilh whom h© had much 
intercourse and conaiderabl© correBpondenee. ^ piovAs to thö Greek 
meant simply the unit in arithmetic» Leibniz himself attributos 
th© term to Pythngoraa. In the senso of a numerieal Unit it occura 
in Plato {Phüebua^ IS B ; i^A^jßdo, 105 C, iqi E)* But Leibniz's chief 
foremnner in th© use of th© term was Bruno, It la also usod by 
Kichoks of Cufla, 

" Hegel j GeschkhU der Fhüo^^phiCi Iii, 413. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



35 



pGrception\ Similarly, the Monad has appetition, but 
not necessarily in the sense of conscious desire or will. 
As the essence of perception is multiplicity in unity, so 
the essence of appetition is change within the identity 
or permanence of a simple substance. Appetition is ' the 
action of the internal principle which produces change 
or passage from one perception to another'.' As the 
Monads alone are real, every change in nature must be 
change within a Monad. This change, as we have seen, 
must be the unfolding of the whole which the Monad 
potentially contains or represents. That is to say, it 
naust be the passing from one perception (or state of 
representation, whether conscious or unconscious) to 
another. And thus, wherever there is change there is 
appetition. It is simply another name for the spon- 
taneity of the Monad, its power of imfolding its whole 
nature and experience from within itself. The Monad 
as perceptive is thus a universal within, rather than 
exclusive of, the particular, while as appetitive it is 
dynamic and not static 

* Cf. p. 135. Also Epistola ad R, C, Wagnerum (17 10) (E. 466 a ; 
vii. 529) : * This correlation of the internal and extemal, or 

representation of the external in the internal, of the Compound in 
the simple, of multiplicity in imity, really constitutes perception.* 
In a letter to Arnauld (1687) (G. ii. 112) Leibniz says that <ex- 
pression is a genus of which natural perception; animal feeling, 
and intellectual knowledge are species. In natural perception 
and feeling, it is enough that what is diyisible and material, and 
is actually dispersed among seyeral beings, be expressed or repre- 
sented in a Single indivisible being or in substance which has 
a genuine unity.' 

* Monadology, § 15. 

' * We could not say in what the perception of plant s consists, 
and even that of animals is not well conceived by us. Yet, 
according to the general sense I give to these words, in order that 
there may be a perception, it is enough that there should be 
a variety in unity ; and in order that there may be appetition it is 
enough that there should be a tendency to new perceptions.* 
Lettre ä Bourguet (1715) (E. 732 b; G. iii. 581). * The soul has 
perceptions and appetitions, and its nature consists in these. 
And as in body there are understood to be dvTiTviria and figure of 
some kind, although we do not know what are the figures of 
imperceptible bodies; so in the soul there are understood to be 



36 



INTRODUCTION 



As the Monads are purely intensive centres or units, 
each must be absolutely exclusive of all others. Not 
being quantitative, they are simple, in the sense of 
having no parts^; and thus no one Monad can include 
another. Further, no Monad can really influence another 
or produce any change in it. For that would mean 
a transference of quality from one to the other. But 
as the quality of a substance, being its very essence, is 
inseparable from it, such a transference is impossible*. 
The Monads are also real ultimate elements, because; 
being entirely non- quantitative, they cannot have been 
formed out of any combination of simpler elements, nor 
is it possible in any way to dissolve them, as they are 
without parts^ The point which is at once real and 
indivisible has thus (Leibniz thinks) been found in the 
Monad, as contrasted, on the one band, with the mathe- 
matical point of Descartes, which is indivisible only 
when it ceases to be real, and, on the other band, with 
the physical point of the Atomists, which, if it is real, 
must always be divisible *. 

The Identity of Indiscemihles and the Law of Continuity. 

The indivisible having thus been established, there 
remains the question of continuity and the infinite. As 
we have seen, a quantitative contmuum cannot have 
indivisible parts. But, as the actual indivisible elements 
of reality are essentially perceptive, real continuity must 
also be a continuity of perception. As each Monad is 
a pai-t or element of the universe, in the sense that each 
represents it or reflects it as in a mirror from some 
particulai* angle, in some special aspect, the whqle must 

perception and appetition, although we do not distinctly know 
the imperceptible elements of the confused perceptions, by which 
the imperceptible elements of bodies are expressed.* Epistola ad 
Bierlingium (171 1) (E. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 

* Mmaddhgy, §1. * Ibid. § 7. 
3 Ibid. §§ 3-6. 

* As to the contrast between Leibniz's view of substance and 
that of Locke, see Locke's Essay ^ Fi'aser's ed., yol. i. pp, 399 sqq. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



37 



be the infinite totality of Monads, representing the 
universe from every possible point of view. And thus, 
while the Monads are entirely separate from one another, 
each must represent the universe in a way which differs 
to the least possible extent from the representation given 
by some other. No two Monads (and a fortiori no two 
things, which are all aggregates of Monads) can be exactly 
the same : no thing can have a merely numerical differ- 
ence from another. The Monads are essentially non- 
quantitative, and number by itself is merely a measure 
of quantity. The Monads differ from one another in 
quality or intension alone, so that two Monads not 
differing in quality are impossible. This is the doctrine 
of Leibniz which is usually called the * Identity of Indis- 
cemibles\* It is simply bis law of continuity in a 
negative form. The number of Monads must be in- * 
finite^; otherwise the universe would not be represented 
from every possible point of view, and would thus be 
imperfect. But if the number of Monads is infinite, and 
if every Monad diflFers in quality from every other, then 
the Monads must be such that they might be considered 
as a series, each term or member of which differs from 
the next by an infinitely small degree of quality, i. e. by 
a degree of quality less than any which can be assigned. 

Leibniz explains his principle of continuity in a letter 
quoted by his biographer, Guhrauer^ *I think, then,* 

^ 'There are no two indisoernible individuals. A clever gentle- 
man of my acquaintanoe, talking with me in presenoe of Mme. the 
Electress, in the garden of Herrenhausen, was of opinion that he 
could qnite well find two leaves entirely alike. Mme. the Electress 
would not believe it, and he spent a long time vainly seeking them. 
Two drops of water or of milk, looked at through a microscope, will 
be found discemible. This. is an argumenf'against atoms, to which, 
no less than to the void, the principles of true metaphysic are 
opposed ... To suppose two indisoernible things is to suppose the 
same thing under two names.' IV"^ Lettre ä CHarke, §§4 and 6 
(E, 755 b, 756 a ; G. vii, 372). Cf. Nouveaux Essais, bk. ii. ch. 27, § 3 
(E. 277 b ; G. V. 214). 

' Du Bois-Reymond compares the infinite series of Monads to 
the ordinates of a curve, which grow from nothing to infinity. 

^ G. W, F, WH LßihnilZy eine Biographie^ vol. i., Anmerkungen, p. 32. 



38 



ff 



I 




INTRODUCTION 



le aays, * tJia y. M ve good reasons for believing tbat all 
the diffarent flüSSea of beings, the totality of wliich form» 
the universe, are, in the ideas of. God^^fvlio knows 
distinctly thair essential gradationa^erely like so many 
ordinates of one and the same curve, ytlie relations of 
which do not allow of others being^mrbetween any two 
of them ^ be cause that would mdicate disouder and iniper- 
fection^^ccordingly nien are linked witli animalSj tbese 
^Tith pfanls, and these again with fossils, which in their 
turn are connected with thoee bodiea which sense and 
imagination represent to us as completely dead and inor- 
ganic Unformes], But the law of continuity requit^os that, 
whm the essefitial determimtions of an^ heinff app^ximate io 
thme o/anoiher, all tlwproxmiies o/tJiefönner must gradualliß 
ü^Töximüfe to those of the latter, Therefore all the Orders 
of natural beings must necessarily form only ono cbain, 
in wbieh the different classes^ like so many links, are so 
cloeely connected with one anotber that it is ioipoasible 
for serisö or imagination to detemiine exactly the point 
where any one of them begins or ends ; all tbe species 
which border upon or which occupy, so to speak, dis- 
putable territory {teglms d'inßexion et de rehroussement '] 
being neccsaarily ambignous and endowed with charac- 
teristics which may equally be ascribed to neighbouring 
species. Thus, for instance^ the existence of zoophytes, 
or, Buddeus^ calls them, Plant-ammals, does not imply 
monströs ity, but it is indeed agreeable to the order of 
natura that they ehould exist. And so strongly do I hold 

The Academy of Berlin declared Ihis letter to be spurioos ; but 
therö aeems no good reason to doubt ita genimieneBs, Ali the^}- 
proved was that thö letler had not been addre&sed to tbe per^oa to 
whom it was aaid to hav© been addreääod. S&e also Julroduciimf 
Part iii^ p. Ö3 note, and ^^ew Essays, Iniroductitm, p. 376. Cf. Locke^ 
Essay, hk, in. ch. 6^ § la, Fraser's ed., vol. L p. 67; cf, note im 
p. 380. 

^ Literally^ places wliere the eurve or cham turns back upou 

itself. 

^ Probabi j- Johannes Franeiscns Budda^us (1667-1 739) ^ Professor 
of Philo&ophy ftt HalJe^ and afterwards of Tlieology at Jena, Hc» 
pubüahed many booksj moBtly on moml philosophy. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



39 



to the pidnciple of continuity that not only should I not 
be astonished to learn that there had been found beings 
which, as regards several properties — for instance, those 
of feeding or multiplying themselves — might pass for 
vegetables as well as for animais, and which upset the 
common rules, founded upon the supposition of a complete 
and absolute Separation of the different Orders of beings 
which together fiU the universe : I say, I should be so 
little astonished at it that I am even convinced that there 
must be such beings, and that natural history will perhaps 
some day come to know them, when it has further studied 
that inünity of living beings whose smallness conceals 
them from ordinary Observation, and which lie hid in the 
beweis of the earth and in the depths of the waters ^ . . . ' 

The pre-established Harmony hetween Suhstances. 

There is, then, in the System of the Monads a perfectly 
continuous and infinite gradation of intension, that is to 
say, of perception or representation, combined with appe- 
tition or spontaneous change. And thus the universe is 
at once continuous and not only infinitely divisible, but 
infinitely divided, consisting of an infinity of real ele- 
ments \ But we still have to consider how the prineiple 
of continuity, as thus interpreted, is consistent with the 
changes which take place in real things. In the System 
of Monads the prineiple of contiiiuity jcorresponds to the 

^ *M. Malpighi, founding upon very considerable analogies in 
anatomy, is much inclined to tiliink that plants may be included 
in the same genus as animals, and that they are imperfect animals/ 
Lettre ä Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 122). 

* Cf. Lettre ä Foucher (1693) (ö. i. 416) : *I hold by the actucU 
v^finite to such an extent that, in pla^ce of admitting that nature 
abhors it, as is commonly said, I maintain that nature affects it 
eyerywhere, so as the better to indicate the perfections of its 
Author. Thus I think that there is no part of matter which ia 
not, I do not say merely divisible, but actually divided ; and 
consequently the smallest particle must be regarded as a world 
filled with an infinity of diflferent creatures/ Also Lettre ä AmaiM 
(1686) (G. ii. .77) : *Not only is the continuous infinitely divisible ; 
but every part of matter is actually divided into other parts.' See 
Momdoilogy, § 65 note. 



40 



INTEODUCTION 



*void' in the older Atomism. Eaeh ia tte necessary 
correlative of the indiyisible and impenetrable elements. 
The conception of continuity, however, by implying 
s plenumt eseapes the contradictions that are involYed 
in the idea of a void, But it has still to be shown how 
change ia possible within a phnumj or how change can 
take placö without disturbing the coiitinuity of the 
infinite series of Monada Any change within a plenum 
affects every part of it. This is the principle involved 
in the seien tific point of view regarding the uniyei'aej 
which became current mth the rise of modern pbilosophy, 
Everything in the world acts and reacts npon everything 
eise* However separate things may he, no change can 
take place in any one without affecting every other. The 
influence may in some cases be impereeptible, infinit ely 
small ; but it exists, If, however, the universe be a 
quantitative pknmij it is imposaible to nnderstand how 
any change eould originate within it. It mnst i-eceive its 
motion from outside, and must thus be regarded as finite, 
wliich again is inconsistent with its reality as a plennm. 
*Leibnii£ overcomes this difflculty by regarding the uni- 
versoj not aa an infinite mass occnpying all that there ia 
to oceupy, but as a continuity or infinite gradation of 
qualitative dififerenc^ each containing witliin itself the 
principle of its own ehanges. He Substitutes for an 
extensive pknum of mass an intensive caniifmum of force 
or life. 

But if the universe consists of an infinity of Monads, 
each independent of the rest, impenetrable and unaffected 
by them, and each containing within ifcself the principle 
of all its changesj how is it possible for a change to take 
place in any one of them vsrithout destroying the con- 
tinuity of the series^? Each Monad contains within 

* How tli© perfect independence of th© Monads is to be r«concil&d 
with the contiiiuity of their aeriea in a qu^ation whlch Leibniz does 
not answer. For Mm the ideal unity of the Moiiads (j^a eacli repre- 
Lenting tho aame unWerse) düos not m&ke their mutual indepen- 
doneo any the lesa comtplete, To gdve up the iadepeiid«iii;e of thö 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



41 



itself a representation of the whole universe from one 
particular point of view, which differs to an infinitely 
small degree from the representations contained in some 
other Monad. then, any change, however slight, 
takes place in the- perception or representation of one 
Monad, the continuity of the seriei» will be broken and 
we shall have two indiscernible Monads. But it is of 
the very essence of the Monads to be *living mirrors,' 
*forces' (as distinct from masse»), centres of appetition, 
spontaneously unfolding a sequence of perceptions. Ac- 
cordingly this change within the Monad does take place : 
it is essential to its nature. The continuous order or 
System of the Monads must therefore be destroyed, unless 
we ean say that any change within one Monad produces, 
or is invariably accompanied. by, correlative changes in 
other Monads, of such a kind that the equilibrium of the 
whole System is maintained. In other words, there must 
be something of the nature of mutual influence, action 
and reaction, between the various elements in the System. 
If the System were a joilenum of mass, this interaction 
would be intelligible without further explanation. But, 
as the Monads form a qualitative continuum of such a 
kind that no part can really act upon another, a further 
hypothesis is required to complete the theory. 

This hypothesis is Leibniz's System of the pre-estalT 
lished harmony between substances. Though no true 
substance can really act upon another, everything in the 
universe takes place as if this mutual interaction were 
real. Substances form a System, not of physical relations, 
but of harmony or mutual compatibility. In the creation 
of the World, the inner development of each Monad has 
been so prearranged that all its changes are accompanied 
by corresponding changes in others. The succession of 

Monads would for him have meant to fall into Spinoza's pantheism, 
while, on the other hand, to give up the continuity of their series 
would have meant having recourse to Atomism. And these he 
cegarded as equally irrational alternatives. Cf. this Introdudion, 
Part iv. p. 188. 



42 



nfTRODÜCTIOH 



changea in each Honad is different fnom that ia eyery 
other, and yet all are in harmonjj the perfections of one 
being accompanied hy count^rbalancing imperfections in 
othars. One Monad influences another ideally \ that is to 
say, not ah txira^ but tkrough an inner pre-establijsbed 
ilconfonnity \ 

Melatim ofthe S^dem afpre-eslaUished Marmony to 
Sclwtlmtk and Oceasionalist Theories. 

liike most of the other doctrines of Leibnia:, tliis system 
of the pre-established harmony is a new hypotheBis 
devised to remedy the imperfections of previous theories, 
The general problem which it is meant to solve appeared 
at first for Leibniz in a particuJar form, that of the relar 
tionä between goul and body. The usual pre-Cartesian 
Solution of this special problem was the theoiy of an 
inßtims physicus or actual pasaage of elementa from tbe one 
substance to the othen Descartes's complete Separation 
of soul from body, of tbinking substance from extended 
substance, was in total Opposition to tbe earlier theory \ 

J r ' Cf, Nüuvaaux Essai^ bk, iv. ch. lOj | lo (E. 376 ; Q.. t. i^i) i 
I " ^ Aa each of thesö Boiik expreaaea in its own way what takea plasia 
' outside of it, and ia u nable tö bavs any influanee upon othor par- 
ticular beings, or ratb«r, as each must draw thm expression entirely 
from witbin ita owa natura, each soul muat nocösgarily have received 
this natnre (or this internal ground of its ©xpressions of what ia 
exbemal) from a Universal Caiiaej upo-n whieh tbe&e boings are all 
dependent, and which makea each of tham to he perfoctly in agree* 
meut apd in correlation wlth every other» This ijnplies the uae of 
infinit© knowledg© and power and grcat ingen^ity, eepecially with 
d reference to the spontaneous agreement of a jnechani»m wiili the 
i_ flctivities of th© rational soul.' Also Monadolog^f §§ 5^ sq*l- ^iid 81 ; 
New Syfftemj §| 14 and 15. 

Cf. Thiodic^e, Part i, | 5g (E, 519 b; vi 13SJ 'The scholaatic 
philo^opherts believed that there iä a reeipi-oeal phy&ical iutGraetion 
between body and soul ; but since a thorough investigation has 
ahown that thought and extended mass have no eonnexion with 
one anothor, and that they are created thlnga which diffor Ma 
f^eti^tt, HBveral modern writers have r^cognizod that there iu no 
physieal communieatien between bouI and body, although there 
always remains the metaphyaical communication. whit^h makea of 
floul and body one and the same agent, or what ia callod ono 
person/ 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



43 



. The Problem itself is leffc by him without any satisfactory 
Solution ; but his foUowers made a deiinite attempt to 
solve it by the theory of * Occasionalism,' in which they 
developed a Suggestion that had been made by Descartes 
when he spoke of thinking and extended substance as 
alike dependent on nothing but the 'ordinary co-operation ' 
(concours ordinaire) or ^assistance' of God. The Occa- 
sionalist theories varied to some extent, but in its most 
consistent form the hypothesis is that God is the sole 
real Cause, that finite substance has no power or activity 
of its own, and consequently that the changes which take 
place in soul and body are both directly produced by 
God. Consequently on the occasion of the appearing 
of a phenomenon in the one substance God produces 
a corresponding phenomenon in the other. The two 
phenomena are quite independent, except for the fact 
of their contemporaneous production by God, the one 
real Causa 

Leibniz's pre-established harmony has sometimes been 
regarded as merely another variety of Oocasionalism, in 
spite of his frequent criticisms of the Occasionalist theory. 
And he has been accused of borrowing (without acknow- 
ledgement) from the Occasionalist Geulincx the well- 
known Illustration of the two clocks which he uses 
in explaining his pre-established harmony. But Dr. 
Edmund Pfleiderer has clearly shown ^ that Leibniz, who 

^ Leibniz und Geulincx mit besonderer Beziehung auf ihr beiderseitiges 
ührengleichniss (Tübingen, 1884). Zeller comes to the same con- 
clusion. The Illustration appears in a note to öeulincx's Ethica, 
Tract. i. cap. ii. § 2, note 19 ; Land's ed., vol. iii. p. an. Cf. Third 
ExplanaMon of the New System, note 3. The notes are not in the first 
edition of the Eihica, and they do not seem to have been known to 
Leibniz. He received the Illustration from Foucher, who probably 
arrived at it independently, not knowing that it was used. by 
Geulincx. Cf. E. 130 a ; ö. iv. 488. 

L. Stein holds that Leibniz was unaware of the source of the 
Illustration, and may have cousidered it superfluous to assign any 
special source for it, inasmuch as it was a universally used simile, 
characteristic of the Cartesian school (a Schulbeispiel). With other 
references the Illustration is used both by Descartes and by 
Cordemoy. See Archiv für Geschichte d, Philosophie, i. 59. 



44 



never mentionB Geulincx in his writinga, must have been 
quit© unawar« of Geulincx's us© of the illustration. And 
in any case there is this essential differenc© between th© 
Occasionaliat theory and that of pre-establiahed harmony, 
that the former ragards finite things m empty of all 
activity except that which is immediately communicated 
to them by God, while th© lattar ia foutided on th© 
concaption of finite things in reality foi-cos, Monads 
with spontan©ou3 activity ^ Thua^ th© Occasionalist 
theory is open to the criticism which Leibniz repeatedly 
brings agitinat it, namcly^ that it involves th© supposition 
of perpetual mirade, or, in other words, that, if it be tm©, 
th© connaxion bötween ßoul and body must b© a purely 
arbitrary on©, there being notbin g in th© nature of ©ither 
which call serv© as a rea&on why ihis phenomenon of soul 
should aceompany that phenomenon of body and not some 
other» The Monada, on th© othar band, hav© at leaBt this 
in common, that it is of the essence of oach to reprasent 
th© sam© World from a particular point of yi©W3 and that 
©ach unfolds th© s©ries of its perceptions or represanta- 
tiona in an intelligibl© order. Th© whola m potentially 
present and seoks its raalization in each of the pai^ts. 
Consaqaently, the pre-astablished harmony is not arbi- 
trary, but rational : no TJeus ex macMna is invoked, Thus 
it is impossibl© to retard Laibniz*s theory as th© com- 
pletion of th© Oecasionalist doctrin©, unless in the sense 



* * WhöÄ I &poak of the foree and action of created beiagg, I menn 
that each croated. beifig i.^ pregnant with. ita fature stabo^ and that 
it naturivlly followa a cortain eourse, if nothjng Lindera it ; and 
that the Monads^ which are th© true and only suhi^taiMsea, canuot 
be lifltuTftlly hindered; in their inner determitia tiona, since they 
inchidt? Um rcpreaentation of ererything external [to tliem], But, 
ney^rthetess, I do not saj that thia future atate of Uie croated being 
followa from ita present state withoufc the co-operation [c^namra] of 
Ood, and I atn rather of opinion that preservation ia a continnal 
creation with an orderly change, Thus Father Malebrancho might 
perhapa approve the pro-establishod harmony withont giving up 
hie own hypothe^i»^ to the eflfoct that God ist th© solo Agent [admr] ; 
though it true that other wise it [hia hypotheais] doea not appear 
to me well founded/ Itüre ä Brnr^ai ^^1714) {E. 703 a j Q. iii. 566)* 





GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



45 



that it is an hypothesis which seeks to reconcile the 
contrary views of Scholastics and Cartesians \ 

The scholastic theory of an infliixus physicus connected 
soul and body in a way which ultimately confounded 
them, making it impossible to draw any clear line 
between them. The Cartesian or Occasionalist view, on 
the other hand, separated them so absolutely that nothing 
but a purely arbitrary connexion could be supposed — a 
connexion external to the nature of both. The Scholastics 
seemed to Leibniz to be right in holding that the con- 
nexion is a real one, grounded in the nature of the 
substances ; the Cartesians seemed right in maintaining 
that the substances are mutually exclusive. And the 
antinomy is solved for Leibniz by the supposition of a 
mutual ^ ideal influence,' a relationship of perception or 
representation, between independent self-active Monads, 
the harmony of whose inner developments has been 
established before their creation \ 

Leibniz' s Uhistrations of the pre-estaUished Harmony — 
the ClocJcs md the Choirs. 

The simile of the clocks, by means of which Leibniz 
illustrates his theory in relation to the Scholastic and 
Cartesian views, is given in the Third Explanation of his 
New System, Two clocks may be made to keep perfect 
time with one another in three different ways. They 
may be actually connected together, for instance by 
a piece of wood, in such a way that there is a mutual 
transference of vibrations between them, resulting in a 
perfect agreement of the motions of the pendulums Or, 

^ Cf. H. C. W. Sigwart, Die Leibnizsche Lehre von der prästablirten 
Harmonie in ihrem Zvsammenhange mit früheren Phüosophemen betrachtet 
(Tübingen, 1822), pp. 107 sqq. 

' For an application of the doctrine of pre-establisbed barmony 
to a particular Appendix A, p. 200. 

. ' Tbis was suggested to Leibniz by an experiment of Huygens, 
wbo bung two pendulums on a bar of wood, and found tbat, tbough 
they were set swinging out of time with one another, the vibra- 
tions which each gave to the bar of wood caused them ultimately 
to Swing in harmony. Cf. Third Explanatioii of the New System, p. 332. 



4ß 



INTKODUCTION 



in thö aecoad place, they m&j be stipposed to be k^pi 
in time witb. one anotber from moment to moment hy 
& skilled workman, Or, fiiially, they may bave been so 
perfectly conatructed that they keep time of themaelTes, 
without any mutual influenee or assistance. If we com- 
pare soul an<3 body to the two clocks, tbe first of these 
ways of connexion corresponds to the doctrine of an 
influams pkijsims, the aecond to the Occasionalist yiew, and 
the third to the pre^establisbed harmony. 

It is, however, mialeading to suppose^ a3 has too often 
been done, that this is Leibniz's favourite simile for 
explaining bis System of pre-estabüsbed harmony \ He 
usGs the Illustration, not so mucb to explain bis own 
theoiy as to make clear tbe relation in wbich it Stands to 
previous hypotheses» He accepts for the moment the 
limited problem whicb these bypotheses endeavour to 
solve. But bis own problem ia larger and bis own hypo- 
thesis is therefore more comprehensive than those of bis 
predecesjsors. Bo<3y, for Leibniz, is notliing but a collection 
of Monads (or pbenomena of Monads), and consequently 
tbe question of the connexion between sonl and body is 
only a confused and imperfeot form of the question as 
to tbe relation between any one Monad and another. Tbe 
larger problem thus deals with the relations of body to 
body and soul to soul as well as the relations of soul and 
body, with which alone the earlier tbeories were concerned. 

Leibniz would maintain tbat, as snbstances (Monads) 

are not physical but metapbysieal, it ia impossible for ns 

to realize the true relations between tbem by conceptions 

of sense or imagination. These relations aro metaphysieal 

or ideal, and are therefore only intellectually apprehended, 

^ The Bomöwhat mialeading prominöiic© which hfia been giyen 
to this illustration is to be attribut-ed to Wolfif and bis sebool^ who 
repreaeinted tho metapbyBJCs of Leibniz in a very imperföct way. 
Too man j hiatoriajia and teachöra ha^e been content with a Wolffian 
Leibniz; though for this thore was doubtlees some ©xcuse in the 
imperfection of the edltions of his writings* For insfcance, the 
Correspondm^ with Armiddj in which the illnatration of the choir» 
gcourS| waa firat complet«!^ publiahed by Orotefend in 1846, 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



47 



But he elsewhere uses a simile for the pre-established 
harmony more adequate than that of the two clocks, 
when he compares the Monads to completely independent 
bands of musicians playing in perfect harmony. *In 
Short, to use an Illustration, I will say that this con- 
comitance, which I maintain, is comparable to several 
different bands of musicians or choirs, playing their parts 
separately, and so placed that they do not see or even 
hear one another, which can nevertheless keep perfectly 
together by each following their own notes, in such a way 
that he who hears them all finds in them a harmony 
that is wonderful and much more surprising than if there 
had been any connexion between them, It would even*" 
be possible that some one, being beside one of two such 
choirs, should by means of the one judge what the other 
is doing, and should even acquire such a habit of doing 
this (particularly if we suppose that he could hear his 
own without seeing it, and see the other without hearing 
it) that, with the help of his imagination, he should no 
longer think of the choir beside which he is, but of the 
other, or should take his own merely for an echo of the 
other V The analogy must not be pressed to an 
extreme ; but the simile is much better than that of the 
clocks. The clocks are too much alike to represent the«. 
Monads, and the harmony of their movement is too empty 
and almost meaningless. But in the case of the bands 
there is a real harmony formed out of the complementary 
movements of several self-acting units, and there is also 
the spontaneous develöpment from the written notes of 
the score to the System of sounds which they signify. 
This develöpment from the written signs to the sounds 
signified might be said to correspond to the passage from 
unconscious to conscious perception in the Monad^. 
An unconscious perception is, for Leibniz, a symbol of 
the corresponding conscious perception. 

We have now considered the three chief conceptions of 
* Lettre ä Amauld (1687) (ö. ii. 95). ' Cf. ö. iL 74. 





iNTnoDucnoK 

the metaphysic of Leibniz, and we haye se6n how they 
aiis^ 8B the Solution of bis problem in the form which. ig 
given to it hy its historical sefcting. In the first place, 
intension, force, or life, in the form of pereeption and 
appetition, is the essence of real, individaal substance* 
In the second place, the principle of eontinuity or the 
identity of indis<;ernibles is the hjrpotheais by which 
Leibniz endeavoura to explain the System or inter-relation 
of strictly iDdividual snbstances* And, in the third place, 
the pre-established Jmrmony is introdnced to account for 
thepossibüityof change in elementary enbstanceswithout 
prejudice the whole. 

and cmfuseä Perceptim and Degrees of Äj^tition, 

We must now consider more fuUy the varieties of per- 
eeption and appetition which constitute the differences 
amongat Monads. In regard to pereeption Leibnix adopta 
the Cartesian distinction aniong ideas, with conaiderahle 
modifimtions» Deseartes divided ideas into tbose which 
are obacure, those which are clear, and those which are 
distinet aB w^ell as clear. *I call that clear,' he eays, 
' which is present and manifest to the attentive mindj as 
we say we see an object clearly when it is present to the 
eye looking an, and when it makes an the sense of sight 
an Impression sufficiently streng and definite i but I call 
that distinet whieh ia clear and at the same time so 
definitely distinguished from everything eise that its 
essencö is evident to bim who pro perl y considers it\* 
And ^ all the things which we clearly and distinctly con- 
ceiveare true^' Leibniz follows Deseartes in regarding 
clearness and distinctness ae the marks of perfection in 
ideas or pei-ceptions ; but he does not limit the dis- 

1 Prt'ncipia^ u 4S- " Methode Part iv-. 

■ Leibniz, however, interprets elearnesa and difitinctiiess mme- 
wh^t differently from Descartta. The diatiiiction of one idca. from 
aU others is ©niphasized by Descart^s^ whÜe Leibniz rnther laya 
^tress upon the ü^tornal distinctnesa of the idea, the distmctneas 
of its elementö. Cf. MeditaHones de Cogriüimej Fentoto ei Ideis (1684) 



m 





OENERAL PRINCIPLES 



49 



tinction between distinct and confused ideas to the ideas 
which we consciously possess, nor does he draw a sharp 
line between ideas which are perfectly clear and distinct, 
and all others, which are confused or obscure. Confused 
perceptions are not for Leibniz, as for Descartes, mere 
mistakes and illusions ; but they belong to the real order 
of things, which without them could not be what it is. 
And there is no question, as in Descartes, regarding the 
correspondence of perceptions to reality, clear and distinct 
ideas representing their objects with perfect truth, while 
obscure and confused ideas are * of no avail in affording 
US the knowledge of anything out of ourselves, but serve 
rather to impede it ^. ' According to Leibniz all perceptions 
are more or less perfect representations of objects ; but 
they Vary infinitely in their degrees of distinctness or 
confusedness. Confusedness is simply a low degree of 
distinctness : the more perfect any perception oi: repre- 
sentation is, the more distinct is it, while the less perfect it 
is, the more is it confused. Thus the differences among the 
Monads consist entirely in the various degrees of peifec- 
tion or distinctness with which they perceive or represent 

(E. 79 a ; ö. iv. 422) : * A notion is obscure when it does not suffice 
for the recognition of the thing represented, as for instance when 
I remember some flower or animal formerly seen, but not so well 
as to be able to recognize it when it appears and to distinguish it 
from some other near it, or when I think of some scholastic term 
insufficiently explained, like the "entelechy" of Aristotle, or 

cause" in so far as the name is applied indifferently to material, 
formal, efficient, and final causes. . . . Thus knowledge is clear 
when it enables us to recognize the thing represented, and clear 
knowledge again is either confused or distinct. It is confused 
when I cannot separately enumerate the marks which are sufficient 
for distinguishing the thing from others, although the thing really 
has such marks and essential elements, into which its notion may 
be analyzed. . . . So we see painters and other artists knowing 
rightly what is well and what is badly done, but often unable to 
give a reason for their opinion and saying that the thing they 
dislike is lacking in something, they know not what. But a distinct 
notion is such an one as the assayers have regarding gold, namely 
one acquired throngh marks and tests sufficient for the discerning 
of the thing from all other similar bodies.* For Locke's views, cf. 
Essayf bk. ii. ch. 2g, §§ i sqq. (Fraser's ed., vol. i p. 486}. 

* Prindpia, Part iv. § 203. 



so 



INTEODUCrnON 



the universe. But as eaeh Monad aetually r«pi¥?sents 
the whole universe^ however confusedly or imperfectly, 
and as each ia oasentially a farce or living principle, 
proceedingj by its own spontaneous a<^iTity, from one 
perception to another, the distinct and the confused are 
not essentially separate from one another^ bnt it is possible 
for the confused perception to unfeld into distinetness. 

' Each Munad contains the whole more or less confiisedly 
within itseli ^, and hy its appetition may rise to a more 

» perfeet stata Each Monad contains as it were enfolded 
within itself all that it is to he* It is * big with the 
future/ It is like an exceodingly Condensed algebraical 
Statement which can he indefinitely expounded ; sorae- 
what like the symbol in the problem of determining 
the relation between the lengths of the diameter and 
cii'eumference of a circle, with this very important differ- 
©nee, that the Monad * reads itself oC An omniscient 
Being could see the reality and history of the whole 

' nnivei-se within the lowest Monad. 

Tliree Clas^s of created Mmiad^—{i) uncomdouSj 
^ ^ (2) consciom, (3) sdf-eomcim^. 

Wliile there is thns a perfeet eontinuity in the degree® 
of perfection with which the Monads represent the 
nniyerse, Leibniz haa roughly distinguished created 
Monads into three main clasaes — (i) imconscious or bare 
Monads (monades fmes), {2) eonseioüs Monada, and (3) 
rational or aelf-conscions Monads. Aa we liave seen, 
©veiy Monad or simple subsfcane© has a eertain degree of 
perfection or completenesa, inasmnch as it ideally or 
potentially contains the whole within itself. Thus the 
Äristotehan name of Entelechies might be given to all 
Monads, smce they have each *a eertain perfection^ 
(«;^mjcrt r6 fWfX*V), and ^ a eertain aelf-snfiiciency («iVdpiffto) 
which makes them the sourcea of their internal actions, 

* ^Tho World ia ontirely in each of its parts, but mor« di&tinctly 
in somo tlian in otherg,* Lettre ä la Prinmsae Scphie i^i^^) ^G. ttü. 
544). 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



51 



and, so to speak, incorporeal automata \' That is to say, 
each is, in its own way, complete in itself as representing 
the universe and complete in itself as an active living. 
being or force. On the other hand, every Monad might 
be called a ^soul,' inasmuch as it has both perception 
and appetition, in the general sense of these words 
which has been already explained. Nevertheless, in spite 
of this essential unity of nature Iä the Monads, it is 
possible to draw broad lines of division among them. 
Conscious Sensation or feeling, accompanied by the 
simpler forms of memory, clearly marks oflF certain 
Monads from those which have merely unconscious or 
confused perception. To the former class the name 
' souls ' may be specially applied, while for the latter the 
* general name of Entelechies or Monads will suf&ce. And ^ 
as there are still higher Monads which have self-conscious- 
ness and reason or thought proper, in addition to uncon- 
scious and conscious perception and memory, we may 
call these * rational souls' or *spirits' (intelligences, 
esprits) \ The class of rational souls or spirits includes 
men and higher intelligences. The intermediate * soul 
class is that of animals, and the class of Ei^telechies or 
bare Monads includes all real beings that have not 
reached the stage of consciousness. 

The differences of appetition in the three classes of 
created Monads (corresponding to the three grades of 
perception which characterize them) may be expressed 
as mere impulse, animal instinct or blind desire governed 
by mere feeling, and self-conscious desire or will. 

Each of the two higher classes possesses, in addition 
to its own specific qualities, the characteristics of the 

^ Monadologyj § i8. 

* Cf. De Anima Brutorum (1710), §§ 10 and 13 (E. 464 b ; G. vii. 
330) : * Sense is perception which contains something distinct and 
is combined with attention and memory. . . . Besides the lowest 
degree of perception, which also occurs in those who are stunned, 
and the intermediate degree, which we call sense . . . there is a 
certain higher degree which we call thought. Now thought is 
perception combined with reason.' 

£ 2 



52 



INTRODUCTION 



inferior Monads. Thus both animals and men have 
unconscious as well as conscious perceptions, for ex- 
ample, when they fall into a faint or have a profouYid 
and dreamless sleep\ In such a case they are not 
entirely destitute of perceptions, for the Monad is inde- 
structible (being indivisible) and it cannot exist without 
perception of some kind. The changes of the Monad 
are entirely from within, so that when the man or 
animal awakes out of a sleep or trance his conscious 
perceptions must have unfolded themselves out of imme- 
diately preceding perceptions of an unconscious kind*. 
Again, men share with the animals both sense-perception 
and the empirical sequence of memory and Imagination, 
which bears a resemblanee to the concatenation of rational 
thought, but may be sufl&ciently distinguished from it \ 
Indeed, in most of our actions and beliefe we are empi- 
rics, as for instance when we expect the dawn, not 
because we know the cause of it, but because it has 
happened regularly in the past*. 

Self-consciomness in the Philosoph^ ofLetbnU and in 
that ofDescartes, 

The signiiicance of this may be brought out by a 
reference to the position of Descartes, which Leibniz 
* probably had in view. According to Descartes, the 
rational soul is the mind and its reality comes only from 
its conscious certainty of itself. Thus without self-con- 
sciousness there is no mind or soul. Animals have no 
self-consciousness and therefore they have no souls — they 
are mere machines. But animals have sensations and 
impulses, and consequently Sensation and impulse are 
not functions of self-consciousness, acts of the soul, but 
are purely physical and mechanical processes, whether 
they occur in man or in the lower animals. It is in 

* Monadology, § 20. * Ibid. §$22 and 23. 

* Ibid. §§ 26 sqq. Cf. Nouveaux Essais, bk. ii. ch. 11 (E. 237 ; 
ö. V. 129), and Fraser's ed. of Locke's Essay, vol. i. p. 208. 

* Monadoilögy, § 28. 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



53 



self-consciousness alone that we have immediate self- 
certainty, from which we may proceed outward to the 
certainty of other things. Thus for Descartes the line 
between consciousness and unconsciousness on the one 
side and self-coosciousness on the other must be very 
sharply drawn : the complete independence of self-con- 
sciousness is the root of the Oartesian dualism. 

Now, Leibniz desires to preseiTe the independence of 
self-consciousness or the self-certainty and self-sufl&ciency 
of the mind. The validity of thinking must not be made 
to depend on reference to a reality extemal to it \ But, 
on the other band, the mechanical dualism of Descartes 
must be avoided. The independence of self-consciousness 
is preserved through the conception of the Monads as 
9 plurality of real, independent substances. Mind is not 
merely a modification of substance, an attribute (as 
Spinoza made it) ; it is an independent substance, in 
its various forms one or other of the infinite number. 
But, on the other band, mind must not be regarded as 
identical with self-consciousness alone : self-consciousness 
must not be taken as entirely exclusive of mere con- 
sciousness or of unconsciousness. Otherwise we have 
returned to the Oartesian dualism. There must some- * 
how be an unconscious activity of mind, and the Oppo- 
sition between mind and body becomes a difference, not 
of kind but of degree. 

* Cf. Remarques sur le senüment du P. Mcdehranche (1708) (E. 452 b ; 
G. vi. 578) : * The truth is that we see all things in ourselves and 
in Our souls, and that the knowledge we have of the soul is very 
real and correct, provided we have given some attention to it. 
And fiirther, it is through the knowledge which we have of the 
soul that we know being, substance, God Himself, and it is 
through reflexion upon our thoughts that we know extension and 
bodies. Yet it is true that God gives us all that is positive in this, 
and all the perfection involved in it, through an immediate and 
cpntinual emanation, in virtue of the dependence of all created 
beings upon Him. In this way it is possible to give a good 
meaning to the phrase that God is the object of our souls and that 
we see all things in Him.' Cf. also Part iil. of this Introduction, 
p. 136. 



54 



INTKODUCTION 



Belf-eonöciousnesö in the pliilosophy of Lelbniz is, 
however^ a very dÜferent thing from self-conaciousness 
in the philosophy of Descartes. The latter arrives at 
the self-conscious Ego as the result of a rigorous analysis, 
whose instrument is doubt \ It is an ultimate fact, the 
fact of a subject thinking, without regard to any specific 
ohject of ita thought. Self-conseiousness is the bare 
witness of consciousness to itself, its empty seLf-con- 
aisteney. In the certainty of self-conscionsness Descartes 
(jtistifiably or not) ünds involyed the cortainty of God, 
the Perfect Being, and frora this he proceeds to the 
certainty of the external world and to, the principle that 
clear and dktinct ideas are characteristic of self-eonscious- 
ness and are a sufficient Warrant for the reality of their 
• objocta For Leibniz, ort the other band, the Ego is 
not a pure subject^ whose essence is immediate self-eon- 
sciousness. No Monad can b© a pure subject, ' Not only 
is it immediately clear to nie that / thinkj but it is quito 

^ Leibniz seecus straiigely to havo missed thö eigüificance of 
I>©scart<3s'j^ meth<»d of doubt^ probably bocauae his iutereat lay 
more in Deacartes'e doctrlueg than in bis way of reaching tliem. 
* M. Deacartes,* ht? saySj * has acted like the quackb [charlaimis] who^ 
in Order to attract peopJe und get a eale for their remedi^s^ set up 
open tbeatres in wlüch tbey show farcea and other extraordiiiÄry, 
but not vury ueeessaryi thinga. Thus all that he says about the 
necesaity of doubting everything and of treating doubt ful thinga aa 
fake has had no other use than to get him a hoaring, to raise 
a cornmotioüT to draw tli© crowd by ifca novolty^ and «Ton to get 
himJ^elf confcradictedy that he may be the moii© famous, But he 
has taküii care to reserye for himsolf a way of rationally explaining 
his paradoxes/ Fou^^hof de Careil, NouveUes Leftns et Opusctiks fVwtitte, 
p, la, Leibniz el&ewliere spoflks of Bo&carte&'s CofjHoj ergo and 
Ma melliod of doubt aa * trapp inga to appeal to the people * {phaleras 
adpf^ujum), and he pictures Desjmrtes as ^ throwing balk to plebeian 
rnindB to play with,' so that 4h©y seem to havo goi &omethiiig 
graat j like boys with a nut or a faean' (Ö, ^»337). We rauat^ of 
eourae, remember how different is the problem of I>escartes from 
that of Leibniz. Descartes lays apecial stresa upon self-eonacion^- 
neF?3 becaus*ts he regards himself as having found a principle by 
meatis of w Ii ich to dii^tinguish absolutely tlie tru© from the falsö or 
dotibtfül, On the other hand^ for Leibniz aa for Spinoza, the 
Problem of philosophy is not primarily a problem of knowledge. 
Lfiibniz's theory of knowitdgo followa from his answer to the 
queation— 'What in reality is substajice ?' 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



55 



as clear to me that I have different thmgMs ; that now 
I think of Ä, now of B, &e.*' An Ego ia one of an 
infinite number of substanees, and its self-<5onsciousness 
is thus not the ground of its existence, but a difference 
in degree of guftli^^y between it and others^. The self- 
conseious Monad is merely one which has deyeloped its 
representative or pereeptive nature more fully than those 
which we describe as amimal souls or bare Mohads. In 
other words, we are * Egos ' before we think of ourselves, 
realize ourselves, or reflect upon ourselves as Egos. We 
are ' raised to the knowledge of ourselves and of God 

The difference between the self-conscious Monad and 
others eonsists in the greater eleamess and distinctness 
of its pereeptions and ideas. But, as clearness and dis- 
tinctness are relative terms (every Monad having pereep- 
tions in some degree clear and distinet), the specific 
pereeptions of a self-conscious being must be further 
defined. Leibniz, as we have seen, cannot aceept the 
Cartesian view which totally rejects eonfused and obscure 
ideas and makes eleamess and distinctness the sole criteria 
of truth^ In addition to being clear and distinet, the 

* Nouveavx Essais^ hk. iv. ch. a, § i (E. 341 a ; Gt. v, 348). Cf. G.. 
iv. 327 : ' These two things I regard as mutually independent of 
one another and as equally original/ Also Lettre ä Foucher (1676) 
(G. i. 370) : * There are two absoliLte general truths, that is to say, 
general truths which speak of the actual existence of things : the 
one is that we think, the other that there is a great variety in our 
thoughts. From the first it follows that we are, from the second 
it follows that there is something other than ourselves, that is to 
say something other than that which thinks, something which is 
the cause of the variety in what appears to us. Now the one of 
these truths is as unquestionable, as independent as the other, and 
H. Descartes, having in the order of his meditations taken account 
only of the first of them, has failed to reach the perfection he set 
before himself.* 

* * To say, / think, therqfore I am [exist] is not strictly to prove 
existence by thought, since to think and to be thinking are the 
same thing; and to say I am thinking is already to say I am.* 
NomeoAtx Essaisy bk. iv. ch. 7, § 7 (E. 362 a ; G. v. 391)* 

' Monaddogy, § 29. 

* Cf. Meditatimes de Cognitime, Veritate.et Ideis (1684) (E. 80 b ; G. iv. 
425^, translated in Appendix to Baynes's ed. of Port-Royal Logic: 
*And I also see that the men of our time abuse that vaunted 



IM-BODUCTION 



ideas which ar© charact^ristxc of a rational being mmi 
be analyzedj so that their grounda or premises may be 
as fully exhibited as poasible. And ihm the specific 
qualit j of & mtioiial soul or self-consciouB Monad is * the 
knowledge of necessary and eternal triiths/ that is to 
sayj of the ultimate grounds or premises of all knowledge* . 
The self-conscious Monad represents or perceives the 
universo in an articulate way, It has carried the internal 
evolution or realization of the nniverse so far that its 
underlying principles have clearly revealed themselves. 
' It is by the knowledge of necessary truths and by their 
abstract expression \leurs ahstmcimis] that we are raiaed 
to acte of reflexion which make us think of what is called 
** I/' and observe that this or that is mthin us r and thus, 
in thinking of oursei ves^ we think of heing^ of substance. 
üf the simple and the Compound, of the immaterial and 
of Ood Ilimself, conceiving that what is limited in us 
is in Him %vithont iimits. And the&e acts of reflexion 
furnish the chief objects of our reasonings \^ 

This at onee suggests Descartes, but Bescartes with 
a difference. For Leibniz, as for DescarteSj the idea of 

principle : whai^rer I dmrly a?M:l dhiindl^ perceitc regaräing anrftMngf 
üiat is true or {rißhtly) preäkabh [enuniiabüe] of it. For often tliings 
wliich are realiy obactii^ and coiifii&ed sötjm clear and diatmct to 
men judging hastily, The axioni, therefore, is iiseless, iinleisa there 
bö added such criteria of th© clear and d ist in et aa we have givön, 
ÄJiid iinkää ther© is certainty [cortstet] regarding the tmtb of the 
idefta. For the rt-at, the rulea of common Logic, wliich ar© also 
uged in Geotaetry, arc not to bo doapiäcd aa criteria of true state- 
mcnte, such rulca^ for instancej as that nothing should be admitted 
aa certain tinleas it has becn proved by accuratö obaervation 
[$ji^hntia \ or by st riet detnonatration, But st riet demonsfcration 
iiä that whieh keeps to the form preecribed by Logic^ not nec©säarily 
alwaya in syllogiama set out in oi^ier aceording to the pustom of 
the schoolä . . . but at Itjast in such a way that the conelnaion of 
the argument foUowa from its very form, Any right calculation 
might be taken an ©xample of an argument of this kiiid, con- 
c«iv©d tu due form. Therefor© no neceseary prcmise must be left 
out, and all the premises muat first havö been ei ther proved or 
aasnmed by way of hypotheaäa, in which ease tho conclusioB also is 
hypothetical, Those who will diligcntly obscr^^e theae thinga will 
easily guaid thom&olvca against deceptive ideas/ 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



57 



God or the most Perfect Being is involved in that of 
an imperfect self-conscious being. Yet Leibniz regards 
the idea of God as contained, not in the self-conscious 
being alone^ but, in one way or another, in every real 
being. Thus it is of less consequence for Leibniz than 
for Descartes that the idea of God is pre-supposed in the 
consciousness of seif. That which is of most importance 
to Leibniz is that self-consciousness pre-supposes a know- 
ledge of nßcessary truths in generäl Thus, for Leibniz, 
God is not merely the eternally necessary Being whose 
very idea (or esseüce) involves existence and who is in 
that way the ground of existence to all other things : He 
is also the greatest - of beings, the highest of Monads 
(Monas monadvm whose own existence is one among 
many necessary and eternal truths. *We must not 
imagine, as some do, that eternal truths, being dependent 
on God, are arbitrary and depend on His will, as Dea- 
cartes, and afterwards Monsieur Poiret, appear to have 
held^.' There are truths or facts which are dependent 
on the will of Gewi, but these are not necessary and 
eternal. 

> The Kinds ofTruth according to Leihniz. Necessary and 
eternal Truths and contingent Truths, 

• Accordingly as, on Leibniz's view, the self-conscious 
being has not a primary and independent reality, based 
on a complete difference in kind between itself and other 
beings, so the special kind of knowledge (that of eternal 
and necessary truths) which belongs to a self-conscious 
being is not to be regarded as the only absolutely certain 
truth,. to the form of which all other real knowledge 
must be reduced. ' There are two kinds of truths, those 
of reasoning and those of fact^,* The former are the 
eternal and necessary truths, the latter are contingent. 



^ Giordano Bruno, as well as Leibniz, speaks of God as Monas 
monadum. 

. * Monadologyy § 46. ^ Ibid. § 33. 



INTRODUCTION 



And tliö difFerence betweea them is that the trutlia of 
reasoniiig are either iiltimate self-evident principlea or 
triiths wliicli are reducible to such first principles by 
a process of striet logical analysis^ wltOe any attempt to 
analyze tmtlis of faet into their ultimate grounds leads 
to an infinite process, and ttiey niust finaHy be referred 
to Ood as their ground eminenkr K 

Logkai Frindpks of ihe Fhilosopkt^ of Leibniß, (a) 
Pfinciple of Identity or Contrudictmi, 

With this division of human knowledge into two great 
kmds WG come in sight of the guiding principles of 
Leibniz's phOosophy, its logical pre-suppositions aa dis- 
tinet from its specific metaphysical doctrines, The logic 
underlying the philosophies of Deacarfces and Spinoza 
was a logic of abstract self-consistency In their Tiew 
all real knowledge must be ultimately of one kind, Ail 
appai-ent knowledge that ia not of that kind must be 
regarded as entirely unreal and illusory. This was necesr 
sarily involved in the position that there is no appeal 
beyond the witness of conseiousness to itself. ^ The order 
and connexion of ideas is the same as the order and 
connexion of things\' And^ as tili things must be re- 
garded as ultimately referable to one grountl or cause, so 
all ideas must idtimately be referable to one Standard ; 
that is, must be linked togother by one principla The 
Standard must be that of self-eyidenee or absence of self- 

I 

^ Cf, Monadoloq^f || 35-38* 

^ Not that this was perfectly evideDt to themBalTCs, Descartes, 
for inafcance, regards his method of doubt m superior to a lopoal 
d^iduction, bas^id on thö principlö of contradiction. ^ Here^ if I am 
not WToiigj' sayg Eudoxug, ^you mnsfc be beginning to that h& 
who can mfiko a proper usti of döubt will be üble I0 deduce irom 
it very ijei-tain trutha, nay rat her, more ceHain and morö uBeful 
truths than thos© which deriv© from thö great principie we 
iisually lay down as th© bÄöis or cGotre to which all othor principles 
tnay be referred, '* it is impoiisible that me and the satfie thing can bath he 
and mt he.**' R{;ch&rchs de la VSrits par Isa lumiertA naturetl^ij CEKt?r?s de 
Ikscarte» ( Cousin )j vol, xi. p, 366. 

' Spinoza, EthicSj Part iL Prop. 7» 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 59 

contradiction in the ideas, which is simply another way 
of describing the immediate witness of consciousness to 
itself. True ideas must be clear and distinct in order 
that it may be manifest that they are free from self- 
contradiction. All real knowledge must either be imme- 
diately recognizable as etemal and necessary truth, or 
must be deducible from such truth by a formally or 
mathematically conclusive process. Thus the philosophies 
of Descartes and Spinoza were ruled by the principle of 
contradiction, that A cannot both be A and not A, or 
that necessary truths are 4dentical propositions, whose 
opposite involves an express contradiction \' In other 
words, they held that self-consciousness is self-consistent, 
that it never absolutely contradicts itself. 

Now this is, so far as it goes, a perfectly sound doctrine. 
Its fault is that it does not go far enough. Self-con- 
sciousness is much more than merely self-consistent. Its 
self-consistency is not immediate and on the surface. It 
is not a mere negative self-identity of parts, without 
regard to their specific content. To be self-consistent, 
aecording to the principle of contradiction, is for a thing 
to be itself, that is, to be 'not anything eise.' But a 
thing whose ultimate essence is to be ' not anything eise ' 
is nothing. * Nothing ' is immediately self-consistent 
quite as much as * somethingl' In other words, all real 
(not merely formal) self-consistency must be mediate, it 
must have grounds. It must spring from the specific 
nature of the self-consistent thing ^. And thus, as Leibniz 
contended, even axioms may require proof *. Their self- 

* Monadologyf § 35. Cf. ibid. § 31. The principle of contra- 
diction is that *in virtue of which we judge false that which 
involves a contradiction, and true that which is opposed or contra- 
dictory to the false.' 

^ Cf. Locke's Essayy bk. iv. ch. 8, § 3 ; Fraser's ed., vol. ii. p. 293. 

^ Cf. Nouveaux Essais^ bk. iv. ch. 7, § 9 (E. 362 a ; G. v. 392) : ' In 
the natural ' [i. e. logical] * order, the statement that a thing is what 
it is, is prior to the statement that it is not another thing.' 

* Cf. Nouveaux Essais, bk. i. ch. 3, § 24 (E. 222 a ; G. v. 98) : * It 
is one of my great maxims, that it is good to work out proofs of 



6o 



INTHODUCTIOK 



eyidenoe requires eloeidation ; the basis of it must be 
made manifest^. Self-consdousness, ihm, is reaJly eelf- 
consi Stent only in virtue of its being a definite System, 
a self-revea!ing process or dovelapmentj which contains 
within itself tbe ground or reason of its self-consisteocy, 
imd the ground or reason of existeiice. Äccorditigly, to 
treat it in phüosophical invostigation as if it %yere merely 
superfiüially self-consiatent, as if the law whicb exprosses 
its whole nature wore tbe law of contradiction^ wonld be 
to arrive at an empty and abstract result. 

Leibniz, however, wbile recognizing tbe inadequacy of 
the principle of contradietion as thus interpretedj did not 
clearly enough perceive tbe reason for tbis inadequacy. 
He regai-ded the principle of contradiction, not aa an 
imperfect interpretation of tbe one principle of all truth, 
to be made perfect by fui-ther definition, but as an in- 
dependent principle^ adequate to a certain kind of trntb^ 
yet requiring to be supplemented by anotber eo-ordinate 
prineipl©j whicb sbould be tbe Standard of anotber kind 
of trutb, If the principle of contradiction be tbe sola 
principle of knowledge, wbatever is not self-contradictory 
is true ; and not hing is true nnless it am be sbown tbat 
it is not self-eontradictory. But how are we to determine 
wbat is or is not self-contradictory? According to the 
Cartesians this is to be done by analytically reducing the 
doubtful Statement to one or more self-evideut propo- 
sitiona, or, in other words^ by showing that the state- 
ment is nltimately involved in one or more propositions, 
of snch a Mnd that tbeir predicate is manifestly contained 
in tbeir subject ^ But Leibni2 maintains tbat tbere are 

the nxioms themaelipea/ €t Fraser'a ©d. of Lwke s Bssay^ vol. ii. 
p. 126'} f note. 

^ üt Nouteauoe^ Esa^ts, hk, iT. ch. 11, | 14 (E. 379 b; G. r. 438) i 
^ As to Gtei'Dsl trathsj it i« to be noted that at T>qfctom th&j ars all 
condifcional and &ay in ufiFect; sucli a thmg boing supi>osed, such 
an other thing in/ 

^ Act: Ording to Loibniz, all truo propositions must be auch that 
thoir predioate is really contained in their subjocfc^ ftlthough this 
may not be seLf evident. ThJe is dinply expressing in anothar 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



6l 



many statements to which it is impossible satisfactorily 
to apply this test. Their very nature is such that the 
process of analysis cannot in their case be brought to an 
end, and consequently we remain unable to say whether 
they are reaily self-contradictory or not. At any rate, 
their self-contradiction, or the absence of it, cannot be 
made self-evident. For instance, the statement that 
'I took a long walk yesterday' may be perfectly true, 
but by no amount of analysis is it possible for us to test 
its truth by reducing it to self-evident propositions. It is ■ 
not necessarily T^ut contingently true. Its truth is not 
directly grounded in the etemäl nature of things, but is 
determined by a multitude of other truths, which may 
each in their turn demand an infinite analysis \ These . 

form his yiew that ' in the notion of eaeh individual substance all 
its events are contained, along with all their circumstances and 
the whole sequence of extemal things.* Lettre au Prince Emest 
(1686) (O. ii. .12). *Always .in every true affirmative proposition, 
whether necessary or contingent, universal or singular, the notion 
of the predicate is in some way comprehended in that of the 
subjeot, praedicatum inest siibjecto ; otherwise I know not what truth 
is, But I require no more connexion here than that which exists 
apaiie rei between the terms of a true proposition, and it is only in 
this sense that I say that the notion of the individual substance 
includes all its events and all its characteristics, even those that 
are commonly called extrinsic (that is to say, those which belong 
to it only in virtue of the general connexion of things and on 
account of its expressing the whole universe in its own way). 
** For there must always be some foundation for the connexion of 
the terms of a proposition, and this is to be found in their notions." 
That is my great principle, as to which I think all philosophers 
should be at one, and of which one of the corollaries is the common 
axiom that nothing happens without it being possible to give a 
reason why things should have gone thus rather than otherwise, 
although this reason often inclines without necessitating, a perfect 
indifference being a chimerical or incomplete supposition.* Lettre 
ä Amauld (1686) (G. ii. 56). 

• * Cf. De Sdmtia üniversdli seu Calcrilo Philosophico (E. 83 b ; G. vii. 
200) : * The difiference between necessary and contingent truths is 
indeed the same as that between commensurable and incommen- 
surable numbers. For the reduction of commensurable numbers 
to a common measure is analogous to the demonstration of necessary 
truths, or their reduction to identical truths. But, as in the case 
of surd ratios the reduction involves an infinite process and yet 
approaches a common measure so that a definite but unending 
series is obtained, thus also contingent truths require an infinite 



6e 



IHTRODUCTION 




contiugent truths, however (if they sare to be truths at 
all, and not merely false or doubtful statements), must 
liave some ground or reason \ If the truth is such tbat 
it is impossible to find for it an absolute and etemal 
reason in the first principles of things, there must at 
least be some satisfactory or suf&cient reaaon why it 
ahould be so and not otherwisa 

Logkai Frinciples of the Phihsoph^ ofLßtbnh. {h) Frinc^h 
of Sufficknt lieüson. 
Thim Leibniz Supplements the principlß of contra- 
diction by the addition of tbe principle of suffici^nt 
reason. The name has a makeshift sound — as if one 
should say, * We must be content with a sufficient reason 
pin cases where a perfect reason is not to be found/* But 
I in the pbilosophy of Leibniz it is much more than a 
makeshift» Thia principle is essen tial to his system and, 
indeed, giTes it the greater part of its value. In the 
Mo}mdolo(jfi/y Leibniz defines this principle as that ^in 
Tirtue of which we hold that no fact can be found real or 
©xisting, no statement true, unless there be a sufficient 
reason why it should be so and not otherwise, although 
these reasons very often cannot be known by us '^/ Äs 
" thus defined, the principle of suÖicient reason might 
aLmost be regarded as including the principle of contra- 
dictiouj inasmuch as the self-consisteney of neeessary 
truths is their sufficient reason, SelfH3onsistency or 

analysis, which God alone cäh flccompläsh, Aecordingly it is by 
Hirn alone that thes^ trutha are known a prieri and with certainty. 
For, although the reason of any succeediag State might be fotind in 
that which precedoa it, yet a reason for thig precediiig stat^s can 
again b© given, and so w© never C(*m€5 to the final reaaon in the 
seriea, But this infinite proce^a itself takes the place of a reason» 
becau^e in ifcs own special way it might from the beginn ing ha^e 
been immodintely understood otitsid© of the aeriea, in God, the 
Author of thingSj on whom both pntecedent and consequent statee 
ane d<?p©ndent, even moro than they are dependent upon <jnö 
anöther.* 

* Monadologyf §§ 36, 37, 

' Ibid, & 32, In iii© Thhdic^, | 44 (E, 515 j G. vi. la?)^ he caJla 
i% ^ Determining [deciding] Ji^dsom' 



GENERÄIi PRINCIPLES 



63 



absence of self-contradicidon is one test of the sufficiency 
of the reason. But, on the other hand, the principle of 
conti'adiction has an independent and, in some sense, 
superior position, for in the cäse of necessary truths the 
reason can always be given, that is, can be made explicit, 
while in the case of contingent truths we often can only 
say that there must be a sufficient reason, without know- 
ing fuUy what the reason is. 



-The value and importance of the principle of sufficient 
reason become more manifest when we inquire further — ^\ 
*In what does the sufficiency of the reason consist?* 
We have seen that the grounds of any contingent truth 
or faet are to be sought in other contingent truths or 
facts, and that an attempt to analyze a contingent truth 
or fact into its grounds thus leads to an infinite process. 
Aceordingly it seems to Leibniz that the final reason of 
contingent i^uths must be sought in something outside 
of the System of contingent things, viz. in an eternal and 
necessary Substance or God, who is their source. But 
this requires some further explanation. In the case of 
the principle of contradiction, what may be called the 
sufficiency of the reason consisted in the absence of 
self-contradiction in the thing or proposition. But to 
say that a thing is in itself free from contradiction is the 
same as to say that, by itself and without reference to 
other things, it is possible^ Aceordingly, to say that 
everything which is not self-contradictory is true or real 
is to say that everything possible is true or real. ' I call 
pqssihle everything which is perfectly conceivable and 
which has consequently an essence, an idea, without 
considering whether the remainder of things allows it to 
become existent But the opposite of every particular 

* Cf. Meditaiiones de Cognitionen &c. (1684) (E. 80 b ; G. iv. 425 ; 
Baynes, Port-BoyoL LogiCf 428). 

* Lettre ä Bourguet (17 14) (E. 720 a ; G. iii. 573). 



The Possible and the Compossihle, The best of all 
possible Worlds. 




64 



INTEODUCTION 



event or contingent truth is possible in tbis sense : it doea 
not neeesaarily imply a self-contradiction* The opposite 
of the axioni, ^ Things that are equal to the söme thing 
are equal to one another/ is not possible, for it involves 
an immediate self-contradictian, The opposite of the 
truth, ' I am sitting here at thia moment/ is possible, for it 
does not involve a direct self-contradiction, Aceordingly, 
the truth of contingent tliinga is not gronnded in their 
possibLIity \ It is not in virtue of their very ©ssence or 
idea that they, and ^ not their opposites, are true or real, 
Their siiffieient reason lies beyond themselves» in their 
relation to other things. In themselvesj the contingent 
truth s and their opposites are alike possible : eonsidered 
in relation to other thiogs, the truths aloue are possible» 
For instancoj if we eonsider the truth that ' I am sitting 
here at this moment,' not in itsolf alone, but in relation 
to an uidefinite number of other truths regarding (say) 
my habits, eharacter^ work^ the hour of the day, Ste., we 
shall see that the truth alone is possible, that in this 
* connexion its opposite is impossible, The opposites of 
contingent truths, thongh not self-contradictoryj are in 
contradiction with the gener al System» Each is possible, 
but they are not jointly possible^ mutually compatible, 
or, in Leibniz*s phrase, ' compossible,* Aecordingly^ 
' compossibility,' or conformity with the actual System of 
things, is the true test of reaÜty^ the suMcietit reason. 
Everything which is possible has an essence or meaning, 
but only that whieh is also eompossible has existence ^, 

' Deiücai'teö did not «dmit tluit everything whioli ia poasiblß i& 
renliz^d, but jissignt^d the choic* amon^ possiblG things to the mere 
will öf God* But thi» is practioßUy to make the ohoice arbitrary 
and cona&quetitly fco make th© eontingönt (which ia the t^eault of 
choice) fort ui top s. Spinoza, on fche other band, by holdiiig that 
ßverything possible is realizedj m«do tho contingent nei3öSfiiiry, 
LeihniZj howeyer, points out that Deacartes in one pasaage \ Frincipia, 
ÜL 47) saya tliftt *■ Matter must sueceEL^ively take all the forma of 
which it ia ö»pabk\' an approach to Spinoza'a view. Ri'p&me aau 
E^fleximSj kc. (1697) (E. 144 a; iv. 340). 

^ Cf. Lettre ä Bmrguä. (1714) (E. 719 b; G. iii, 573): *I do not 
admit that, in order to kiow whether the romance of Astr^ is 



OENERAL PBINCIPLES 



65 



But, while the ground of the individual thing's reality 
is its compossibility with the actual System of things, 
Leibniz does not admit that mere compossibility with 
any System whatever implies the existence of the com- 
possible essences. The principle of sufficient reason is 
not interpreted by him as a general reference to System 
or as reference to a System which is held to be the only 
one possible, to an all-inclusive System \ There are 
several possible Systems or universes, each of which 
consists of a collection of compossible elements. Indeed 
it must be supposed that there is an endless series of such 
possible universes, of which one only has existence as 
well as essence. But the principle of sufficient reason 

possible, it would be necessary to know its connexion with the rest 
of the universe. That would be necessary in order to know 
whether it is compossible with it, and, consequently, whether this 
romance has been, is now, or shall be [realized] in any corner of 
the universe. For assuredly, without that, there will be no place 
for it. And it is very true that what does not exist, has never 
existed, and never shall exist, is not possible, if by possible we 
mean compossible, as I have just said. . . . But it is another 
question whether Astraea is absolutely possible. I say "yes," 
because it involves no contradiction. But, in order that it may 
actually exist, the rest of the universe would have to be quite 
other than it Is, and it is possible that it may be otherwise/ 
L'AsirSe was the first French pastoral romance, modelled on such 
works as the Aminta of Tasso or the Pastor Fido of Guarini. It was 
written by Honorö d*Urf6 (1568-1625) and was published in parts 
between the years 1610 and 1619. It is a stränge medley of his- 
torical and imaginary events and characters, and the Court society 
of Europe for a long time amused itself by trying to * identify ' the 
characters of the story. It was translated into almost every European 
language, many * keys * to it were written, plays were founded upon 
it, and it was read with much appreciation by such writers as 
La Bochefoucauld, La Fontaine, and Rousseau. 

* Remarq^ies sur la lettre de M. AmaiUd (1686) (G. ii. 45) : ' If we 
were to reject absolutely things which are merely possible, we 
should do away with the contingent, for, if nothing is possible 
except what God has actually created, whatever God has created 
would be necessary — supposing that God has resolved to create 
anything.' Nolen {La Critique de Kant et la Metaphysique de Leibniz, 
p. 24) remarks that 'the relation between the world of possibles 
and the world of existences remains one of the obscure points in 
the philosophy of Leibniz. The correspondence with Arnauld . . . 
shows that Leibniz was conscious of the insufficiency of his explana- 
tions and of the difficulty of the problem.* 

P 



66 



INTRODUOTION 



still r©quir«s that a cause or reason he ajssigned for the 
exisience of the actual imiverse ratber than any other 
atnong those which are poasible, Tlie exiatence of the 
actual universe is iis creatiou by God^ that is to say, its 
being not merely in the region of ideas, or essenees. or 
poBBibilities, ^liich ia the pure understanding of Grod, 
but also in the sphere of final causes^ in whicb the will 
of God operates^ In other words, the actual univorse 
is the result of a free choice of God aniongst all posgible 
universe3. While the choice of God is free, being un- 
limited in Its applicationj it is not an arbitrary choice, 
but a cboice according to reason. God choosea as th© 
actual universe that whose eompossible elements admit 
of the greatest amount of perfection or reality, that is to 
l^say, the füllest and most eomplete es'^ence» Thus th© 
actual universe is * tbe best of all possible worlds ' — of 
all worlds whicb are reaUy worlds or syatemSj that is^ 
in Leibniz's languagej of all worlda wbose elements are 
composjsible. God makes tbia choice because, being 
omnipotent j His cboice is unlimited, He may create any 
possible World ; being omni seien t, He contains all possihle 
worlds in His understanding and perceives that whicb is 
best ; and, being perfect in goodness of will, He cbooses 
the best. Thus the Divine Nature is ultimately the 
sufiicjent reason of all particular tbingSj since it is the 
ground both of the essence and of the existence of the 
actual universe which, in its turn, as a system of com- 
possibles, is the immediate ground of its individual ele- 
ments, 

Accordingly, the principle of contradiction and the 
prineiple of sufificient reason remain side by side in the 

^ According to Leibniz, ©lisfeence (or tli© creatiou which produc^ 
existenee) involvea no change in thö easence of a thing. Ita eaaenoe 
is the samoj whether it be in tli© actual world or moreJy in the 
region of the Divine idoaa. Gf- Mmadohgy, §5 43 und 47, notes, 

^ Cf, T}t4odicdej § 7 {E. 506 a ; O, vi. 107); *His understaiiding ia 
the EouTc© of essencesj and Hia will h the origin of exifctencGs.* 
Alm Monadologj/j |§ 53^55^ a^id IMidke^ § 301 (E, 565 b ; G- vi. 336). 



GENEEAL PRINCIPLES 



67 



philosophy of Leibniz, each having its specific function, 
but neither reducible to the other, while no attempt is 
made to find a more comprehensive principle which may 
include both. There are certain etemal and necessary 
truths which are independent of the will of God, existing 
in His iinderstanding alone, and these are subject to the 
principle of contradiction ; but the reality of all indi- 
vidual substances and their changes is dependent on the 
will as well as the understanding of God, and they are 
all subject to the principle öf sufficient reason. Each 
principle expresses a certain necessity ; but the necessity 
of the principle of contradiction differs in kind from 
that of the principle of sufficient reason, the former 
being an absolute, compelling, or metaphysical necessity, 
whose opposite is impossible, involving self-contradiction, 
while the latter is a relative, inclining, or moral neces- 
sity, whose opposite is not impossible, but incompossible, 
inconsistent not with itself but with the System of which 
it is a part, inconsistent not so much with the etemally 
true as with the best possible. 

Tke Uading Characteristics of Leihniisf's Philosophy as 
BesuUs of the two great hgical Prindples. 

• We are. now in a position to see how the main features 
of the Metaphysics of Leibniz are determined by these 
great logical principles which underlie it \ The principle 
of contradiction, taken by itself, is a principle of exclu- 
sion. A is A (every real thing is identical with itself) 
at all times, in all circumstances, throughout all changes, 
in every variety of. relations. Strictly speaking, then, 
A can never hecome B. A is always A, B is always B ; 
each is for ever exclusive of the other. * Black is black, 
furieusement black; white is white, furieusement white.' 
The principle of contradiction, as thus interpreted, is 

* What foUows is, of course, not an exposition of Leibniz's explicit 
doctrine, but an analytic investigation of the way in which his 
logical principles fix the main lines of his philosophy. 

F 2 



68 



INTRODUCTION 



a principle of pure self-identity which asserts permanence 
to the exclusion of change or, in general, unity to the 
exclusion of difference. In other words, it insists on 
the reality of Terms, making relations subordinate or 
fictitious. Consequently a philosophy whose dominant 
principle is that of contradiction, in this sense, must 
(consciously or miconsciously) treat whole and parts as 
exclusive of one another, asserting the reality of the one 
as against that of the other. For if the whole be real 
it must be simple, it must exclude as unreal all relations 
or difFerences. Otherwise it will not be purely self- 
identical, but may receive a variety of real predicates. 
And as it is simple it can have no real parts. Since A 
cannot be not-A, and since not-A includes B, C, &c., 
it cannot be true that some A is B or C. Some A can 
only be A without further distinction. On the other 
hand, if the parts be real and purely self-identical, if the 
reality of each is self-centred and is determined without 
regard to its relations to the others, then there is no 
real whole, but only a numerical collection of individuals 
which may even be contradictory of.one another. The 
principle of contradiction, considered as meaning merely 
that the real is that which is not self-contradictory, yields 
either a whole, which has no real parts or determinations 
because it is equally indifferent to all possible determina- 
tions, or a bare collection of severally possible, but jointly 
* incompossible ' parts. 
• Now, it is the influence of the principle of contra- 
diction, thus abstractly interpreted, that leads Leibniz 
to the conception of real substance as simple, L e. as 
without parts, indecomposable. And it is the same 
principle that accounts for the infinite plurality of simple 
substances and their complete isolation from one another. 
For Leibniz, in order to give due value to the differences 
in the universe, holds the principle of contradiction as 
ensuri ng reality to the parts, leäving the whole to be 
otherwise accounted for. And, on the other hand, the 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



69 



mutual Isolation of simple substances is but another 
name for their abstract self-identity. A can never become 
B, and, as A and B are simple, no part of A can ever 
become B, or a part of B. One Monad can never become 
another, and no quality of one Monad can ever become 
a quality of another. 

The principle of sufficient reason in combination with 
the principle of contradiction yields the idea of the 
Monad as itself the source of all the differences it con- 
tains, the whole variety of its existence \ The principle 
of contradiction requires that real substance must con- 
tain its whole nature within itself in such a way that 
it may be analytically deduced. The notion of substance 
is self-explicative. Every true proposition must be ana- 
lytic. Thus the Monad must be self-sufficient. But 
now the principle of sufficient reason is added to explain 
that the analysis is not necessarily completed in every 
case, that, while substance must be self-sufficient and self- 
explicative, its self-sufficiency is not necessarily in every 
case fuUy realized. Its self-identity is not static but 
dynamic : it is not immediately self-explaining, but pro- 
gressively self-revealing. Many true proposition s are not 
aetually but potentially analytic. Whüe the predicate 
of every true proposition must in some way be contained 
in the subject, it does not follow that in each particular 
case the relation can be made perfectly and self-evidently 
clear \ The predicate must have a sufficient ground or 
reason in the subject, but not necessarily a self-evident 
one. The Monad must be conceived as sufficiently the 
reason of its changes or varieties, though not self-evidently 
the reason of each. In other words, the various per- 
ceptions which are the variety or change in the Monad, 
the manifold [muUitude] in the simple substance, have 

^ The Problem how the simple substance can contain differences is 
the same as the problem how the principles of contradiction and 
su£Scient reason can be treated as independent and co-ordinate. 
Of this Leibniz offers no clear Solution. 

* Cf. this Introduction, Part ii. p. 60, note 2. 



70^ 



IimiOBUCTlON 



reality even though they are not all perfectly clear and 
dietinct. Thus Spinoza, under th© giiidance of the prin- 
ciple of contradietion, rejected merely empirical know- 
ledge, the contingenfc sequence of ideaa that comes ab 
f^^erientia vaga, as confused and therefore unreal and 
illüsory, a work of imagination* On the other hand, 
Leibniz (for whom this empirical sequeneo m the sorias 
of perceptions in Monade tliafc have not reached the self- 
conscious stage) attributes to this sequence a relative 
reality, inasnineh as it is potentially^ though not actually, 
clear and diätinct. 

Pm-therj we see the influence of the principle of suffi- 
cient reason in th© conception of the Monads aa each 
representative of the whole universe from its pai*ticular 
point of TieWi The Monads are indeed Terms or absolute 
points, centi-es exciusivo of one another ; but they are 
not Terms ©xcluaive of relationa, It is a part of their 
©ssential reality to contain within themselTöS a multi- 
plicity of relations. The Monad may be likened to 
centro or point in which, quite simple though it is^ there 
exists an infinite number of angles, formed by the lines 
whieh meet in it ^/ The principle of contradiction 
requii-es nothing but a pure simplicity in the individual 
substance ; any kind of simple substanc© would satisfy 
it, But the principle of .suffijeient j:fiasonjmpos^^ 
further conäTtion tEat the simple substance must hay© 
relations to other simple substances and to tEe whole, 
and that only those simple (self-consistent) substances 
are real wMch are also consistent with the real unity 
of the whole, ¥ov otberwise every real substance wouM 
have its ground or reason Tvbolly in sc^ and those things 
for which \ve must be content with a groimd or reason 
in uUo would be entirely illüsory. Thus tbe combination 
of aelf'Consistency with consistency in relation to the 

* Frindples üf Natura a?id nf Grazie, § ä Of. Mxtrait ifit IHciionnain de 
Bayk^ &c. (170a) (G. iv. 54a) : ' God liaa put in ©ach ßoul a Gürwenfra- 
tian qf the mrld,^ 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



71 



whole is what Leibniz means by the character of the 
Monad as at once exclusively individual and represen- 
tative or perceptive of the whole universe from its par- 
ticular point of view. 

Again, the appetition of the Monads is due entirely 
to the principle of sufficient reason. A substance which 
is real in virtue of its mere possibility can have no ten- 
dency to a change of state \ If it were really to change 
it would cease to be itself. But the appetition of the 
Monads is ruled not by the principle of realizing the self- 
consistent or the abstractly possible, but by the principle 
of realizing the best or the füll harmony of a System. 
The» pre-established harmony of the universe as a 
System of * compossible ' substances is the ground or 
reason of the appetition in each, the principle of its 
changes. But this, as we have seen, is a consequence 
of admitting the principle of sufficient ;reason. 

Lastly, a very slight consideration will show that the 
law of continuity (with its obverse, the identity of in- 
discernibles) is a pai*ticular application of the principle 
of sufficient reason. A breach in the continuity of the 
series of simple substances would mean a void in nature. 
Such a void is not inconsistent with the principle of 
contradiction : it is not self-evidently impossible. But 
it is inconsistent with the principle of the best or most 
fitting which governs the actual System of things, that 
is to say, it is inconsistent with the principle of sufficient 
reason. That one possible thing is in itself more perfect 
than another is no sufficient reason for the existence of 
the former rather than the latter; the former might 
perhaps be incompatible, while the Jatter is compatible, 
with the rest of the wörld. But it is inconsistent 

^ Cf. Spinoza's Conatusy the * effort by which each thing endeavours 
to persevere in its own being,* and which is * nothing but the actual 
essence of the thing itself.* Ethicsj Part iii. Prop. 7. Leibniz 
might say that, on Spinoza's principles, to call this an * effort * is to 
beg the question, because eJffort implies tendency towards some- 
thing. 



72 



INTEODUCTION 



with tbe principle of sufficient reaaon that notliing 
sboiüd exist where somethmg is possible ; for th© prin- 
ciple of sufficient reason requires the exiatonca of a 
eomplete world, that is to say, of that eotire syateoi of 
compossible tliings whkh contains the füllest reality or 
the greatest amount of essence\ Consequently the law 
of continviity derives its forca from the principle of 
aufäcient reason. Atid thus, in general, Leibniz'a Solu- 
tion of hia maiii problem ia accomplished by the com- 
binatioii of the piinciples of contradiction and sufficient 
reasorij giving, on tbe one band, real luiits of substance, 
even more thorougbly irapenetrable and Lndivisible than 
phyaical atoma ; and^ an tbe other bandj in consListency 
with tbese, a real wbole^ wbich is not a mere Aggregate 
of iiidependent and perhaps mutually contradictory ele- 

1 Qf jyfflfl j^^f^^ ^ (jf^^^^ C1716), AposfÜk (E. 758 b; viL 378) 
(CLarke's iraBslation) : * In like msiiiner^ to admit a. vacpum in 
natura is üscribing to God a very imperfect work ; Vis violafcing 
the grand prinoiple of th© necossity of a svijffiüioiit reason ; which 
many have talked of^ without understajiding ita true meaoing. . , , 
To omifc many othwr argumenta agami^t a mamm aod atmw^ 1 shail 
here metition thoae wliith I ground upon Grod'a perfectiem, ajid 
upois the neceaisity of a aufficient reason, I !ay it down aa a prin- 
(jtple tliftfc evt^ry porfection which God could impart to things 
without derogat ing from ihiür other perfections has actual ly beeil 
imparfced to them. Now let us fancy a space wholly eiupty. öod 
could have placed aome matter in it^ without tierogating in any 
reapect from all other thinga ; thörefore Ho hath actuaily placed 
aome matter in that space t therefore tkero is no spaco whoUy 
empty : therefore all is fulh , . . I shall add auother argument, 
grounded upon the necessity of a ffUj^cienl reasm. Tis impossibl** 
thero ahould he any pnnciple to determine what proportlon of 
matter there ought to be, out of all the poasible degreea from 
a plmwn to a vavuum, or from a mmum to a plenum' [_? The Pro- 
portion of öithor pknum to vacuum or of vaamm to plenum.} ' Ferhapa 
it will he 3fljd that the one ghould he equal to the other ; hut, 
becÄUse matter is more perfect than a locMiimpfeaaon requirea that 
a geometrical proportion should bo observed^ nnd that there should 
he as much more matter than vacuum as the formor doserv^ ta 
have ihe preferenoe before the latter. But then there must no 
mmum at all j for the perfection üf matter ia to that of a mcuum as 
something to nothing.' Cf. also the beginn iag of Lcibniz's fiecond 
letter r^E, 748 b ; tü. 356) : * The more matter there ia, the more 
opportun ity is there for God to exereise His wisdom and Hia power ; 
and for thia rsuson, among others, I hold that there is absolutelj 
no void.* 



GENERAL PRINCIPLES 



73 



mentS; but the most perfect System of mutually consistent 
or compossible substances, in each of which the whole is 
in some way ideally contained ^. 

^ Further consideration of the relation between these two great 
principles in the philosophy of Leibniz is given in the Fourth Part 
of this Introduction, p. 174. 



PAET III. 



DETAILED STATEMENT OF THE PHILOSOPHY OP LEIBNIZ. 

Passing from the general consideration of the doctrines 
of Leibniz, we now come to their more specific develop- 
ment. We shall, in the first place, examine the relation 
between his philosophical principles and the ruling con- 
ceptions of his Mathematics, and we shall afterwards 
endeavour to trace the principles of the Monadology in 
the various departments of knowledge which are con- 
cerned with Matter, with Organism, and with Self- 
consciousness. This review of human knowledge, pro- 
ceeding from the most abstract or simple to the most 
concreto or complex of the sciences^ will reveal to us 
the Interpretation which Leibniz's conception of Sub- 
stance requires us to give to the judgments of common 
consciousness. From another point of view, we may 
consider ourselves as inquiring : — * What are the answers 
which Leibniz would make to objections against his 
System, based upon facts, hypotheses, or common beliefs 
in mathematical and physical, biological and mental 
science ? ' 

A. leibniz's MATHEMATICS IN RELATION TO HIS 
PHILOSOPHY. 

It was partly through Mathematics that Leibniz 
arrived at the notion of Substance which is the core of 
his philosophy. Dissatisfaction with the Mathematics 
of Descartes and with its consequences in Physics led 
him to reject the Cartesian theory of matter and motion 

^ The consideration of Leibniz's Theology or Philosophy of Reli- 
gion is beyond the scope of the present volume. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 75 



and to Substitute for it a more adequate theory of Force 
and a higher Mathematics. Both the Mathematics and 
the Physics of the time appeared to Leibniz to be too 
abstract, and the great object of his speculations was to 
bring them more into touch with concreto reality. 

The Transition from Synthetic to Analytic Geometry, 

Early in the seventeenth Century a considerable ad- 
vance was made in the science of Mathematics, mainly 
through the work of Kepler, Cavalieri, and Descartes. 
The Geometry of the Greeks was synthetic or synoptic. 
It dealt with ideal figures as discrete wholes, not taking 
into consideration the possibility of their being analyzed 
into elements, of which they are combinations or func- 
tions. Thus the relations of the figures to one another 
are considered as external. Each is what it is : no one 
is regarded as having in it the possibility of passing into 
another. A rectilineal figure is one thing ; a curvilinear 
figure is another. The barriers between them are re- 
garded as insurmountable, at least by the methods of 
exact or demonstrative science. Thus a curve is still 
a curve, however small may be its curvature. A polygen 
is still a polygen, however numerous may be its sides. 
And the kinds of curves are each independent of the 
others. An ellipse is still an ellipse, however distant 
one focus may be from the other. 

Kepler's introduction of the notion and the name of 
infinity into Geometry was the beginning of a great 
change in mathematical methods. The geometrical 
figures of the Greeks were all finite, and therefore 
capable of representation to the eye, or, in other words, 
capable of being pictured. Every curve must have 
a definite curvature. Every polygen must have a de- 
finite number of sides. Kepler, in order to attain to 
greater exactness in the statement of mathematical 
relations, suggested that finite (or definite) figures might 



76 



INTRODUCTION 



be regarded as consisting of an infinite (or indefinite) 
number of elements. Thus he considered a circle to be 
composed of an infinite number of triangles, having 
their common Vertex at the centre and forming the 
circumference by their bases\ Such an analytic con- 
ception of the figure is, of course, not capable of being 
pictured. But it at once suggests the possibility of 
representing the figure, not by a rough drawing or 
image, but by an infinite numerical series the terms 
of which are so related to one another that their sum is 
finite. Accordingly, in thus considering the finite as 
made up of an infinite number of elements, we have 
promise of a connexion between Geometry and Algebra, 
of such a kind that geometrical relations may be sym- 
bolized algebraically and the knowledge of them may be 
extended and generah'zed by calculation. Such a con- 
nexion would mean the reduction of the discontinuous 
concepts of Synthetic Geometry to the comparative 
continuity of Algebraic Concepts or Numbers. It would 
thus lessen the abstractness of Geometry, and make it 
more adequate to the continuity of nature, or, looking 
at the sam-e thing from the opposite point of view, it 
would enable the continuous System of space-relations 
to be more completely brought within the ränge of 
mathematical demonstration. For instance, problems 
which the Greeks had to solve by the indirect and 
unsuggestive method of reductio ad absurdum would now 
be capable of a direct demonstrative Solution, and there 
would arise many new problems which the old methods 
could not touch. 

* In a similar way Cavalieri afterwards suggested that the area 
of a triangle might be conceived as made up of an infinite number 
of straight lines, each parallel with the base. The lengths of these 
lines he regarded as forming an infinite series in arithmetical pro- 
gression, of which the first term is zero. The sum of this series is 
equal to half the product of the last term (i.e. the length of the 
base of the triangle) and the number of terms (i. e. the altitiide of 
the triangle). As against this it was pointed out that, since a line 
has no breadth, no number of straight lines can ever make up a 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNIZ'S PHILOSOPHY 77 



The Basis of Andlytical Geometry. 

This connexion between Algebra and Geometry was 
definitely established by Descartes in the Analytical 
Geometry, of which he was the inventor. The basis of 
the Analytical Geometry is the finding of a definite 
Proportion between the space-relations or ratios investi- 
gated by Geometry and certain numerical ratios. But 
the space-relations of Geometry are not merely quantita- 
tive as are the relations of number. To take the simplest 
of instances, the -Square upon a line may be represented 
by the Square of a number. But the Square of a number 
n is simply n times n, that is to say, it is the sum of 
n »'s added together. The Square of » is a quantity of 
n's or a simple series of homogeneous units, which may 
be interchanged within the series without in any way 
affecting the result. On the other hand, the relation 
of a geometrical Square to the line upon which it is 
constructed (i.e. to any one of its sides) is not purely 
quantitative. The Square is not a sum of lengths. It is 
a figure with special characteristics. The line cannot 
intelligibly be regarded as its unit. It is its side, and 
as the side of a Square it has properties other than those 
which it would have as a mere line. It is, in fact, 
part of a unity which is more than merely quantitative. 
And yet a quantitative ratio can express the relation 
between the Square and its side, in such a way that the 
properties of the Square may be algebraically calculated 
without direct reference to the geometrical figure. Thus 

plane area. Pascal, however, showed that Cavalieii's method 
really implied that the infinite series of straight lines is an • in- 
definite * number of * small * rectangles, which are so small that 
the minute triangles between them and the sides of the given 
triangle may be neglected in the computation. This * indefinite ' 
of Pascal is the * infinite * of later mathematicians, and Iiis * small ' 
is manifestly their * infinitely little.* Thus we have liere the 
transition from the ancient to the modern methods. Pascal vindi- 
cated Cavalieri's method on the ground that it diffored only in 
manner of expression from the method of exhaustions, used in the 
Greek mathematics. 



78 



INTRODUCTIOK 



relations of quantity (that is to say, of mere ag-gregation) 
may become signs or Symbol a of relations whicli are 
more than quantitative, relations in whieli tlie part is 
not indillerent to the whole but charaeterlstic of ii All 
the processes of Algebra^ however comp! ex and elabomte, 
are forma of the addition and the subtmction (or Separa- 
tion) of abstract units. Tlnis the abstract numbor i 
reniains the same, into whatover algebraic combination 
it may enter aa a part. But the conception of a atraight 
line, for instance, varies (the line has varioua functions) 
according to the nature of the whole into whieh it enters 
aa a part, and according to the special way in whieh it is 
related to the whole, Thus in relation to different kinds 
of figurea {rectilmeal, curved^ &zc^\ or on account of the 
varioua forms of its relation to one and tJie same figure, 
a straight line is a side^ a tangent, a radiua, a directrix, 
an axiß, a sine, &c. There is a c los er, more real unity 
between the part and the whole than in the relation of 
mere quantity, where the part is indifferent to the special 
character of the whole, 

EelaUons of put^l^ quantitative TJnihj anä geometriciü 
Unitif, Infinite Series anä the mfimtehj litth. 

But there is no absolute gulf fixed between quantita- 
tive unity and geometrical nnity, The differetiee is, 
that geometrical unity, while abstract in compariaon 
with organic unity or with the real conerete unity of all 
esistencej is less abatract than merely quantitative unity \ 
And the bridge between the unity whieh is expressed in 
the Algebra of finite quantities and that whieh is expreaaed 
in the Geometry of fi nite space-relationa ia to Iw foond in 
the analysis of a ßnite quantity into an infinite aeries, 
Ko finita quantity can be reaolved into an infinite series 

* Striutly speaking, a merely quantitative unity ia a contra diction 
in temiB^ for mere quantity is pure difierenceT the abssenoöof unity, 
But what I mmn liere is unity of the lowest degree, uiiity on the 
point of vanishing:, or the most indetemlaat© unity. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 79 

formed by an addition of independent integers, such as 
I + 1 + I, &c., or even 1 + 2 + 3, that is to say, by an 
addition not conditioned by any special law. But there 
are certain numerical series in which the terms are not 
mutually indifferent (nor immediately reducible to a set 
of mutually indifferent terms), but are arranged, or rather 
proceed from one another, according to a definite law, 
which law is of such a kind that, although it never 
brings the series actually to an end, it results in the sum 
of the series approaching more and more nearly to some 
finite quantity. Accordingly it is held that, if the series 
be regarded as consisting of an infinite number of terms, 
the difference between the sum of its terms and the finite 
quantity will be infinitely little, and therefore practically 
negligible. 

This * practically negligible ' is the keystone of the 
bridge between algebraic quantity and geometrical, 
physical, or any other kind of relation. Strictly speaking, 
if the series be regarded as a pure sum, and therefore 
ultimately analyzable into an addition of homogeneous 
Units (i + i + i, &c., or w+w + w, &c.), the fijiitude of its 
sum is incompatible with its having an infinite number 
of terms. It is only inasmuch as the series is regarded, 
not as a merely quantitative unity, but as a unity deter- 
mined by a characteristic law or principle, that we are 
entitled to disregard the * infinitely little' difference 
between the sum of its terms and the finite quantity. 
There can be no absolute * infinitely little' in mere 
quantity. The * infinitely little' here considered is 
* infinitely little ' as determined by the law or character 
of the particular series. That is to say, we are certain 
that the law of the series holds unchangeably, however 
far the process of analysis may be carried ; and we have 
thus inferential certainty regarding the result of the 
analysis (the equation of the sum of the terms to the 
whole finite quantity), even although we may be unable 
actually to count each one of the terms. It is the law 



8o 



INTEODUCTION 



or principle of the series which enables us to say that the 
* infinitely little ' difference may be neglected because the 
character of the series is not affected by it. 

But in neglecting this * infinitely little ' difference, 
because of the special character or law of the series, we 
have virtually passed from the unity of mere quantity to 
a unity of character, a unity in which the parts are not 
entirely indifferent to the whole and to one another, but 
are connected in accordance with some special principle. 
We have thus given an indefinite increase of elasticity to 
the formulae of Algebra and have prepared the way for 
an algebraic representation and calculus not merely of the 
elementary space-unities (figures) of the Greek Geometry, 
but also of more comprehensive geometrical unities öf 
which these are Clements, and further of physical unities 
and indeed of any unity the elements of which are in 
themselves capable of a suflBciently accurate quantitative 
expression. For instance, the phenomena with which 
Physics deals are differences of a unity, elements in 
a whole. But the unity, the whole, is not one of quantity 
merely. And yet its elements are capable of quantitative 
expression with a degree of accuracy such that its dif- 
ference from absolute accuracy may be neglected so far as 
physical science is concerned. Consequently it becomes 
possible to state and to work out problems of physical 
science in terms of Algebra. 

The Infinitesimal Cdkülus and the Principle ofBecoming 
or System, 

The practical development of this possibility is the 
function of the Infinitesimal Calculus of Leibniz and 
Newton \ As we have already seen, the Analytical 

^ A succinct account of the famous controversy regarding the 
discovery of this method, and of the difforont forins in which 
Leibniz and Newton expressed it, will be found in Dr. William- 
son's article * Infinitesimal Calculus * in the gih. ed. of the Encydo- 
paedia Britannica. Cf. Merz, History of European Th&ught in the Nitieteenth 
Century, i. 100-103. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 8l 



Geometry reduces the discontinuifcy of Synthetic Geo- 
metry to the relative continuity of number, or quantity 
of homogeneous units. But number as a sum of finite 
Units (even though it may take the form of an infinite 
series) is still to'some exten t discontinuous. It may, 
however, be made continuous by regarding its elements 
not as finite units, but as 'infinitesimals' or infinitely 
little quantities. In other words, any numerical unit we 
may choose to employ may be subdivided infinitely, and 
thus every finite number may be regarded as the sum of 
an infinite series of infinitely small terms. This is the 
basis of the Infinitesimal Calculus as originally conceived 
by Leibniz. It may be otherwise expressed by saying 
that the series of finite numbers or quantities is ulti- 
mately to be expressed, not as a series of terms which 
grow by finite increments (like i + + + 
&c.), but as a series, whose terms flow into one another, 
their differences being infinitely small. That is to say, 
any variable magnitude must be regarded as increasing or 
diminishing by infinitely small increments or decrements. 
The work of the Calculus is to determine the relations 
between unknown quantities or magnitudes, not by 
considering them merely as fixed wholes and directly 
finding equations between them, but indii-ectly, by treat- 
ing the quantities as variables or. as growing, and in the 
first place finding equations between their elements or 
differences \ 

^ From one point of view it may be regarded as the solving of the 
problem of Achilles and the tortoise. Cf. Letire ä M. Foucher (1693) 
(E. 118 a"; G. i. 416) : < As to indivisibles, in the sense of the mere 
extremities of a time or of a line, we cannot conceive new extremi- 
ties, nor actual nor potential parts in them. Thus points are 
neither large nor small, and no leap is needed to pass them. Yet 
the continuous, although it everywhere has such indivisibles, is 
not composed of them, as the objections of sceptics seem to suppose. 
There is, in mj opinion, nothing insurmountable in these objections, 
as will be found if they are put into strict form. Father Gregory 
of St. Vincent has ezcellently shown, by the Calculus of infinite 
divisibility, the place where Achilles should overtake the tortoise 
which Starts before him, according to the proportion of their 
velocities. Thus Gtoometry dissipates these apparent difficultiea.' 

a 



82 



IKTEODUCTION 



Accordingly, for instanc^ Kewton regarded all geo- 
metrical magnitudea as capable of generaiion by con* 
tinuous motion, Linea may be regarded as gen erat ed by 
the motion of points, surfaces by that of lines, and solids 
by tbat of anrfaces. That is to say^ these figureä are dis- 
tinct from ono another, not absolutely, but merely in the 
degree in which they posseas certain ehai-acteristics. The 
difiference between the point atid the line is an infinitely 
small degree of length, the difference between the line 
and tho surface is an infinitely small degree of breadth, 
the difference between the siirfa<»e and the sohd is an in- 
finitely small degree of depth. * Motion, ' in Kewton's way 
of putting it, is in this connexion merely a metaphor for 
continuity. Again, in physical seience we have to deal 
with pbenomena which not merely are Yariable but bxb 
continually varyingj and the Infinitesimal Calcnlus ia of 
the utmost Talue in enabüng us to state the laws of these 
variations, that is to say, to estabhgh proportions between 
diflferent sets of constantly changing phenomena. 

The value of the Infinitesimal Calculns in the Interpre- 
tation of nature rests ultimately on this^ that the con- 
ception of * infinit esimals ' which it employs is a Virtual 
recognition of System in knowledge or of the principle of 
Becoming as disti net from that of abstract Being. When 
we say that a thing (a geemetrieal figure, for instance) has 
a certain quality or characteristic in an infinitely small 
amount^ we mean that it both has and has not that quality 
or charaeteristicj or (to use another metaphor made familiär 
P^l by Psycho-physics) that it is on the ' threshold * of having 
it. The identity of the thing is not merely superficial, 
of such a kind that when a quality seems to pasB away 
from it the thing ceases to exist and another thing ap- 
pears ; the identity of the thing is maintained through an 
indefinite amount of difference, Thus, as we haye seen, 
the point, the line, the surface, and the solid are all i*ecog» 
nized as differences or relations with in one system. So in 
general, when we have shown that the difference between 



I 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZ'S PHILOSOPHY 83 



one thing and another is infinitely little, we have not 
converted each into the other, but have explained them 
both by referring them to a common ground. "We can ex- 
press each in terms of the other, provided we state expli- 
citly their relations to one another within some system. 
A parabola is not an ellipse ; but a parabola is an ellipse 
with one of its foci at an infinite distance from the other. 

Conünuity and the Logicäl Cälculus. 
Now it cannot be said that all this was fuUy manifest 
to Leibniz himself ; but the truth of it underlies his 
thinking. The Infinitesimal Cälculus in his mathematics 
is an expression of the same tendency of thought which 
makes the principle of sufficient reason so important an 
influence in his philosophy — the tendency to a less 
abstract, less dogmatic, more intensive way of looking at 
things, in contrast with the a priori deductive methods 
of the Cartesians. The influence of the mathematics of 
Leibniz upon his philosophy appears chiefly in connexion 
with his law of continuity and his prolonged efforts to 
establish a Logical Calculua As to the law of continuity 
it is unnecessary to say more. It is the law of the end- 
less relativity of things, the principle of System, of in- 
finite multiplicity in unity, and we have seen that the 
Infinitesimal Cälculus is an application of it\ On the 

* Cf. Lettre ä M. Bayle (1687) (G. iii. 51 ; E. 104 a) : * I have seen 
the reply of Father Malebranche to the remark 1 made on some law» 
of nature which he laid down in the Recherche de la Verite. He 
appears somewhat disposed to give them up himself, and his in- 
genuousness is most laudable ; but he gives reasons for it and makes 
TOstrictions which would bring us back into the obscurity from 
which I think I have delivered this subject, and which conflict 
with a certain principle ofgenercU order that I have observed. I hope, 
therefore, that he will kindly allow me to take this opportunity of 
explaining this principle, which is of great use in reasoning, and 
which does not yet appear to be sufficiently employed nor known 
in all its scope. It has its origin in the conception of the Irifinite ; 
it is absolutely necessary in Geometry, and it also holds good in 
Physics, inasmuch as the Supreme Wisdom, which is the source 
of all things, acts as a perfect geometrician, and according to a 
harmony which cannot be bettered. . . . The principle may be stated 
thus : When the dißerence betioeen two cases can he diminished below any 



84 



IimiODUCTiON 



other band, the endeavour to find a Logical Calculus 
(implying a universal philoaophical languag© or System 
of signs) is an attempt to apply in theological and philo- 
sophical investigations an analytic method analogous to 
that wtdch had proved so succeaaful in Geometry and 
Physics^ It seemed to Leibniz that if all the complex 

givm tmgjti^e in dsiiiM or in th» anfece^tenfs [ce gwi «rf poafl ii wiU neae^ 
sarü^ atea he dimini^^d helmc given magnüude in quuefliti:^ or in iht 
conßsgWflwfe [ce qui m rimäts]. Or^ to put it more aimply : the 
ca^s (or what is giv&n] conUnually approach and are ßTiaUy Jof^t in one 
anntherj ihfi mmequences or resjdts (tir what is reguired) mmt do thß same. 
Ulis again depend» ni>on a more general principle, to wit : daivi 
orrllTtatis eifam quaesiia ffUnt ordinafa. [If thöre is order ia the grouDd» 
fchere will also be order in the conHeqaents,] But, for the urider- 
Standing of this, Inatances are neces^ary. It is knoivn that th© aase 
or supposition of an ellipso niay made to approximflte, as mneh 
a^ we like^ to the case of a parabolan, so that the differenoe between 
tho ellipse and tho parabola may become leaa than anygiven differ- 
eni^e, provided tiiat oße of the foci of the ellipäo be made äiifliciently 
disit4int fi'om the other, for then the radii vedores prcM^eeding from 
this di statt t focus will differ from parallel radii mclores as little 
we Like. Consequently all fche geometrical theoreras which may b& 
proTed of tho elHpso in general can be applied to the parabola by 
conaidering it aa an ollipse one of whoae fo<5i is afc an infinit« 
distancL^, or (to avoid this expre^ion) as a figure which differa 
from aome elUpse by 1©hiü than any giyen difierence. Th© aame 
principle holds in Physies. For instance, reat may bo rogarded a» 
an inflnitely small velocity or aa an infinite alowness, AccoMinglyi 
whatever is true of slowne&s or velocity in general o«ght also to be 
true of rest, thus underatood ; so that the law of r^st ahould be 
j^arded as a particQlar case of the law of motion, Othertvise^ if 
this does not hüld| it will be a suro sign that these laws are ill* 
oonatruct^d. In the sam^ way equality may be regarded as an 
infinitely Bmall inequaUty, and inequality may be made to approxi- 
mate to equality as much m w© like.' See also Nm Easa^Sj Inti'o- 
diiction, p. 376^ and Nouveaux jEssöhä, hk, iv, ch» 16, §12 (E, 39a a ; 
G, TT. 455) i rBut the beauty of nature — requiras the appearance 
of discontinuity [sauis'} and, so to speak, musical cadeHfOB among 
phenomena/ In the letter to Bayle aboye quoted, Ijeibniz also 
remarks (E. 106 a; G. uL 54); *It ia true that in Compound 
thingB a amall change may aometimes produee a great eöect, For 
instance, a apark falling upon a large mass of gunpowder might 
overthrow a whole town ; but that is not contrary to our principle, 
and might indeed be explained on general principle^. But in the 
caae of element« or simple things nothing like this eoxild happen ; 
othorwiHe nature would not be th© result of infinit© wisdom/ 

* Aa to the analogy between Symbolio Thought and Algebra, &c,, 
ef. Locke, E^y, bk. ii. eh. 29^ § 9 (Fraser^a ©d. yol. i. p. 490). 
See also Fräser, toL ii» pp, 12 and 124^ where further r©ferencb8 
wilt be found* 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 85 

and apparently disconnected ideas which make up our 
knowledge could be analyzed into their simple elements, 
and if these elements could each be represented by a 
definite sign, we should have a kind of 'alphabet of 
human thoughts.' By the combination of these signs 
(letters of the aiphabet of thought) a System of true 
knowledge would be built up, in which reality would be 
more and more adequately represented or symbolized. 
For, according to Leibniz, the progress of knowledge con- 
sists in passing from obscure to clear ideas, from clear to 
distinct, from distinct to adequate. Ideas are obscure when 
analysis has not proceeded so far as to enable us definitely 
to distinguish them from others. They are clear when 
we can so distinguish them, but are not yet able to 
enumerate their particular elements or qualities. They are 
distinct when we can enumerate their qualities, and they 
are adequate only when the analysis is complete, that is 
to say, when all the elements of the clear and distinct 
idea are themselves clear and distinct. In many cases 
the analysis may result in an infinite series of elements ; 
but the principles of the Infinitesimal Calculus in mathe- 
matics have shown that this does not necessarily render 
calculation impossible or inaccurate \ Thus it seemed to 
Leibniz that a synthetic calculus, based upon a thorough 
analysis, would be the most effective Instrument of 
knowledge that could be devised. * I feel,' he says, * that 
controversies can never be finished, nor silence imposed 
upon the Sects, unless we give up complicated reasonings 
in favour of simple cdlculations, words of vague and un- 
certain meaning in favour of fixed symbols [characteres]\' 
Thus it will appear that * every paralogism is nothing but 
an error of calculation.' * When controversies arise, there 
will be no more necessity for disputation between two 
philosophers than between two accountants. Nothing 
will be needed but that they should take pen in band, sit 

^ Cf. this Introduction, Part ii. p. 61 note. 

* De ScienUa UniverscUi seu CcUciUo Phüosophico (E. 83 b ; G. vii aoo). 



86 



INTHODUCTIOK 



down with tbeir counting^tablea, and (having summoned 
a friend, if they Jike) say to one another: Lei m 
calciüak,^ This soimda like the ungrudging optimism of 
yoiith ; but Loibniz waa Optimist euough to cherish the 
hope of it to bis life*s end- 

ThiB project of the Logical Calculus or pliilosophical 
language eonnects the mathematics of Leibniz with bis 
theory of knowkdgOj while the Calculus of InfLnitesiinals 
finde imxnediate application in bis revision of Descaiies's 
theories regarding matter and motion, Descartes treated 
niotion and rest syntbetically as con staut quantitatiy© 
wholes. Leibnijs regards them analj^iieally as consisting 
of an infinite series of degrees of one constant force, 
Äccordingly Leibniz aduiita that tbe Cartesian laws of 
motion bave a cei-tam vaüdity in relation to 'absti-act' 
niotion, but denies tbat they are adec^uate to tbe 'con- 
crete ' physical pbenoniena* 

Besmrtes's Tfmnf of Maiier and Motion. 

Ab W0 have already seen, Leibniz's view of matter can 
be nuderstood only as it appears in contrast with that of 
Descartes. In accordance with his interpretation of the 
principle of contradietion, vir. that the essence of a thing 
cousLsts in that only wbich m common to all its manifes^ 
tations^ or (otherwise expressed) in that only wbich 
remains after all varieties or specific determmatxons have 
been excluded, Descartes maintained that matter is esaen- 
tially extension. Bodily substance and magnitude or 
spatial estent are identical. And all tbe changes in 
matter or extension are ultimately redncible to motion, 
Motion is regarded by Descartes as being ' the transference 
of a portion of matter or a body from the neighbourhood 
of those bodies wbich are in direct contact with it, and 
wbich we consider as at rest, to the neighbourhood of 
other bodies or portions of matter Matter is infinitely 

^ Prii\€iptai Pnrt ii, 25, Dt^acart^a fldda : * Ey a body, or ratln-r 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 87 

divisible. Its division is dufe to motion. Its forma arise 
solely from the combinations and separations of its parts, 
which also are due to motion. * All the variety of matter, 
or the diversity of its forms, depends on motion \' * I 
frankly avow that I acknowledge in corporeal things no 
other matter than that which can be divided, shaped 
[figurees], and moved in all kinds of ways, that is to say, 
that which mathematicians call quantity, and which they 
take as the object of their demonstrations ; and in this 
matter I consider only its divisions, shapes [figures], and 
motions; and, in short, regarding this I will accept 
nothing as ti-ue which is not deduced from it with as 
much certainty as belongs to a mathematical demonstra- 
tion. Ajid inasmuch as by this means all the phenomena 
of nature may be explained . . . it seems to me that in 
Physics no other principles ought to be accepted, or even 
desired, than those which are here expounded ^' 

Conservation of Motion {or Momentum), its Birection heing 
lefl out ofaccount. 

Again, according to Descartes, the quantity of motion 
in the world (or in any material System complete in 
itself and apart from all external influences) is constant 
The motion (or momentum), whose quantity is thus con- 
stant, is in each particular case directly proportional to 
the mass and the velocity of the moving body, and it may 

a portion of matter, I mean the whole of what is transferred to- 
gether, although this may be composed of several parts which 
themselyes have other motions. And I say that motion is the 
transference and not the force or activity which transfers, in order 
to show that motion is always in the moving object and not in that 
which moves it ; for it seems to me that these two things are not 
usually distinguished with sufficient care. Further, I mean that 
motion is a property of the moving thing and not a substance ; 
just as form is a property of the thing which has a form, and rest 
is a property of that which is at rest.' 
* Prindpiay Part ii. 23 (Veitch's tr.). 

' Ibid. Part ii. 64 (tr. from Abbö Picot's French). Descartes's 
object is to show that all the motion in the world is one, and thus 
to get rid of the later Scholastic theories which referred each parti- 
cular motion to some unexplained principle in the moving body. 



88 



INTRODUCTION 



he expressed hy the formula mv. Now no new motion 
can come to any body from itaelf; no material body is 
seK-moved, becauae ita e^sence h pure extension, and the 
idea of extension does not necessarily involve the trans- 
ference of parts* To any quantity of matter, whether 
large or smalJ, motion comes entirely from without ThuB 
at the creation of the World the whole material nniverse 
received a certain fixed quantity of motion, which is con- 
aenred by the ' ordinary co-operation ' [concours ordinuire] 
of God. Motion is thus a positive thing and not merely 
relative to rest, Motion is not opposed to motion, bi^t 
to reat. Motions do not cancel one another ; they ara 
quantitiea which can merely he comhined and aeparated- 
Andj on the other hand, eaeh indlvidtial portion of matter 
must remain in the atate in which it is, unless it receives 
motion from outside itself, The motion of any one body 
is increased only by a corresponding decrease in the motion 
of some other ; and the motion of any body is decreaaed 
oniy by a part of it paaaing into some other, Motion is 
diffiised, but never destroyed ^ 

* Cf. Frincipkt^ ii, 36 (Veiteh*3 tr,) ; * With respect to th© göneral 
cauüe of motion, it s&&ms manifost to me tha.t it is noDe other thaa 
God HlmS'elfi wlio in the beginning created matter along with 
motion and reat^ and now by His ordinary ^concouree' alotie pra- 
eerves 10 the whole the Käme amovmt of motion and rest that He 
then placed in it. For^ although motion is nothing in the mattär 
moved hut its mode, it has yet a certain and determiaate quantity, 
which we easily und erstand may römain alwaya the same in th© 
whole univerae, although it ehangeg in each of the parts of it. So 
that^ in truth, we may hold when a part of matter is moved with 
double the qnickneaa of another^ and that other iö twieo the aize of 
the former, that there is just preciseiy aa much motion, hat no 
morej in the less body as in the größter; and that, in propot-fcioii aa 
the motion of any one part is redueed, so ia that of some other and 
equal portion a^^eelerated. We aleo know that thare i& perfection 
in Grod, not only boeaußo He ia in HLmself immutable, bnt because 
He operatea in the most constant and immutable raanner possible ; 
so thatr with the exception of those mutationa which nmnife^t 
experienee or Divine rsTelation rendera oertain, and which we per^ 
ceive or boliev© are br<>ught about withont any chang© in the 
Ci-eatoT^ we onght to suppose no other in His worka, lest ther@ 
ahonld theuce adse ground for coneluding ineon^tancy in God 
Himself. Whence it foUows, as mosfc consonant to reaaon, that 
merely hecanae God divereely moved the parte ot matter when H© 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 89 



Now it follows from this, that, while the quantity of 
motion in the world, or in any isolated System of bodies, 
is constant, its direction is variable. For, as all space is 
body and is therefore aplenum, moving bodies must con- 
tinually impinge upon others ; and if a moving body be 
supposed to impinge upon a body at rest, of such mass 
that the moving body is unable to overcome the resistance 
of the other and to make it move, then the direction of 
the moving body is changed ; it rebounds in the direction 
from which it came or is deflected in some other way. 
But, as the moving body has been unable to impart any of 
its motion to the body at rest, the quantity of its motion 
remains unchanged, while its direction changes — ^it being, 
of course, understood that the action of all other bodies, 
except the two in question, is leffc out of account \ 

Letbnis^s Theory of Motion. Conservation of Force. 

Now, according to Leibniz, motion is simply change of 
Position. It is not a positive quality belonging, for the 
time being, to the moving body ; but motion and rest are 
entirely relative to one another. If the relative position 
of any two bodies changes, we may regard either as 
moving and the other as at rest \ And, in general, rest 
is merely an infinitely small degree of motion ; nothing 

Ifirst created them, and now preserves all that matter^ manifestly 
!in the same way and on the same principle on which He first 
created it, He also always preserves the same quantity of motion 
in the matter itself.' 

^ Cf. Principitty iL 41 : * Each thing, whatever it is, always con- 
tinues to be as it is in itself simply, and not as it is in relation to 
other things, until it is compelled to change its state by contact 
with some other thing. From this it necessarily follows that 
a moving body, which meets on its course another body so firm 
and impenetrable that it cannot move it in any way, entirely loses 
the determination it had of moving in this particular direction, 
and the cause of this is evident, namely, the resistance of the body 
which prevents it from goiog further ; but it does not necessarily 
on this account lose any of its motion, since it is not deprived of its 
motion by the resisting body or by any other cause, and since 
motion is not contrary to motion.' 

* Cf. Animadversiones ad Cariesii Principia (1692?), Part ii. § 25 
(G. iv. 369 ; Duncan's tr. p. 60). 



INTEODUCTION 



in thö World is absolutely at reai Accordingly no body 
beging to move from a State of absolute rest, but from 
a State which is to he conceived as already one of motion, 
howover small in amount. Äctual motion ia not some- 
thing added to a body wbicb, to begin with, is bar© masa ; 
ii is always gradual growth er iiierement of a motion 
whicb is already thero, Actual motion always pre-sup- 
poses Potential motion or a force which, though it may 
not be observed, tends to appear as actual motion* 
Descartes, then, was right in intei*pretiiig actual motion 
as cliange of position, but wrong in overlooking potential 
motion and thus in regarding tho total quantity of actual 
apparent motion in th© universe, or in any independent 
System, as constant. He was riglit also in bolding tliat 
each body tends to continue in the state in whicli it iB ; 
but he was wrong in thinking that a body can ever be in 
a State of absolute rest, and thus in supposing that on© 
niotion cannot oppose another, but can only be opposed 
by rost, As a matter of faet everything tends to move, 
and would move, were it not for counteracting tendencies 
to motion in other things K That which is conserved. then, 
is not actual motion, as an extrinsic property of material 
substance, but this intrinsic tendency or potentiaüty of 
motion, which Leibniz calls force, As mere change of 
Position does not ©nable ua to attribute motion to one of 
the two bodies wliose position changos^ and not to tbe 
other, the body which we call the moving body (as dia- 
tinct fi-om the body at rast) is so, not in virtue of its 
motion (in the sense of change of position), but because it 

^ Cf Leite ä M, Pdisson (1691) (Fouclier de Careü, L 20B ; Butens, 
733) - ' ^* mutät be obsserved thsifc every body make» au offort to 
act on outside things, und wüuld purcoiptibly acfc if tbe contTary 
offorts of Surround h>g bodiea did not prevent it. This has not l>een 
sufficiently notict^d by our mod^Tun. Tbey imagin© that a body 
migbt he perfectly at rent, without any eflorfc. But thia is due to 
their fuiluro to undorstand what bodily «ubatanc© really is \ for in 
mfj f^ijüou substance cannot (^at any rate naturally) be witJtout tx^im. 
Thtö also diaproves the inaction which Socinian« attribute to dis- 
embodied fi4>ula/ 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 9I 



contains within itself the cause of the change, the force or 
activity which produces the motion. *The notion of 
force,' says Leibniz, *is as clear as that of activity and of 
passivity, for it is that from which activity follows, when 
nothing prevents it. It is effort, conatus; and while 
motion is a successive thing, which consequently never 
exists, any more than time, because all its parts never 
exist together — while, I say, that is so, force or effort, on 
the other hand, exists quite completely at every instant 
and must be something genuine and real. And, as nature 
has to do rather with the real than with that which does 
not completely exist except in our mind, it appears (in 
consequence of what I have shown) that it is the same 
quantity of force, and not (as Descartes believed) the same 
quantity of motion, that is preserved in nature V 

This force, then, which is constant, is not only an 
actual but a potential reality. It is not mere capacity 
for motion, mere passive movableness, nor is it actual 
manifest motion or activity in general. It is something 
between the two, an undeveloped or restrained tendency 
to act, which in appropriate circumstances is the producer 
of action \ This force is to be measured by the quantity 
of effect it produces. Descartes rightly insisted on the 
quantity of effect as the thing to be measured ; but he 

* Lettre ä M. Pdisson (no date, probably 1691) (Dutens, i. 719 ; 
Foucher de Gareil, i. 157). * The relative velocity of two bodies * 
[i. e. their apparent motion] ' may remain the same, although the 
realyelocities and absolute forces of the bodies change in an infinity 
of ways, so that conservation of relative velocity has nothing to do 
with what is absolute in the bodies/ Essai de dynamique (G. Math, 
vi. ai6). Cf. Appendix I, p. 351. 

' Cf. De Primae Philosophiae Emendationey &c. (1694) (E. 122 b ; G. iv 
469) : * Active force diflfers from the bare potency commonly recog- 
nized in the Schools. For the active potency of the Scholastics, or 
faculty, is nothing but a mere possibility of acting, which neverthe- 
less requires an outer excitation or Stimulus, that it may be turned 
into activity. But active force contaias a certain activity [actus'] 
and is a mean between the faculty of acting and action itself. It 
includes eflfort and thus passes into Operation by itself, requiring no 
aids, but only the removal of hiudrance. This may be illustrated 
by the example of a heavy hanging body stretching the rope which 
holds it up, or by that of a drawn bow.' 



92 



INTKODUCnON 



coiiceived tlie effect in too narrow a way^ regardmg it 
merely as actual motion (i e. the momentum acquired hj a 
büdy) rather than the work done by the force, the Maetie 
energy it produces (i.e. the vis mva v^hich the body 
acquires, and which Leibniz calk action motrice). The 
füiTDula for tlus aciion mötrice is not mv hui mvK ^ In the 
uniform motiona of one and the same body, (i) theat^fion^ 
of traveraijig two leagues in two houiB is double the mtion 
of traversing one league in one hour (for the first ctcHon 
coEtains the second exactly twice) ; {2) the action of tra- 
versing one league in one hour m double the action of 
travorsing one league in two hours (or, actlons which 
produce one and the same effect are proportional to their 
velocities) : thei-efore (3) the actioti of traversing two 
lei^ues in two hours is four times (quadruple) the aciion 
of traversing one league in two houi*s, This demonstration 
shows that a moving body which reeeives a double or 
triple volocity, in order that it may produce a double or 
triple effect in one and the same time, receives a quadruple 
or nonuple action. Thus actions are proportional to the 
Squares of the velocities. But most fortunately this 
happens to agree with my calculation of force, drawn 
both from experiments and from the pre-supposition that 
there is no mechanicaj perpetual motion, For, according 
to my calculation, forces are proportional to the heights 
by descending from which heavy bodies might have 
obtained thek velocities, that is to say, as the Squares of 
the velocities» And, as tbere is alwaya conserved the total 
force for re-asc«nding to the same height or for producing 
some other eifect, it follows that there is conserved also 
the same quantity of motive force " [action motrice] in the 
World ; that is to say, to put it definitely, that in any one 
hour there is as much action motrice in the univerae as 
there is in any other hour. But at every moment ^ the 

' I.e. the work done or vi» viva. For & fuU explaiiatioii of the 
whole matter, 8e€t StAÜo, (k^icepts 0/ Mod&m Ph^icSj eh. vi, espeeiany 
pp, 71 sqq, 

^ *■ A momentary fätate af a body in motion cannot contain motion, 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 93 



same quantity of force is conserved. And in fact adion 
is nothing but the exercise of force, and amounts to the 
product of the force into the time\' Accordingly this / 
motive force or vis viva, the amount of which is constant, 
includes direction, as well as quantity, of motion. For 
the measure of it is height, or position relatively to the 
surface of the earth. Descartes's 'quantity of motion' 
(mv) is the effect of a given force regarded merely as acting 
during a given time. Leibniz's ms viva (mv^) is the effect 
of a given force regarded also as acting through a given 
distance. And Descartes did not take account of the 
direction of motion, because he did not take into con- 
sideration the distance through which the force acts. 

Leibniz's Theory of Matter. 
(i) Materia prima. 
This doctrine of the conservation of force, as Leibniz 
conceives it, involves the rejection of the theory that 
material substance is nothing but extension \ Extension 

for motion requires time, but it none the less involves force.* Lettre 
ä Des Maizeaux (1711) (E. 676 a ; G. vii. 534). 

1 Lettre a Bayle (undated) (E. 192 a ; G. iii. 60), cf. G. Math, 
vi. 117. Of course, from one point of view, Leibniz^s Statement is 
not quite accurate, since there are many forms of energy of which 
it takes no account. It is, however, on right lines. And indeed 
(as Du Bois-Reymond and Stallo have pointed out) Leibniz in one 
passage anticipates the modern theory of the transformation of 
energy (the apparent loss of molar motion being represented by 
increase of molecular motion), although the idea was not worked 
out until a much more recent time. *I had maintained,' says 
Leibniz, * that activeforcea are conserved in the World. It is objected 
that two soft, or non-elastic bodies, when they collide, lose some 
of their force. I answer, No. It is true that the "wholes" lose 
force in respect of their total motion ; but the parts received it, 
being agitated within the whole by the force of the collision. Thus 
it is only apparently that the loss occurs. The forces are not 
destroyed, but dissipated among the particles. That is not losing 
them but doing as is done by those who tum large money into 
small change.' Cinquihne Lettre ä Clarke, 99 (E. 775 a ; G. vii. 414). 

^ Prcjet öCune Lettre ä AmauLd (1686) (G. ii. 7a) : * Extension is an 
attribute which cannot constitute a concreto [accompli'] being. We 
caniiot draw from it any activity or change. It expresses only 
a present state, and not at all the future and the past, which the 
notion of a substance ought to express. When two triangles are 



94 



INTEODUCTION 



is mere capacity for ree^iving motion, bare movablenesB, 
while motion ia complete activityand is entirely extrinsic 
ta that wMch is moved, Force, on the other band, is, as we 
bave Seen, sometbing between tbe two, yjz, a potentiality 
of motion or action tliat is always paasing into actual 
action wben it is not prt^vented by a similar tend^ncy in 
anotber body, This force, tben, shows itself not nierely 
in actual^ positive motion, but in hindrance or resistance. 
And if tbis force were ,not of tbe esseneo of material 
bodies there would be no resistance among bodies and 
the absurdity of perpetuai motion would be b-ue. For if 
material bodies consist solely of extenaion, and if one 
such body moTing shonld come into eontact with another 
at rest (i, a destitute of motion). tben tbe form er must 
carry the latter along with it For, ex hypothmi, there is 
nothing but Space to resist tbe progress of tbe moving 
body, and, if motion is posaible at all, it must be motion 
ihrmgh space, i.e. motion wbieh mere spaee cannot resist\ 
Accordingly, in addition to exten sion (however it may 
be interpreted)j every material body must have resistance 
or impenetrability. Tbis mere passive resistance Leibniz 

on Tarious OCCasionS Calls a^vrirvirla^ The avTirviria of a 

body \b simply its need of space. The body is not mere 

faund joined together , wü cannot infer from thom Low the joiuing 
liaa taken placa For it may have happened in Tarious wnya ; but 
Bothing which oan liftv© seTcral caiifies iis över a eonorete [accomjrfi] 

^ Epidda ad Iks Bosses (1706) (G» ii. 395) : ^IT, with the Gart«- 
siani^, were to admit a plenum and the uniformitj of matter ^ 
adding only motion, it wonld foUow that there would never be auy- 
thing m the world hni a ßub&titution of equivaleüts, m if thewhole 
lanivors© weie to reduce itself to the motion of a perfectly uniform 
wheel about its axia or to the revolutiona of conoentric circlea of 
perfectly homogeneona matter. In that cä&g, it would not be poB- 
Skible^ even for an angel^ to diatiijgujsh the state of the World at one 
moment from its atate at another nioment. For thoro could not be 
any variety in th© phenomena. That ia why, in addition to figure, 
öTze, and movement, thore must bo admitted forms from wMch 
there arises in matter a variety of apptmranccs ; and l do not eee 
whenee we can draw these forms, if they a™ to hü intelli|:jh]e, 
except from Entelechies,' Cf. Jk Ipsa Natura (1693), | 13 (E. J58 b ; 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 95 

place : but it cannot be a body unless it has a place of its 
own. And its avnrvTrCa consists in its maintaining its 
place, staying where it is. Eesistance is thus a passive 
force.* * Matter taken by itself or bare matter consists of 
dvTiTVTTia and extension. By avrtruTrta I mean that attribute 
in virtue of which matter is in space. Extension is con- 
tinuation through space, or continuous diflPusion through- 
out a place \ * Matter is that which consists in avTirmria 
or which resists penetration ; and thus bare matter is 
merely passive ^' In so far, then, as a material body is 
extended and occupies a place which cannot be occupied 
by any other body at the same time (for this is the 
meaning of avrtruTrta or impenetrability), it consists of 
bare matter. Bare or abstract matter, as thus defined 
(dvriTviria + extension), Leibniz usually calls materia prima. 

(2) Materia secunda. 
But we must beware of supposing that this materia 
prima is by itself any thing actuaL As the mathematical 
point is nothing actual, but is the indivisible limit of 
extension, so materia prima is the indivisible limit of 
matter. No portion of matter, no material body, consists 
of materia prima alone, just as no portion of extension 
is a mere mathematical point. For materia prima is 
simply body considered as if it were purely passive : it is 
the abstract passivity of body. But, as we have seen, 
there is, according to Leibniz, no such thing as absolute 
passivity. Passive resistance, impenetrability, inertia, 
always involve a real force, a tendency to action, though 
that tendency may actually be prevented by counteracting 
forces from realizing itself at this or that particular 
moment. Passivity is the limit of activity, as rest is the 
limit of motion. Every material body, then, is ultimately 
something more than avTL-nrn-La + extension. It is essen- 
tially force or energy, activity of some kind. And 

^ De Anima Brutorum (1710), § i (E. 462 a ; G. vii. 328). 
' Epistda ad Bierlingium (1710) (E. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 



9ß 



INTEODUCnOH 



inasmuch as tliis force ib a potential activity, a force 
which tends to realize itself» it is autoniatic or aponta- 
neous, it contains within itself the priDciple of its future 
Gonditions, it is an Entelechy, Thua every actual 
material body is materia seamdUj from which materia 
prima is merely a mental abstraetion \ Every oomplete 
aubstancö is materia prima + Entelechy, i. pa^ivity + 
activity, 

Now wbile materia pnmu, beiog abstract passivity, is oot 

to be regarded aa leal substance, materia semmda^ inasmuch 

m it is matter and is therefore extended and infinitely 

divisiblej is, on the other hand^ not to be confounded 

with individual subatance, Materia secunda must con- 

täin an entelechyj hui is not identical with it. Materia 

secunda^ is an aggregat© of things ; it is to be conceived as 

quantitative, consisting of pafies exira partes^ and is thus 

quite distinet from substancey which must bö conceived 

as striving force, i, e» under the relation of means to end^ 

^ Cf. Epi$toJ<i ml R, Ü. Wagnerum {ilio) (E. 466 ä ; vii. 529) ; 
'The ftctivo pimtiiple ia not attrifauted by mo to bare lüEitter or 
maUHa prima y which is merely passiv© and consista solely in dyri- 
Tviriii and exteiisioa ; but to body or clothed matter or mateha 
s^cmida^ whieh c50iitflins ia addiüon a primary entelechy or actire 
principle. , , , The re^i staue© bare matter 13 not actiTrlty, but m&T& 
|iasp*ivity, inasniueh as it has di'TiTim'io or iinpenetrabilityj by which 
indtjed it rcaiats that which would penetrate it, but doea not re-act 
unlesfi it has in addition an elaiätic force. Thia elastic forcö muat 
b© derived from motion, and thua also from an aetive force suptr- 
added tö matter/ Also Ik Ipsa Natura (lögö)^ § liz (E. 158 b ; 
iv, 51a) i 'Matter iß underatood m ©ither ^natma semnda or materia 
prima ; maima seeutnda is indeed a complete substaiice, but not a 
merely passive one ■ materia prima ig inerely pagsiTe^ but is not 
a oomplete 9ub»tance ; and ther© muafc furtlier be addod to it a soul, 
or form analogous to a aoul^ kvTfh.^x^^^ ^ "^P^^t that ia a eertain 
effort er primary force of aeting^ which it^ielf iä an iiidwelling law^ 
imprintcd by Biviiie decree.* It should be noted that the eipi-©«- 
aion *flubstanee/ aa here applied to wiafen'cj jfecuwüa, is not to be 
taken too stiictly. Maisria ßemnda is not ao mueh suhsianUa aa sub- 
stantiaia. This iä more clearly brought out in Leibniz'a later 
writings. See Monadology^ note 3, and this Introduction, Part iii. 
p, 98 noto^ 

" Cf. L^trß ä Memand (1715) (E, 736 a; iii. 657): ' Strictly 
apeaking, materia prima is not a aubstane©, bufc aomething in- 
coinplet-e. And materia frecwwrfo (aa, for inatance, the organic body) 
is not & subita nee, but for another reason : namely, booause it in 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 97 

In short, as materia prima is abstract passivity, the limit 
of activity, and is thus in reality merely the finitude or 
imperfection of a Monad, so materia seeunda is mere 
abstract quantity, the limit of intension, and is thus a 
mere phenomenon of that which is essentially one and 
indivisible, of the *soul' which the body *contains\' 
Accordingly every created Monad or simple substance 
has materia prima in so far as it is not entirely active ; or, 
in other words (since activity and passivity are relative 
terms), every created Monad must have materia prima, 
because its activity is not entirely realized, but is in part 
Potential, because it is not actus purus, activity without 
passivity. * Materia prima is essential to every entelechy 
and can never be separated from it, since it completes it, 
and is itself the passive potentiality of the whole complete 
substance. . . . God . . . cannot deprive a substance of 
maieria prima ; for He would thus make it whoUy pure 
activity [^purus actus] which He Himself alone is^.' 
Materia secmida, on the other i|and, is not necessarily 
attached to any specific entelechy or individual substance. 
It is a relationship of Monads imperfectly conceived by us 
as a group of things which may vary from time to time, 
and which, as a matter of fact, is constantly varying. 
Leibniz compares it to a river \ * God, by His absolute 
power, may be able to deprive substance of materia 
sectmda*.' In fact, it is not by itself anything real, but is 
merely the relation of certain Monads, regarded abstractly 
as a temporary aggregation or collocation. The only real 
existences are the Monads, which are purely spiritual, 
nonnspatial existences, but in relatively confused or 

a collection of several substances, like a pond füll of fish, or a flock 
of sheep ; and consequently it is what is called unum per accidens : in 
a Word, a phenomenon. A real substance (such as an animal) is 
composed of an immaterial soul and an organic body ; and it is the 
combination of these two that is called unum per se,* 

^ Cf. this Introduction, Part iii. pp. 78 sqq. 

' EpisUHa ad Des Bosses (1706) (E. 440 b ; G. ii. 324). 

• Ibid. (1706) (E. 436 b ; G. ii. 306;. Cf. p. 1 14 and Monaddogy, § 71. 

* Ibid. (1706) (E. 440 b ; G. ii. 325^ 

H 



98 



INTRODUCTION 



abstract and impeifect thought (i.e. iQ *ßens©' or 
^ imagination ' as dietinci from thought proper) vre &m 
presentöii with tba phenomena of things variously 
grouped in space, and these groups, qua groüps, are 
maieria secunäa \ 

Phmomem hme fimdata. 
As materia secunda is always a mere aggregatö, while 
yöt eyery aggregate pre-suppoaes as iis reality an in- 
divisible simple substance or soul, such aggregates or 
groups of thingSj together with their powers, acta, and 
affections, are sometimes described by Leibniz as well- 
founded phenomena (phemmena bene fundata), They ar© 

^ €f* Lett-e ä Armuld (1686) (G. Ii. 75^ 76) : ^ In mj opinionj our 
body in itgelf (sefcting aaide the soul), or the Ccbärner^ can b© called 
orte Hubstance only by a wrong use of terms, like & machine or 
B, heap of atonea, which are only beinga by ftggregation ; for regulär 
or irregulär arrangement hag nothing to do with unity of sub- 
fltÄnce, , , . I Jiold fchat a marble pavement iss probably only 
liko a heap of ^tonef^^ and thus oannot paaa for only one sub- 
fttfliicfj bat a coUeefcion of seyeraU For auppose there are two 
stoneä— for examplej thö diamond of the Grand Duke and that of 
the Great Mogul — wo might give them both^ in resp^ct of their 
Talue, otie and the eame collect ive name, and we might my that 
they are ono paii* of diamonda, although thoy are acttially far 
diatant from one another. But it will not be said that tbea© 
diamondä coinpose one substance. Nc*w mor© or less malce no 
differenee here. Accordirigly, if we bring th^m riearer one 
another^ and even make them touch one another, they will be 
nono the more unitod in substanc© ; and aJthoughj after they had 
been brought into contact, we were to join to them some other 
body in eueh a way as to preveuti them E»eparatlng again^ — for 
inatanee, if we wor© to sofc them in one ring — all that wonld make 
of them only what ia calied unum per {icüidens, For it is as by 
actfsidont that they are compelled to share in thi^ eame motion. 
I hold then that n marble pavemcnt is not one conerete lacco?nplie] 
substance, any more than would be the water of a pond with all 
the fish it holdft^ oven although alt the wator and the fiah were 
froren together ; or than a ßock of aheep, in whieh the aheep 
should be supposed io be so bound together that they could only 
walk in step^ and that one could not be toached without all the 
others erying out. There would be aa mnch diiJerence between 
a aubatance and sueh a boing m between a man and a Community, 
like a people, army, aociety or College, which are moral beinga and 
in whieh there is soraething imaginary and ereated by our mind, 
Unity of snbatam^e requires au indiviaible and naturally iade- 
Hti-uctible ooncrete [aca>mplie^ being^ aince the notiou of auch a 
being iuoludes all that ia ever to happen to it/ 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 99 



hem ßmdata in contrast with the phenomena of dreams 
or visions, whlch are phenomena pnre and simple, not 
haying any proper bond or connexioo. Phenomena hene 
ßmdata may be disHngniahed from the phenomena of 
dreamsj inasmuch as the former are vivid, multiplex (i.e. 
Tftried in their relationa and capable of a variety of testa 
or obseryations), and congruous or consbtent both with 
themselves and with the general eourso of üfe or 
experiencey whieb wo find in other phenomena* The last 
of these tests is the moBt satiafactoiy, öspecially when it 
is supported by the testimony of other people who bave 
also applied iL ^ But the most powerful proof of the 
reality of phenomena (a proof which is, indeed^ sufficient 
by itself) is success in predicting fiiture phenomena 
from those which are past and present^ whether the pre- 
diction be founded upon the success, so far, of a reaaon or 
hypothesis, or upon cnatom so far observed \' In short, 
phenomena hene fundata are distinguisbed from illusions, 
inasmueh as tbey are not merely Beparate and discon* 
nected, but beld togetber in a eystem so that their ante- 
cedents may be traced and their consequents deduced '*. 
And Leibuiz goes so far as to add * Althougb this 
entiro lifo Vk &re said to be nothing but a dreani, and the 
visible world notliing but a phantasm, I sbould eall this 
dream or phantasm real enough, if we were never 
deoeived by it^ when we ose our reason rightly'/ On 

* De Modo disiingu^ndi phrnomena reülia, ah imaghaurüs (E. 444 a ; 

■ Cskn ÜiiH be reconciled with th© Tiew fchat materia secunda iä 
a mere aggregabo or coUectioB ? 

* Lftc. CiL Of coura« it must be remembeTted that the ^realily* 
öttributed by Leibniz to ph^mmma h^m fundata ifi entirely relative 
to tbe illusorineaa of * pure " phenometia, auch as we havs in 
dxeamB, and is not to be con founded with tbe reality of substauce, 
er, Ntmveaux ^Äsais, bk* iv. ch. a, S 14 (E, 344 b ; v. 355 ) ; *■ The 
truth of the tliingi! of äense conbi&iä only in the connexion of the 
pbenonieiia, which must have it3 rea&on [ground], and that is 
what dUting\iishos them from <lreams ; but the truth of our 
eiifltetiüe and of the cause of plienomena is of another kind, 
because it estabHshes subatancets, . . . The conneziün of the pheno- 
mena which eatabliähea truths q/* /ad In regard ie sen^-objects 



lOO 



INTBODUCTION 



sevei'al occasions Leibniz uaes the rainbow as a simile by 

wbich to illustrate what he means by a phenomenm bme 

fundatumK He simply mentionä it without explanation ; 

but we may suppose him to have nieant that the rainbow 

iB tlie type of a phmomemn hem fimäatmnj inasmuch as, 

being merely colourj it exists as a rainbow only for those 

who actually behold it, and is thus a mem appearance, 

while, being an appearance whicb results from certain 

physical conditions of light and moistur©, it bas a ground 

or cause^ it k the phenomenon of something and ib there- 

fore bme funäatum and not a pure phantasm or illusion, 

ThuSj in general, the qualities of matter, whetber 

aecondary, as colour, smell, sound, &c,, or primary, as 

extension, figur% and motioni nv&pJimmiena bcnts fundata. 

Taken by themselves, aa qualities of a matter whicb has 

no ^soul/ they are not real but merely subjective. Eut 

their order or connexion implies a principle of order (i, e. 

a eoiil)^ and accordingly they are confnsed (i.e. not fully 

analyzed) representations, perceptiorLS, or symbols of 

that whichj expressed distinctly, is real substance. 

Ultimately (*metaphyBically * as Leibniz would say) they 

are reduuible to non-spatial perceptiona or appetitiona of 

Monads ; but in the form in vvhich they are given to us 

üutsid© of US 13 verified by meanss of truihs 0/ Tea3<m ; as the pheno- 
menii of optica arü explained by geometiy. Yet it must be 
admitted th&t tlUs c^rtitude not of tbe high est degree. . . . For Jt 
ia not iniposaiblo, metaphysically speaking, thafc thöre is a conaecu- 
tive dream lasting aa long the life of a mau ; but that ig a thing 
as contrary to reason as would be th© fiction that a hook üould 
he formed by chanco through throwing down type in confusion/ 
Cf. Locke, Essay, bk. iv. ch. § 14 ; Fraser's ed,, vol. ii, pp, 185 
Willi Prof Fvm&r'^ N^tesj and also bis Notes on pp. 332 and 333. 
* Cf» Episifjla ad Des Bosses i^^i^is) (E* 728 b ; G. ii. 504) : ' I prefer 
to say that not subatantes but species' [i.e. sense-qualifcies] 
^remainj and that these am not Lllu&ory, like a dnenm or like 
a sword pointing towardü ub out of a cont^ave mirror, or a» 
Dr, Fauötus ate a eartful of hay, but true phenomena, that ia^ in 
the aenae in which a i-ainbow or a mock sun la a »peciea» indeed 
as^ accoiding to the Cartesiana and in trutb, colour^ are apeciea/ 
Also Episioia ad De Vdder (1706) (O. iL a6i, note) : * Extension itself, 
m&ns and motion^ ure no more thingä than the Image in a mirror 
or the rainbow in a cbud. » . . They exist vSptw r^ther thau fpiawtj to 
use the expi'ession of Democriiua ' (p. ada^ note). 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY lOI 



by Our senses or imagination (which perceive things 
confusedly) they are mere connected or orderly pheno- 
mena, abstractions or incomplete things, which pre- 
suppose souls or Monads. 

Space and Time. 

In one of the Letters to Ärnauld^, Leibniz speaks of 

Space and time as phenomena hene fundata, Probably, 

however, he did not intend this statement to be very 

rigidly interpreted, and there is much value in the view 

of Erdmann that space and time are to be regarded as 

purely ideal, entia mentalia^, while extended bodies and 

actual events in time are entia semimentalia ^ or phenomena 

hene fundata. In any case, what Leibniz desires specially 

to maintain is that space and time are not real substances 

nor attributes of real substances. They are nothing but 

Orders or arrangements of co-existing and successive 

things or phenomena. Individual substances or Monads, 

which are the sole realities, are not to be conceived as 

paHes extra partes: the central thought of Leibniz's 

philosophy is that this quantitative aspect of things 

should be treated as subordinate, as not belonging to the 

essence of real things. Hence space is to be regarded, 

not as the mutual exclusiveness of real substances, but as 

simply the order of co-existence pre-supposed in the 

aggregation or grouping of phenomenal things, while 

time is the order of sequence of phenomena. *Time, 

extension, motion, and the continuous in general, in the 

way in which they are considered in mathematics, are 

only ideal things ; that is to say, things which express 

possibilities, just as numbers do. Hobbes has even 

defined space as phantasma existentis, But, to speak 

more exactly, extension is the order oipossibleco-existences, 

as time is the order of possibilities which are inconsistent, 

but which have iievertheless some connexion. Thus 

^ G. ii. ii8. ^ Hist. ofPhüosophy (Eng. tr.), vol. ii. p. 185. 
5 Cf. Episida ad Des Bosses (1706) (E. 436 b ; G. ii. 306). 



102 



INTEODUCTION 



©xtension relöt^s to simultaneous things or things which 
exist tögether, time to those which are incompatible and 
which are nevertheless all conceiyetl as existing, and it is 
tbis that makes them successive. But space and time 
taken tögether constittite the order of th© posaibilities of 
a whole universej ao that these Orders (that is space and 
time) Square not only with what actually exists but also 
with whatever might be put in its place, as numbers are 
indLffei^nt to whatever can be res numerata^.' Thus 
space does not mean anj particular Situation of bodies, nor 
time any paHicular suecession of phenoniena, Space is 
simply the indefinitely appücable relation pf co-existence, 
whil© time is the indefinitely applicable relation of 
succeaaion or order of successive positions. In each case 
th© things or phenomena related might have been other 
than they are, and thus the ordei-s are Orders of possi- 
hüiiics* But in neither case is the order actual apart from 
some ordered or related thmgs, There is no actual empty 
space or empty time. These are abstractions, hnrmless 
or possibly useful when recognized as abstractions^ but 
hurtful if thej are regarded as actual tliings. 

Leibniz's disproof of the independent reality of space 
and time is directly based by him upon the principle of 
sufficient reasoru 'I say, then^ that if space was an 

* E6pliqi^ awo Biflemms de Bayk (170a) (E. i8g b j G. iv. 568). 
The tmiüslation ia from G^rhardt'a text. CL lll*^" Lsttre ä ClarkSf 
4 (Clarke's tr.) (E. 75a a ; G, tjL 363): liold space to be some- 
thitig merdjf reiatiUj aa timß is : I hold it to bo an ordm- qf co-exist' 
encesj as time ia an ürder 0/ succession-t. Für spaco deiiötf;;^, in tenns 
of posaibililyj an order of things whicb exist at the same time, con- 
sidered as existing togethör ; witkout inquirmg iato their particulftr 
manner of exiating* And when raany things are süen together 
one p^rceives that order of things among themaelves.' The conre- 
spoudenc© between Leibniz and Clarke ia maiiily lievot^d to thia 
question of the meaning of spat.^ and time, Clarke endeavoiired 
to defend the view of Newton that infinite space is real, and is to 
be regarded as a kind of aensorium of God or as His omnipres^nt 
Peremption of things^ Leibniz attacks not merel j thia partionJar 
viow, but all other theoriea which make Spaces real, aa, for iustanoe, 
those wliich confound inünite space with the Immenaity of Ood 
or with any other of His attributes. Cf. Fräser*» ed. of Looke'a Essaiff 
TOl. i* pp, 359^ 360. See also E^^IaTicdimi qfm New S^fsfe»», i, ucvte. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 103 

absolute being ther© would aometbing happen for whit-h 
it is impossible there should be a BuMcient reason, wMcli 
is againat mj axiom. And I prove it thus. Space is 
aometMng absoluteljr uniform ; and, witliout the thinga 
placed in it, one point of space does not absolutely diftar 
in any respect whatsoever l'rom another point of spaca 
Now from hence it follows (supposing Space to be some- 
thing in itseli, besidea tbe order of bodies ainong them- 
selvea) that 'da impoaaible there should be a reason why 
God, presei^ing the same situations of bodiea among 
themaelves, ahould have placed tbem in apace after one 
certain particular manner, and not otherwiae ; why every- 
thing was not placed the quite contrary way : for insfcance, 
by changing east into west. Biit if space ia nothing eise 
but that Order of rclation, and is notliing at all without 
bodies but the posaibility of placing them^ then tho&e two 
statesj the one such as it now ia. the otber supposed to 
be the quite contrary way, would not at all difler IVom 
one another . Their difference, there for e, is only to be 
found in our chimerical auppoaition of the reality of apace 
in itfielf* But in truth the one would exactly be the same 
thing as the other, they being absolutely indisceraible; 
and consequently there is no rooni to inquire after a reason 
of the preference of the one to the other. The caae is the 
same with respect to time. Supposing any one should 
aak why God did not ereate eyerything a year sooner, and 
the same person should iiifer from thence that God has 
done aome thing concerning which 'tis not possible there 
sbouM be a rejison why He did it so and not otherwise j 
the answer is^ that hi& inference would be right if time 
was anything distinct from things existing in time, For 
it would be impossible there should be any reaaon why 
tliings should be applied to such particular instants, rather 
than to others, their succession continuing the same, But 
then the same argument proves that instants, considered 
without the things, are nothing at all, and that they 
conaiat only in the auccessive order of things; which 



104 INTRODUCTION 

Order remaining the same, one of the two statea^ namely, 
that of a suppoaed anticipation, would not at all differ, 
nor eould he discerned from the other which now ia*.' 

Accordingly, Leibniz's theory of Space and time may 
be summarized thus. Phenoinena are hene fundata in 
Proportion as they arc connected together, Space and 
time ai^e Orders or aystems of connexion between pheno- 
mena, the bond being co-existence in the one case, 
successioii in the other, Apart from the phenomena, 
Space and time are mera abstractions. Thus pure space 
and pure time are at two removes from reality, for 
the things which are in space and time are not Monads 
but phenomena. Yet ultimately pUenomena are imperfect 
realitiesj unanalyzed perceptions, They have a hasis in 
simple subötance» Thus there mus'l: be something non- 
spatial and non -temporal, of which si>ace and time are 
the imperfect expressions. And in a letter to Schulenburg 
(1698) Leibniz, after deiining Space and time in his usual 
wayj says tliat * in themselves \per se] they have no reality 
beyond the Divine Immensity and Eternity 

' IJI^* Lettre ä aarke^ 5, 6 (Clarke's tr.) (E. 753 a j G, vii. 364^ 
In answer to this, Clarie, while professedly admitting the prin- 
giple of atiftlcient imiaoii} leally denies its validity by maiutaining 
Üiat the niere will of God is to be eounted a. sufBcient reaaon, 
and thjit there fore Leibniz's applieation of the principle does not 
prove hin tase, Cf. 17™' Lettre ä Oarke, ifl (EL 756 b ; yii* 374) : 
* Space being uniform, there <mn be neither any externa] nor 
intoriiül reason by which to d Latin guish ita parts and to make 
♦any choice among thom, For any external reason to discern 
between them can only be grounded upon some internal one. 
Otherwiae wo should discorn what ia indiseernible, or chwse 
without diäcerning, A will witliout reasou wouM be th© * chaiice ' 
of the Epicurean^. A Godj who should act by euch u will, woutd 
be a God only in name/ 

With regard to the general question, cf. F™» L^e ä Qark$j 6a (E, 
771 b ; G. vii. 406) ; * 1 don't eay that inatter and spa^e are the 
Hixme thing, I only aay, there is no Space whero there is no 
matter, and that space in itself ia not an absolute reality. Space 
and inatt*jr differ m t!m© an<i motion. However thüse things, 
tbeugh dijfferent, are inaeparabLeJ 

* 0. Math, vii» 343. For Leibniz's ac^ouut of the origm of 
Dur idea of apace, aee Appendix p. aoa. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I05 



Ädivity and Passivity of the Monads. Mutual Influence 

of Suhstances. Cause and Effect 

So far, then, from space being, as Descaiiies held, the 

essence of matter, it is a purely ideal relation which we 

mentally construct between things or phenomena whose 

ultimate reality or essence is not quantitative, and is 

consequently not material \ But, as we have seen, every 

one of the real substances (the Monads), each of which is 

the essence or reality of a portion of matter, contains that 

which, taken abstractly, may be described as materia 

prima, Every created Monad is both active and passive ; 

for there is no such thing as absolute passivity, and pure 

activity belongs to God alone. As passive the Monad 

has materia prima, as active it is entelechy. Thus every 

soul has a body ; there is no such thing as an absolutely 

disembodied spirit, unless it be the Spirit of God. And, 

on the other band, mere soulless body has no real exist- 

ence: it is an abstraction. The world is active, living 

through and through, even in its infinitesimal parts. It 

is compact of souls. 

Now this activity and passivity of the Monads do not 

mean that any Monad exerts a real influence outside of 

itself or receives any real impression from a substance 

extemal to it. The relations between the Monads ai-e 

purely ideal, and their activity and passivity are altogether 

internal. As we have seen, a Monad is in itself passive in 

so far as its perceptions are relatively obscure or confused, 

active in so far as they are relatively clear and distinct. 

And similarly, as each Monad perceives or represents the 

whole universe from its own point of view, one Monad is 

said to be passive in relation to another in so far as certain 

perceptions in the former are obscure or confused in com- 

parison with the corresponding perceptions in the latter ; 

* In spite, however, of this reduction of space, matter, &c., to 
confused perception, Leibniz continues to use the language of 
those who speak of them as real, comparing himself to a Copernican 
who speaks of sunrise. Cp. Tfieodicee, § 65 (E. 521 a ; G. vi. 138). 



io6 



INTFODUCTION 



while, on tho oiher band, the Monad whoae percöptiona 
are clearer and more dktinct is aaid to b© so far active in 
relation to the other or (idGally, of course) to act upon 
it Thus^ m vve have already seen, the pre-established 
hai-mony is the basis of the inter-relation of the Monads 
and of their mutual changes^ Furtiier, as clear and 
distinct perceptions are simply the Hofolding (explication) 
or explanation of the corresponding more coufused per- 
ceptions, the action of one substance upon another is fco 
l>e regarded as meaning that the active substance, in so 
far aa ifc is aetive, contains within itself (or, simply, is) the 
esplanation of the passive substance, in eo far aB it is 
passive, Subatances acting upon others are, accordingly, 
those in which the reason of the changes in the others 
niay be read more d istin ctly than in those in which the 
changes actuaUy occur ^ Tliua the connexion between 
cauße and effect in different snbstaaces is a purely ideal 
^ relation j a harmony of internal changes and Operations, 
implying no physical influence of one siibstance upon 
another. And, further, the cause of any change is not it^ 
obecnre antecedent nor any power or activity prior in 

^ Cf, Spinoza's views of action and passion in Ethics^ Part iii, 
ospeeia-lly Defa. i and and Props. i, 2, and 3^ Also Ethi^^ 
Part V. Prop» 40, Corollary, 

^ Cf. P. .40 ; aöB also Lettre ä Arrtauld (1690) {G. ii. 135 ; E. 107 b^, in 
which Leibnis! giTeg a süminary of bis poaition : ' Thero mnat 
©verywhere in body subgitaneea indivisibiej unborn and imperish- 
able, having aometblng corresponding to souls, . . . Each of them 
subatances contains in it& own natyre ^'■lagern contimtatmiis seriei 
stwerum operuHonum '* [th© piiricipl© of succession of tha aoriea of ita 
oWn Operations] and all that haa iiappöned and shall happen to 
it. All its ftctions com© from its own. inner being [/üftrf*], except 
its dopöndence upon God Each substance expressed the entire 
universe, but one dws so more distinctly than another, and each 
eiprossos it more ©specially with regard to certain thinga and 
aociording to its own point of viow, The xinion of soul with body^ 
and indeed the Operation of one siibBtance upon finother, €onäist& 
only in the perfect mutual accord of substancea, deflnitely estab- 
lished through the Order of their firat oroation^ in virtne of whieh 
each fiubstance, following üh owu laws, agrees with the reat, 
meeting their demands ; and the Operations of the one thus foUow 
or üceompany the Operations or change of the other. ' 

^ Cf. Monadology^ §§43 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY IO7 

time to the effect ; the true cause is always the reason or 
explanation, the distinct as opposed to the confused per- 
ception, whatever may be the time-order of the events or 
phenomena \ 

Mechanicäl and final Causes, SouT and Body, 

Every substance, as we have seen, consists of soul and 
body. And the soul, being on the one hand the relatively 
distinct perception of the substance, and on the other 
hand its activity, is the final cause of the substance, the 
end for which it is, the self-development of its nature. 
It must be conceived under the notion of Becoming, as 
a thing whose essence it is to move towards an end. It 
cannot, therefore, be adequately described by purely 
mechanicäl conceptions. It has something more than 
a static self-identity ; its unity unfolds itself in the series 
of its changes. Its reality is thus not determined merely 
by the principle of eontradiction, taken as a principle of 
pure or abstract self-consistency. The body of every 
substance, on the other hand, i. e. its matter, its confused 
perception, its passivity, is the physical or mechanicäl 
cause of the substance. Being entirely abstract, and in 
itself a bare possibility, body may by itself be adequately 
described by mechanicäl conceptions, under the principle 
of eontradiction. Thus we may have an abstract science 
of physics by which the phenomena of abstract matter 
are explained on purely mechanicäl principles, that is, as 
a System of physical or efl&cient causes. But if we would 
explain the concrete reality even of material substance we 
must employ dynamical rather than mechanicäl concep- 
tions, or, in other words, we must regard the world as 
ultimately and essentially a System of final causes, a 
System which is the expression, not of an indifferent all- 
powerful Will, but of an all-powerful Will which knows 
and decrees the best ^. 
^ See Appendix C, p. 204. 

* Cf. Epistola ad Bierlingium (1711) (E. 677 b ; G. vii. 501) : * You 



io8 



IKTROBUCTION 



C. OKGAKISM. 

Organic and inorgank Bodits. Simple and Compound 
Siibstances* Dommant Monad. 

The notion of body existing by itself and that of soul 
existing by itself ai'e results of confiised or imperfect 

rtsk abo«t spiritimlj rather ineorporeal thingst, and you say that 
we aee the m^hAnlcal arrangement of thc parta but not Ihe 
principleia of the mechanism. Tme ; ba£| when we aee iDotion also, 
we understand froni [whafc w© see] tlie cause of motton, or 
for<5s. The aourc^ of mecliÄtiism is primary forcö pr%miUva\, 
but the laws of motion^ ac^sording to which impulses [iwi^^tta] or 
derivative forees arisö out of the primary force, isau© from the 
perceptiod of good and evil, or from that wliidi ia moat fitting. 
Thus it ia that eflSeieut causes are dependent upou final cauaes^ 
and Spiritual things are in thtiir naturo prior to raatei ial things, 
m also thoy are to ua prior in köowledg©, bocaus© we perct*ive 
more immediately [mimws] th© ralnd (as it is neareat to ub) 
than tho body ; and ihis inde^d Plato and Bescartea hav© 
übaerved/ Also Lettre ä Eemond (1714) (E. 703 a; G. iii- 607): 
*I hav© föund that niosfc of the philosophical seets are right in 
a good part of wliat thoy inaintainj but not to tho aam© ext<änt in 
wbat they denj. The Formal iatB, such aa ihe Flatoniata and 
Aristoteiian^^j are right in aeoking the sourc© of thing>( in final 
an.d formal causes. But they err in noglecting efficient and 
material cauaes and in inf erring (aa did Mr. H©nry More in 
England, and somo other Piaton lata) that tliero are phenomena 
whieh cannot bo explained on iruschanical priiioiplea* But^ on 
the other band, the Material ists, or those who hold exclusively 
to the mochanical pliüosophy, err in setting aaido mefcaphysieat 
conaiderationa and in trying to ©xpkiin everything by that which 
38 dependent on the iinagination. I flattet* myself that I hav© 
diacovored tho harmony of the diffüront aystoma and have m&n 
that both sides are right, provided th©y do not claah with one 
another; that in th© phenomena of nature evörything happ©na 
mechanically and at the aamo time metaphyaically^ but that the 
ßOUTce of the meehanical ia in the metaphygical/ Alao Lettre a 
Arväiild (1686) (G. ii. 77) : *We are obligttd to admit many thing» 
of which our knowledgt^ ia not aufficiently clear and diatinet, 
I hold that the knowledge of extension U very rauch l&m so' 
[than that of aubstantial Forma, of which he haa been apeaking], 
* witness the remarkable diflSculfcies as to the compoaition of the 
oontinuoua ; and it may ev©n be said that bodie& haw m d^ßnite ami 
predsii shap^^ b^aiuse öf ihe aciual sub-'dixision of their parts [i* o. their 
f^ub'divläion ad inßniäim]. So that bodie$ would tcithout doubt ht 
mmethirt^ mereiy imoffinaTy and apparmt if th^re were mtliing hut matter 
and üs modißcaiions. Yet it ia of no uae to mention the unity, 
notion, or substantial Form of bodiea, when we are explaining th© 
particular phenomena of nature^ as it ia of no us6 for maths« 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I09 



perception. The world consists solely of Monads, mdi 
of whicli h a concrete unity of soul and body, of entelechy 
and materki prima* Thus nature m througliout living ; 
there is nothing really inorganic \ What, then, is meant 
by the common distintitioii between orgauic or living and 
inorganic or material bodies"? In order to answer tbis 
qiiestion, must consider move fully tha nature of 
Compound substanee. 

While the simple snbstances alone are real they appear 
as phenomena in groups or aggregates, wbieh we call 
Compound substances. Indeed^ although in realUiß they 
are seeondary, Compound substances are prior to simple 
substances in the order of hmtdedge, As phenomena 
they can be perceived by the senses, while the Honads 
cannot be so perceived, For the Mouads are not realltf 
grouped or combined ; the aggregation is purely pheno- 
menah Now each Monad implied in any such aggregate 
pereeives or represents all the phenomena constituting it-a 
group, since it perceives the wbole universe, of which they 
are parts, But aa each Monad differs from all the others 
in the degree of distinctnes3 of its perceptions there must 
in each groiip be one Monad which represents the group 
more distinctly than does any other Monad implied in it. 
Tbis Monad of most distinct perceptfon in each Compound 
substance Leibriiz calls the dominant Monad of the 
substance ^ It has a formal super iority over the others 

matician!« to investigato the diffieultiefi d<r cotnp&sitione cmtimti whoii 
they ai-ü working fit the Solution of adme problemp These thiags 
arö none the le^^ impi>rtarit and worthy of considemtion in tlieii' 
owra pJoce. All the phenomena of bodiea can be t^xplniued 
naechanically or by the coj puscular philoaophy, atijording to certoiii 
prineiples of mechutiicj^, which ar© iaid down without taking infco 
considtirafcion whether theto are aonls or not ; hat iu an ultlraato 
anulysis of the prineiples of physich ^ and eren of me^ihanic!^^ it 
appeari* that we cannot cxplain these prineiples by modifieatioas 
of extenaion alone^ and the nature of foreö already requires som©- 
ttiing eise.' See also Antibarbants Fhymcunj &c. (after 1687) (O. vii. 
343 \ For Irf;ibniz'& account of the düvelopment of tia viewsj fi©o 
üiti3naie OiiginaiiDn o/ThingSj Appendix ^ p. 351. 

* Cf. Mmadology^ §§63 sqq. 

• Cf, ibid. § 70 ; i^ inciples qfN<Uure and qf Grac€j § 3. 



HO 



INTRODUCTION 



implied in the group, thougli all are really independent. 
Ita control or dominance consista mlelj in the distincineas 
of its pereaptioDS. Just as cause is not a real influence of 
one substance upon another, but mörely the rektion of 
activity in the one io corresponding passivity in the other, 
or of distinct to confused perception, so tho central 
Monad of any Compound aubatance has no physical con- 
trol Over the otbers, but is dominant becauae of its 
activity and distinctuess. Thus the relation between the 
dominant Monad and the phenomena {implying other 
Monads) whichj along mth it, constitute a Compound 
flubstance is similar to the relation between the two 
elementa, active and passive (entelechy aud materia prima), 
which together constitute simple substance or the indi- 
vidual Monad. The dominant Monad is the entelechy or 
soul of the Compound substance, wbile its body is a 
phenomenal aggregato, eveiy portion of which in turn 
implies a Monad or soul. But this aggregate is maieria 
secunda ; aud thus we have simple subatance consisting of 
matertu prima and entelechy, and Compound substance 
consisting of materia secunda and dominant Monad* 

Whiie observing this analogy, we must not forget the 
essen tial difference between simple aud Compound sub- 
stance, The formor alone m really substance : the latter, 
in so far as it differs from the former^ is merely sub- 
stance hy courtesy or common usage. Simple subatance 
IS a concreto unity ; Compound aubatance, in so far as it 
JB Compound {1, e, apart from its soul or dominant Monad, 
which is non-quantitative, and therefore cannot be an 
element in a Compound), is merely au aggregate, Thus 
the materia prima or passivity of the individual Monad is 
a name for its confused, undeveloped or implicit nature 
taken abstractly : it is confused perception in the sub- 
stance itsell But the matma secunda or body of the 
Compound subatance is not confused perception in the 
substance itself, for the body as Compound haa no 
perception of ita own^ as distinct from the perceptions 



STATEMENT OF LEIBTaZ*S PHILOSOPHY III 



of the simple substances which it impliös, Maima 
secunäüi tben, is due to the eonfused perceptions of 
those wbo observe the Compound substanees. Tiius to 
the eye of God there can be no materia secunda, no Com- 
pound substance ; for in Kim there ia oo eonfused percep- 
tion. 

The aggregates of phenomena which we call things or 
extended bodies ai^ thus the result of eonfused percep- 
tion. And the differences amongst them^ which we 
describe by the names of organicj inorganic^ &ep, are 
really difterenees in their dominant Monads. Without 
a dominant Monad, body would be mere indetei-minate 
quantity, 'without form' if not *void/ a chaos of pure 
difference, The dominant Monad i& the unity implied 
in a specific or definite aggregate, the unity in virtue of 
which an aggregate or Compound is one thing as distinct 
from other things* If the dominant Monad be a bare 
Monadj with imconscious perceptions^ we call the body 
inorganic, If the degree of distinctiiess in the perceptions 
of the dominant^ Monad be a little higher, we call the 
body a plant and so on. The organic and the inorganic 
pasa imperceptibly into one another, and the degree of 
organic unity possesaed by any body is nothing but the 
degree of distinctness in the perceptions of its dominant 
Monad» Thus the pai^^s of an organism are more clo8e!y 
connected, more firmly held together, than those of an 
in organic mass, because the dominance of the central 
Monad is greater, more complete (that is to say^ its per- 
ception is more d istin et), in the cas© of the former than 
in the case of the latten 

Body without soul, or mere matter considered as inor^ 
ganie, that is to say^ as an aggregate of parts which have 
no unity other than their aggregation, is unreal. We 
may regard it either as an abstraetion from concreto 
substance or (more nearly in Leibni^'s way of tliinking) 
m an imperfect perception or representation of concrete 
substance, Kature is organic throughout : no real thing 



112 



lÜJTEODUCTIOir 



is completely inorganic : what we call * inorganic * ia 
really orgame in a low degiee 

The bödy of ©veiy created subatance ia the point of 
view of its sonh As there is no vacuum in nature, the 
changes in any one body affect every othen Thus in 
every body the whole world ia repregented or expressed. 
But in each dominant Monad, or soiil, the aggregata 
forming its particular hody is more distinctly represe^nted 
than the rest of the world. Thus each soul perceives of 
represents the universe through the medium of its own 
hody. While it does repreaent the whole, it repi-eaents 
it in a form in whieh its own hody is more distinct than 
any other^. The body is like a special lens through 
which the soul sees the universe, This, of course, fol- 
lows from the yiew that hody in general is relatively 
confused perception, For each aubstanee represents the 
universe 4'rom its own point of view/ and its pojnt of 
view is simply the degi'ee of confusedness (or of distinct- 
ness, for they are entirely relative) of its perceptiona ^, 

* Cf, Aniibarbetrus Ph^emf &c. (ö. yii. 344) : ' But indeed, 
although all bodies are uofc organifl, neTerthelea» in all l>odle€i, 
incJuding the inorgftnic^ organic bodiea lie hid^ m thflfc movy mass 
whicli to outward appearanco ia formleas [mcita] and quite undif- 
ferentiated Isimiiaris} ig in ward ly not undifferentifttt^d Hut diver- 
»iMdj and yet its variety is not confueed but ovderly. Thua there 
13 every w he re organi^in^ nowhere chaos^ which would be unbe- 
coming a wiae Creator.* 

^ Monadologyj | 62 ; cf. Spinoza^ Ethics, Part ii, Props. 13 j 13 
{Sch&iium\ 16 Co roll. i\ atj kc. 

^ Yet it rnu&t not be itupposed that the soul has per/ed knowledge 
oFflll that takes place in ita own body» Cf, Lettre ä AmauM (1687) 
(G, li. go) : * It does not follow that the eoul muwt be pörfeetly 
(3ons*?ioua {s^apercevoi'fl^ of what happens in the parta of itg body» 
aince there are degieea of relatioiifship botween thei* parta them- 
jjielves which are not all expresssed equally, any more than external 
thingß are. The distance of th© lattor ia balanced by the smalliie^ 
or other disadvfintages of the forraorj and Thaks soea th© atara 
wlien h© doea not seo the dftch bofore hia feet/ Also Lettre ä 
Amauld (1687) (G* ii, 113) : * In natural perception and in feeling^ 
it ia enough th^it what is diviaible and material, and ia actually 
divided among Bevt^ral beings, ±^hould bo expreased or repi-esented 
in one in diviaible being or in aubatanee which poasess&oa a gmuine 
unity, We cannot doubt th© poaaibility of auch a repreaentation 
of seyend thiuga in oiie only, since our sonl gives ub an inatance 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY II3 

] 

Chcmges in Compound Substcmces. Development and J 
JEnvehpmsnt, 

Every Compound substance is in constant change. No 
created Monad, as we have seen, can ever be entirely at 
rest: each, in virtue of its appetition, is continually 
either unfolding (developing) itself (i. e. passing from 
confused to more distinct perception), or enfolding (en- 
veloping) itself (L e. passing from distinct to more con- 
fused perception). And thus, as the dominance of any 
dominant Monad consists solely in the degree of distinct- 
ness of its perception, the relations of formal dominance 
and Subordination, which constitute a Compound sub- 
stance, must be continually varying in particular cases. 

of it. But this representation is accompanied in the rational soul 
by consciousness, and then it is called thought. Now this expres- 
sion occurs everywhere, because all sübstances are in sympathy 
with one another, and each receives some proportional change, 
corresponding to the least change which happens anywhere in the 
universe, though this change is more or less observable, according 
as other bodies or their actions have more or less relation to ours. 
And I think that M. Descartes himself would have admitted this, 
for he would doubtless allow that, because of the continuity and 
divisibility of all matter, the least motion has its effect upon 
neighbouring bodies, and consequently upon one body after another 
ad infinitumj the effect proportionally diminishing. Thus our body 
must be in some way affected by the changes in all others. Now 
to all the motions of our body there correspond certain more or less 
confused perceptions or thoughts of our soul. Hence the soul also 
will have some thought of all the motions in the universe, and, in 
my opinion, every other soul or substance will have some percep- 
tion or expression of them. It is true that we are not distinctly 
conscious of all the motions of our body, as, for instance, that of 
the lymph ; but this may be compared with the fact that I must 
have some perception ,of the motion of each wave on the shore, 
in Order that I may be conscious [apercevoir] of that which results 
from the totality of them, namely the great noise that I hear when 
close to the sea. Thus also we experience some confused result 
of all the motions which take place in us ; but being accustomed 
to this . internal motion, we are not distinctly and reflectively 
conscious. of it, except when there is a considerable change in it, 
as at the beginning of an illness. . . . Now since we are conscious 
of other bodies only through the relation they have to our own, 
I was right in saying that the soul expresses best what belongs 
to our own body. Thus we know the satellites of Saturn or of 
Jupiter, only in consequence of a motion which takes place in our 
eyes.' Of. Spinoza, Ethics, Part ii. props. 24 and 27. 



I 



114 



INTRODUCnON 



The phenomena wbich make up the body of a Compound 
giibstance mmi be continually cbanging according aa the 
dominant Monad rises or falla in perceptive rank. Ko 
dominant Monad has a changeless body ; beeause of its 
own variations its body ^is in a perpetual flux Hke a 
river, and parta are entering into it and passing out of 
it continually And there is endless room for Variation - 
because each Compound substance is made up of other 
componnd snbstamces (each with its dominant Monad), 
and these again are made up of others ad infinilum\ 
Thus some or all of the things which at one time form 
an inorganic body may, in new relations, become parts 
of an organic body and ^ice versa. And the size of any 
body, belongiag to a particular domiimnt Monad, may 
increase or decrease indefinit ely. 



Aceordingly the change in Compound substance of 
every kind is always meiamorphosis rather than metem- 
psychosial The fundamental element in every Com- 
pound substance is the dominant Monad, and tbe matter 
or body of the substance is continually changing by a 
gradual rem oval and addition of parts, It is the body 
which bit by bit transfers itself from one soul to another. 
There is no such thing as the sudden transference of 
a soul from one body to an other entirely new body. 
Such a transference wonld involve a sudden or discon- 
tinuous change in the soul itself, which is imposaible, 

1 Momdßlogy, §71. So Lotze «joraparoa tho life öf the parts to 
a thron g of travellers. Microcosrnusj bk. iii* ch. 4, | 4 (Eng. Tr-, 
vol. i, p. 368). 

' Cf. Epistüla ad BermiäUum (1693) (ö. Math, iii* 560^ : * I would 
reaiiily allow that thor© ar© animala (in the ordinary sense) in- 
comparably gteater than ouns ; and I have aomotimea aaid in jest 
that there may b© some aystem similar to ours, wJuch is the watuh 
of A verj great giant/ AJao Monadolügiff §§ 66 sqq, ; üf, Spinoza ^ Eihic9, 
Part li, Leranaa vii* Scholium. 

^ Cf, Epistoi^ ad Bet^dlium (169S) (G. Math. üL 561) ^ * I do not 
tidmit p.€r€^vxtifaii into a new ajumaJ, but fj-fruiAoptpittins^ afSf^sris, 
/iftWij of the mme animaL' 





STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 1 15 

Thoughj on the one hand, no soul is limited to any 
paiiicular phenomenal aggregate os its body, yet on the 
other band, 110 soid can be eompletely and instantaneoualy 
severed from its body and transferred to another* Again, 
the birth and the death of any organism are simply forma 
of this metamorpbosiä ^ There isno absolute birth, that 
IB tö say, no direct and im media te implanting of soul in 
body^ and there is no absolute death, no complete 8ever- 
ance of soul from body. All the Monads whieh consfcitute 
the Sole reality of a Compound substance are alike unborn 
(ingmeraUc) and Imperishable^. They proceed directly 
from God : they are produeed by ' fnlgurationa of HLs 
Divinity^' Kuno of them comes out of anything eise. 
Thus the phenomena we call ' birth * and ^ death ' are 
transformations, changea in the relationa between Monads, 
Wben we epeak of an animal being bom, we mean that 
the body of a naicroscopie animalcule has enorm ously 
increased in size, and that its dominant Monad has under- 
gone a corresponding internal change. The animal was 
an animal from the first^ even in the nücroscopicj sper- 
matic stage. In being born it has merely become an 
animal of a higher kind, In every case the process of 
birth 13, in faet, sinaibir to the change which takes place 
when a Caterpillar develops into a butterfly, * nature being 
wont tü reveal in some paiticulur casea her secrets, which 
she conceals on other occaaions\' Birth is thus indis- 
tinguishabl© from growth, increase, development. And 
on the other band, when we apeak of an animal m dying, 
we mean that ita body has docreased in aize or been 
broken up into new compounda The animal has not 
ceased entirely to exist, but has been contracted so that 
it is no longer pereeived^ Death is thus the same as 
decay, decrease, involution^ There is no epontaneous 

^ Monaädogy^ II 73 sqq. ^ Cf. PrindpJe» 0/ Natura andqfOrat^f § 6. 
^ M^nadoltigyf § 47 ; the note to that aection. 
* L^6äAmavld (1686) (G. ii. 75). 

' Monadoliiffyf §§ 74 and 75. Cf. ThSodic^f | 90 (E. 3^7 b ; ri. 
I 2 



ii6 



INTRODUCTIOJfl' 



generation and no pasaiiig fram life to absolute lifeless- 
ness, For lifelessness is entirely relative : the very dust 
and ashea still have life 

^ IndestmetihiUt^ and ImmortalUy of Souh. 
Äecordingly the sonls of all living beinga are lude- 
st ruetiblej wiiile the soul of man is both indeetructible 
and immotial, since it not morely persiata in existenco 
but continues to have conaciousness, memory, and such 
other characteristics as constitute personality It is 
apparently, in Leibniz's view, impossible for the mind 
of man to degenerate so as to pass into a lower stage of 
existence, The posseasion of self-consciousness is in- 
alienable. The rational aoul thus differs froni all souls 
that are beneath it in rank, üiasmuch as it doea not 
experience such wide variations as those to which tlie 
latter are subject. In a letter to Ärnauld (1687), Leibnii; 
says: 'Others, not being able to explain otherwise tho 

* Cf, Epistda ad BermuU^^^m (i6g8) (G* Math. i\L 553! : ' You argue 
entirely to mj mind wlien you say that changes do not take plae^ 
per salium. And further. I do not laugh iit your conjöcture, bnt 
I definitely avow that there are in tlie World animaU öiuch 
I arger than ours, aa oura aro larger than niicroßcopic animalcules. 
Nor does nature know any Ii mit. And agaln it may be, nay it 
must be, th«t in the very smallest graina of duat^ and inde«d in 
the lüast &toms [atomulis] there are worlds not inferior to our own 
in beanty an*! Tariety ; uor ia there anything to prevejit what may 
appear a atill mor^ wondorful thing, that auimala at death are 
tranafarred to sucli worlds j for I rcgard death as nothing elsö than 
the eontraction of an aniraal.' . 

^ et Lettre ä Des Mai^eau^ 7 1 1 ) (E* 676 a ; G. vii» 534) 1 * I am 
of opinioQ that the soula of men pre-oxiötod|, not as rational souls; 
but merely as ^ sensitive ' [s$nsibh] soula, which. attain ed this higher 
degree (that is to aay, reaBon) on ly whcn the man, whom tho soul 
ie to animate^ was conceived. I grant an esiatence aa old aa the 
World not only to the simls of the lower nnimals^ but In general to 
all Monada or idmple Bub3tan<!ea from which Compound phenomena 
result ; and 1 hold that oach soul or Monad is alwaya accompanied 
by an organic bo^y, which is novertholess perpetually changing ; 
so that the body is not the same, though the soul and the animal 
are, Thüse rules apply also to the human hody, but apparently in 
a higher degree than to other animals which aro known to us ; 
since man must continue to be^ not merely an animal but also 
a person and a eitizen of the City of God» which ia the moat 
perfect poaaible state, und^' the moat perfect Monareh,' 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNTZ's FHILOSOPHY 117 



origin of forma, havö alloWed that they have their b©- 
ginmng in a real creation» Whüe I graut ihm creation 
in tinae oaly aa regards the rational soul, and hold that 
all forma which do not think were created with the 
World, they believo that this creation happens every day 
when the smallest womi is engend ered '/ There is, 
then, something comparable to a special cvention in the 
case of every niind or rational soul, although this creation 
is practically no more than the promotion of a Monad 
to self'Consciousness. * Minds [eqirits] are not subject to 
these revolutions [of bodies], or rather theae revolutions 
of bodies are subservient to the Divine economy regarding 
minds. God creates them wlien the time com es and 
detachea them from the body, at least from the earthly 
[grössier] body, by death, since they miiat alwaya retain 
their moral quahties and their recollection io order to be 
perpetual Citizens of that universal all-perfect Common- 
wealth, of which God ia the Monarch, which can lose 
none of ifca members and th© laws of which are higher 
than those of bodies ^' 
^ ii. 117. 

^ Lettre ä Artm'uld (1687) (ö, ii. 99). Of. Thmice&j 91 (E. 537 b ; 
vi. 153): 'Tbus I ^hould think that the souls which wiÜ aome 
day b© Imman souls have, like tbos© of other apeciea, been in the 
äöeed and in their anee^stor^ up to Adam, and have congequently 
«xisted, since the beginning of thingSj always in mme kind of 
organic body, . , . It appears to me also for Yarioua reasons probahlo 
that they then exigted onlj as genaitive or animal soiilg, endowed 
with Peremption and f Oeling, and devoid of reason ; and that they 
jieEnalned in fchia statte up to the fcime of the begetting of the man. 
to whojn they were to belongi bufc that then they received reaaon ; 
whether we suppos© that there is a natuml möana of raising 
ft sensitive botiI to the rank of a rational soul (which I find it 
difficnlt to conceivo)^ or that God haa given rea^son fco thi^ aonl by 
A special act, or (if you lito) by a kind of transcr&utmn. Thia is the 
mere easily admitted, as revelation informs ua of many other 
immediat^i acts of God npon our sonla. . * . And it 13 much more in 
harmony with th© Divin© justice to givo to the soul, already 
phjsicaU^ or as an animal cctrrnpted by the ain of Adam^ a new 
perfection, namely reason, than» by croation or otherwise, to put 
a rational bouI into a body in which it ia to be morally corrupted/ 
Also Lettre äAmauM [16B6} (G. ii. 75) i *The rational soul ia created 
only at the time whon its body ia fprmed, being entirely difforent 
from the other ^uls we know, becanse it is capahl© of reflexion 



ii8 



INTRODUCTION 



The Yhtmlum SuhstantmJe* 

Ab to organic substance^ one other point requires a brief 
conäideration» In a correspondence with Fatber Des 
Bosaesj Leibniz drawa a distinctioii between a Compound 
substancOj strietly speaking, and a mere coUection of 
thmgß, such BB a beap of stonea, or a flock of sbeep, or 
an army, The Compound substance bas a cei-tam unity ; 
it is mbstantia composHa [singiilar number |. It involvea 
sometbing which givea a certam reality to its pbeoomena 
{ens rmlimm phenomena), or, in otber words, there is a 
genuine bond of connexion between its pbenomena (vin^ 
ctihim mhstantiale). Ii is mmmper se, Tb© mere collection, 
on tbe otlier hand^ is not a substance bnt suhat^nces 
isubstantiae, mhstantiatum^ senii-subsfmitia). It has no 
unity of its own. Whetber^ as in tbe case of a beap of 
stones, its unity consists in tbe contact of its parts or, as 
in tbe case of a regiment, it is unit«d by a common 
pnrpose, tbe bond of connexion is entirely in tbe mind of 
an observer. In short, when we regard such a tbing as 
a mere collect ion, wo regard it as with out a dominant 
Monad, iind therefore aa not baving a genuine body. It 
is like tbe ' corporation * whicb, according to Sydney 
Smith, ' has neitber a body to be kicked nor a soul to be 
damned/ It is unumper acctdenSj in contrast with unum 
per ßc ^ 

This distinetioD, however, is not to be regarded aa 
absolute* It is, in anotber form^ tbe distinction "whicE 
we have already considered ^ between phmomefia hene 
fundata and tbe pure phenomena of imagiiiation and 
drearas, The vinculum substaniiaU is simply tbe con- 
nexion of tbe phenomena, in virtue of which we describe 
them as hem fundata^ since this connexion arisea f rom tbe 



and re<semb!es in miniatuTO tlie Divine natui-e. 
% es note. 

1 et thia Introduction, Part iÜ, p. 96, notea i and s. 
^ Cf this Introduction, Fürt Iii. p. 98. 



See Münadologiff 




STATEMEM' OF LEIBNiz's PHILOSOPHY IT9 



mutual relations of the Monads which are implied in thö 
Compound aubstance* The vinculum suhstantiale is no- 
where mentionod by Leibniz except in the correspondence 
witb Des Bosses.. It is in no way essential to Ms philo- 
sopby ; but it is the Suggestion of a way in which his 
System niight possibly be made consistent with the Roman 
Catholic dogma of Transubstanfeiatioo, which requires 
that bödies should be considered as real subatanees* 

Leibniz teils ua plainly that he haa no great liking for 
the vinmlmn mbstantiale^ and that it is better to dispenae 
with it, uniess any would-bo disciple of his finds it 
necessary as an aid to religions faith ^ It ongbt not, 
howoYer, to be forgotten that Leibniz was encouraged in 
rejecting the Cartesian view that the esaence of bodily 
substance is extension and motion, by the fecfc that this 

^ Cf. G. ii. 499, A. LemoineT in hia thesis enUtlefl Qaid^Ü Matena 
apud LßibnitiujH (Pfiris, 1850), discusses fully the Latten to I>tB B&sss^j 
with the objeet of ehowing that tli^i vinculutn substantiale is au gxctgb- 
CHsnce upon the j>hiloiiophy of Ltiibniz, and that ih^ UBts he makes 
<jf it inTolves iucünaiääteöey with liia general pt^^ltiun. Erdmann, 
in hia Histtwy of HtilQsopJi^ (Eng, Tr,, vol. ii. p, 188) holds that it 
ifl not to be regarded merely a» a eoncession to the religioua 
scruples of Ronmn Catholica, bat that it is realJy a part of Leibniz's 
life-loiig eudttavour to reeoncile the Roman Catholic ai>d Lutheran 
Churchüs C£, Lsttre mu Ihte Jean Fridirh (no date) (Klopp, iv, 
^,44): — *There iä also a considerabl© feature of mj philosophy 
which will make it somewhat welcome to the Jesuits and other 
tlieologiana. It is tkia, that I re-establUk the subatantiÄl formu 
which the Atomists and Cartcsiäna Claim to have exterminated« 
Now it i« certain that without these forma and the differonce there 
is between thcin and real a(?cideiit3, it is impostiible to maintain 
uiir mysteriea j for if tiiü nature of body conaUta in extension, 
aa Deacartos hold^, it nndcnbtedly involves a ©ontradiction to 
maintain that a body oxiats in many placea at onco,' Dillmann 
{Kme DarstM^ng der Leihnizischen Monaderdehrej p. 35) has no doiibt 
that tlio xinctUum subatantial^ is the same as the ' &oul ' of the 
body OT its dominant Münad. Logically, perhapiä, it ougkt to 
be so ; but it ia far from clear that Leibniz moant this, For he 
aeveral times iises the terms ^ sonl ' or * dominant Monad ' in the 
same sentence tho term vincidum mhstantmle without identifying 
them. And he apeaks of the vinadum subsiafitiate being *ÄbolisÄed,* 
* desfcroy od j'^aupernaturallyremovedj'&ic. Butheafterwardaa dmi ts 
that the vinctdum subskmliak cannot come into being or be destroyed- 
So that Leibniz's entire trt^atment of thß matter ia tentative and 
unsatiafiwitory» 



I20 



IKTRODUCTION 



theory is ineonsistent both with the Roman Catholie and 
with the Lutheran doctrine regarding the Real Presenee 
in the Eueharigt 

D* SELP-COTTSClOtTSNESS. 

By meanB of the difiFerent degrees of cleamess and 
distinctnes3 in the perceptions of their respeetive souls or 
dominant Monada, the organic Compound substances of 
which the world is composed may be divided into three 
raain classeSj (i) mere living beings, {3) animals, and 
{3) men» Subatances of the üvst class, ineluding plant» 
and all lower forms of existence^ have as their soul a bare 
Monad, having mere perception or representation, nn- 
accompanied by consciousness. AnimalB, on the other 
hand^ have a higher degree of pereeptian, which appears 
as cooscioiisneas or feeling (senUmenf ]^ ineluding meniory, 
The soul of man possesses the chafacteristics of both of 
the lower classes, but ÜB perception has a still higher 
degree of clearness, appearing now as self-consciousness or 
apperception. The self-conscions soul or spirit does not 
merely connect its particular perceptions in the empirical 
sequence of memory ; but, having a knowlodge of eternal 
and necessary truths^ it can represent things in logical 
oi-derj that is to say, in their necessary rational relations. 
This is what is meant by its having reason, or being 
a rational soul, The possession of reason means the 
power of reflexion or self-consciousness, because necessary 
and eternal truths are simply perceptions developed to 
the highest degree of distinctness, and consequently the 
knowledge of such truths is a clear and distinet conscious- 
ness of what is in ourselves (of the perceptions which 
constitute our nature), and hence indirectly a clear and 
distinet know] edge of siibstanee in general\ 

* Monad^ilogy, §§ 18-30 ; Principks ofXature and ofGracä^ §§4 and 5. 
Of üourge it i§ imi to be supposed that feha snale of orgsrüc beingf 
etida with man. Thore muät be between man and God a continuoiis 
suceeasion of other embodi&d aoula, each mor© perfect than the onö 
beneath it. Othorwise th© law of continuity would b© broken. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPH Y 121 



Now, as we saw in considering the meaning of life and 
death \ while the self-conscious or rational soul really 
difiFers only in degree from the cönscious and the uncon- 
scious soul, it can never completely lose its rationality. 
The animal soul may at death lose memory and descend 
to a lower grade. But this is not possible in the case of 
the self-conscious soul. And on the other hand, while 
an animal soul may be raised to self-consciousness, 
Leibniz finds it difficult to eonceive that this can take 
place without a special act or Operation of God. Self- 
conscious beings have thus a position of peculiar inde- 
pendence, which requii-es us to devote to them special 
consideration. We proceed, then, to consider Leibniz's 
account (a) of the form in which perception appears in 
man, and (&) of the form in which appetition appears in 
him ; these being the two essential characteristics of the 
human soul as well as of every other Monad. 

(tl) THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE. 

Ldbniz seeJcs a Via Media hetween the Views ofDescartes 
and of Locke. 

Human perception or apperception is knowledge, 
strictly speaking. Leibniz's theory of apperception is 
thus a theory of knowledge. Now apperception is the 
perception of eternal and necessary truths. It is 'clear 
and distinct knowledge. But the human soul has also 

'It is also reasonable to suppose that there are below us sub- 
stances capable of perception, as there are such substances above 
us; and that our soul, far from being the last of all, occupies 
a middle position, from which it is possible to go up or down 
otherwise there would be in the order of things a defect, which 
certain philosophers call vacuum formarum,* Sur les Principes de Vie 
(1705) (E. 431 a ; ö. vi. 543). Leibniz calls these higher beings 
genies {genii), * It is to be believed that there are rational souls 
more perfect than we, which may be called g^üSj and it is quite 
possible that some day we shall be of their number. The order of 
the uniyerse seems to require it.* Lettre ä la Princesae Sophie (1706) 
(O. vii. 569). 
^ p. n6. 



122 



INTRODUCTION 



knoAvledge which is not cleOr and distinct, knowledg« of 
contingent things whicli it cannot reduce to eternal and 
necessary truth, This muat be so, for otherwise the 
human soul would be perfectly clear and distinct in its 
perceptions, eomplete and unrestrained in its aetivity, 
actus pums* Bot this characterlstic of perfect intuitive 
knowledge and absolut o activity belongs to God alon© ; 
the perceptions of man are always at best only relativ ely 
clear and distinctw Accordingly it is impöseible for 
Leibniz to assent to the Cartesian theory of knowledge, 
>vhich gave woiih only to tho absolutely clear and distinct, 
drawing a hard aud faat Une between aelf-conscious 
thinking and all eise. Deacartes's use of th© principle of 
eontradiction was ineonsiatent with the possibility of 
rölative truth. It explains the universal and necessary, 
but only by setting aside the contingent m ultimafcely 
inexplicable^ 

On the other band, the theory of Leibniz is eqiiaUy 
opposed to the opposite view, expounded in Locke's Essat/ 
m the Human Understanäing. If distinctively human 
knowledge does not consist solely in the perception of 
univei-sal and necessaiy truths, neither is th© human mind 
altügether destitute of such knowledge and dependent for 
its ideas entirely upon the contingency of the senses. As 
the human soul is a Monad, its knowledge does not come 
to it from outsid© itself, for it cannot be reaUy influenc©d 
^by any other substance. It is not originally a tabula rasa 
on which externally-produced impressions are mad© ; for 
no Monad can ever be purely passiv© or absolutely wit hont 
perception, Th© human mind, heing spontan ©oua in all 
its activities, must produce its knowledge entirely from 
within itself, It is not a vacuum, gradualLy fill©d ab extra 
vpith ind©p©ndent ideas ; it is a force or lifo transforming 
itself j a growth, a self-r©v©lation ^, 

* et IToaveaux Essais^ bk. ii, ch. i, | a (E. 222 b ; G. v, 99) : ^Tbis 
tabula rasa, of wliitili so much is said, ia iii my opinion nothing but 
SL fietion, which n^ture doös imi aliow and wh'ieh has itn groundu 



STATEMENT OF LEIBXIZ'S PHILOSOPHY I23 



Thus in hia theoiy of knowkdge» Leibniz may. be 
regarded as eeeking a via media between two extrem© 
Views, the basis of botli of wliich is meehanical rather 
than dynainical. Each in its own way fails to do justice 
to the relatioiis in knowledge^ to its umiy as a System, 
Each rests on tha abeolut© (not the relative) validity of 

only in thB iacomplete notions of phüoaophere, LUce th© void, 
fttoms and absolute or relativo lest of two parta of a whole in 
rö^rd to one aiiother^ or ILke the materia prima j whicli ia oonL*tüv©d 
a!^ ab&olutely passive [sann aucunes /ormeft]. Things whii^li are 
uniform and contain do varitity ure nevor anirthing but abätmctionH, 
liko Lime, space^ and the other beings of pur^a mathematica, There 
U HO body whoee parts are at re^st, and there k 11 subatanL*« 
whlcli ha^i nothins^ to distinguish it from evory other. Human 
soula differ^ not oniy from other aoulü«, but also from one another, 
although the differentse is not of the kind that is callcd **apeeific*" 
And I think I can prove that every snbstaxitial thing^ whether 
Koul or bodyj has ita üwn sptscial relotioß to every otber ■ and one 
muet always dilfer from an other by intririsic charact^rs ; withoutt 
mentioning that thoa^ who say so much about thia tabula rasctj after 
haying i-emoTed from ifc the ideaSj cannot teU wiiat remainü of it, 
like the Scholaatic philoäophßra who leavo nothing in tlioir matma 
priivia. Pörhapa it may be replied, that thia tabula rasa of the 
philosophers meana that the soul has orlginally and by naturt* 
notMng but bare facultiüs. But faeultiea withotit any activity, in 
a Word the pure potenciea \puissa}tce$} of the Sehola^tioSt aJ"o them- 
aelves only fietioAs^ whieh nature knowa not and wbieh are 
obtaiued only by making abstractions, For where in thö World 
ahali w6 ever find a faculty which is Hhut up iii mere potejiey 
without any activity? Ther© is always a partictilar dispoBition to 
action^ and to on© autlun rather than anot|ier> And besjides the 
disposifcion there ia a tendeney to action, and indeed tiiere in alwaya 
an infinity of theae t^ändencioa at once in every object ; and these 
tendencies are neverwithout aome efifect. Experienee is necessaty, 
I admit, in order that t he sonl should be determinod to au eh and 
such thoughtSj and in order that it may take noti^ie of the ideaa 
which are in m But by what means can exporieno© and the 
senaes give ideaa? Has the soul windowa ? Is it like a writing- 
tablet ? Is ifc liko wax ? It is piain that aU those who think thua 
of the soul make it at bottom corporeal. There will be brought 
again at me this a^ciom^ a<jeepted among tho philoaophers, ih^U 
näihhig is in the soul ihat does not corm from Ihe senses, But the soul 
Itaelf and its affectiona muat be eaLcepted. Nihil ösf in intdlecfUj q^uod 
mmfusrit in semu ^ eiccipe : nisi ipse inhllectns. But the soul eontaina 
ihe notions of being, aubstanee, unity, identity, cause, perc^sption, 
reaBening and many othera, which the senaes can not give, This 
agrees weil enough with yonr author of the Essay ^ who tinda the 
origin of a eonsiderable aectlon of the ideaa in the mind's reflexion 
on ita own nature.' Ct New Essays j Intrüduction, pp. 360^ 367 sqq* 



124 



INTRODUCTION 



certain ideas or imprassions ; each is a. kind of atomism, 
The ©ternal and necesaary truths {or clear and distinct 
ideas) of Deseartes are unconditionally valid ; ihey are 
a pt^ori atoms, forming tbe totality of knowledge. The 
* simple ideas * of Locke are equally uneondition&l in their 
validity ; they are a posteriori atoms or data of knowledge \ 
Btitj here as elsewhere, Leibniz would rather reconcil© 
than overthrow. While thö mechanieal riew of things is 
not the trueat, it nevertheless has value in its own sphere. 
Thus he regards the errors of Descartea and Locke as due 
in each case to the orer-emphasis of one of the two com- 
plementary elements in knowledge, the necessary and the 
contingent. Descartes's view might hold if knowledge 

^ Locke's Opposition fco Deseaitös^ gti&at though it was, ought not 
to b© emphasized to such an extent as to hide the fact that they 
have rauch in common, For infitancse, we know that Jjocko's first 
attmction to philoöophy CHme from a reading of Defscarbes, and he 
snaj perhaps owe the euggtistlon öf Sömo of his leading ideaa to 
*Ufih pa^^gagesj tlie following ©xtraet from an unfinished dialogue 
of DeacÄttea, in which tho method of doubt is wittily aet in con- 
traet with tho Scholaafcic metaphysica. The question ia : * What 
is man's first knowledge f In what part of the soul does it dwell? 
Andwhyis it ßo imperfcct at the beginning?" Epiatemon, the 
rßpJnefientative of Scliolastic loaruing^ aays : * That appeara to me 
to he very clearly esplained^ if we liken the Imagination of infanta 
to a iahtda rasa on which oiir ideas, which aro as it werö the living 
imago of objects, are to be painted, Our senses, the dia.positions of 
our mindT our teaehers and our intel Ilgen ee am tho dilTerent paintera 
wko call exßöuto thiö work, and tho&o arnorig them which are least 
fitted to succeed, begin it ; namely imperfect senses, blind instinct 
and foolish nnrses. At last comea the best of all, intelligenco ; and 
yet is it still neeesaary that it aliould scrve aii^ apprenticeship of 
several years and for aome time follow the exaniple of its teachers, 
befoT® it dar© rectify one of their errors* . . . It ig like a clever 
artist, called to put tho finishing toticheg to a pieturo sketehed by 
learners. Though he nse all his art, correcting gradually now one 
feature^ now another, and putting in all that has been omitted, 
there must 8 tili reraain great defects in it, because tho picturo waa 
hadly drawn at first, the ligures wer© ill-arranged and little atten- 
tion was given to proportion." Recherche d& Vh^iti par les Inmitires 
nu^ireUeSj (Ewvres Bescaries (ed. Consin), voh xL p. 345 ; ef, ibid* 
P* 375 * 'All truths follow from one another and ai^ united by 
a common bond ; the whole secret conaists in beginning with the 
first and most simplSj and rising gradually to tho most remote and 
moat coraplexp' See aleo Fmser's ed, of Locke's Essay ^ vol. L 
ProU^menaj p. ao. 



STATEMENT OP LEIBNLZ^S PHILOSO PHT I25 

were öntirely necessary ; Locke's imght hold if kaovrledge 
were merely contingenL But humaa koowledge is both j 
it includes both self-evident truths aud truths of f&cL 
A tru6 theory of knowledge must do equal justice to botli, 
It must have affinity with thö views both of Descartes 
and of Loekö, without altogether accepting either. 

Ldhnis^s Solution o/tfw Questim of Innak läeas and the 
Tabula Ma^a, 

Locke endeavoured to establish his empiricism as 
agaimt the position of De&cartes by denying that there 
are in the human mind any innate ideas, If there be 
HO innate ideaa, all our knowkdge must reach us ab 
extra^ through the senses. And accordingly the ouly 
true theory of knowledge must explain it a posteriori^ 
entirely from sense-experience. This was the eentrtify 
opposite of the Cartesian view that all our genuine 
knowledge comos from pure thought, in complete 
independence of the senses (which are bodily. and there- 
fore excluded from the sphere of thinking)^ and that the 
only true theory of knowledge must explain it a priori, 
m a logical deduction from self-evident innnte ideas, To 
Leibniz it seema that the conception of the human mind 
as a Monad leads to a theoiy of knowledge which har- 
monizes the other two, by combiniug in a new form the 
truth they each contain, and at the same time setting 
aside their orrors* As a Monad the soul of man is not^ 
as in Locke's view^ a purely passive tabula rasüj continually 
reeeiving externa! impressions. It is always an active 
force, and it ia it^lf the spontaneous sourco of all its 
ideas, L e. of the entit'ö sequence of iis experience, AU 
its ideas ai-e therefore innate, But none of its ideas is 
from the beginning clear and distinct, When they first 
appear they are confused and imperfecta The recognition 
of their self-evidence ia the result of a proc^^ a develop- 
ment from relative confusion to distinctness. But what 
Locke calls senaation is, aeeording to Leibniz^ confused 



126 



INTRODUCTION 



perception^ the indistinct representation of things extemal 
to the individual mind. Thus the self-evidence of uni- 
versal and necessary truths is a result of experience, 
though that experience is purely internal. And though 
all our ideas are iniiate, there are many which can never 
be redoced to the perfect ekainess and distinctneaa of 
self-eyident truth, but which we have nevertheless quite 
sufficient ground for recognizing as true. Turtherj though 
our experience is entirely internal, it is none the less 
objectively real, for it consists in a representation of the 
whole univei^e, in aecordance with the pre-estabHshed 
harmony between substances. Human knowledge is thus 
at once a priori imd a posierhri, innate and experiential \ 

^laiimty qf th& Disiinctim hetween Perc^tim €mä 
Apperception, 

The acceptance of this theory involves a change in the 
point of view held both by Descartes and by Locke. They 
both argue on the asaumption that pereeption and apper- 
ception are quite distinct from one another, Deacartea'a 
theory of innate ideas r€sts on bis doctrine that abaolute 
certainty belongs to self-^onscious thought alone, ex- 
cluding all other for ms of human experience as pheno- 
mena of body, which ia the eonUAÜJLLoT^ oppoaite of 

' * If all o\xT ideaa [comiaüfsances] are innate in ao far aa tliey are 
ideas disttinet in themselvesj tliey are all acquired in so far as they 
arie ideas diatinist for us/ BoütrouXj ed. of Noui^eaux Essais^ &;<3,, 
IntroductioHj 83. Cf, Latze, StreU^hriß, p* 13 : * In earlier timm 
people maüa fcoo free a us© of th© nam© of innate ideas ; hui now it 
f*e©ms to me that they haye fallen into an oppgsite error when they 
at once aet aside thi« notion, with a superficial depreciation of its 
^mewhat inappropriate name. I havo never been able to cönvinw 
myaelf that the logical and metaphysical principles regardiug the 
nature of thinga^ which are n€?cosßa ry to our thought, the aeathetic 
feelings and the consciousneaa of Obligation r^st upon anything 
elae than tho immediate depth of our spiritual nature, so that they, 
under the stimulaa of eipörience, come into our cönaciousness as 
original posse^sions of our nature, not as complete innate images, 
ftlwayB hovering in our consdousnos«), but as ao grounded in us that 
they indeed require the stitntiiua of ezpdri^nce^ but are ner^r giren 
to US by experience.' 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I27 



mind. Locka, on the other hand, denies the existence of 
innate ideas on the ground that childrenj savagea and 
idiotB do not consciously posaess tliem ; an argument 
which implies that we have an idea only when we are 
fully aware of it, that iß to say, that ideas exiat only in 
self-consciou.snes3 or apperception. Thus apperception 
(in the Leibnitian senae) is regarded by Descartes 
containing absolute, innate fii-st principles, from which 
particular truths may be deduced, while hy Locke it is 
held to give, not first principles, but simple ideas, which 
are the elements out of which knowledge is built» In 
both caaes it is apperception that is appealed to ; mere 
perception does not count \ 

Now the great central principle of the philosophy of 
Leibniz is the idealizing of all snbstancej by regarding it 
as throughout perceptive or representative, Apper- 
ception. feeling and bare perception (which is not 
necesssarily anything more than the niere possession of 
real (jualities) are not different in kind but merely in 

' Cf. Nouveam Essais^ bk, iL ch, i, 1 19 (E, aa6a ; v. 107) : * FkÜ- 
alethes [represöntative of Locke], That body is oxtended without 
having parts and tbtit a tbing thinks without being oonsebus 
[s'apsrceeoir] tbat it tbinka^ are two asserfcions wbich appear equally 
unintelligible," Theophtlus [reprefientative of Leibniz j. Forgive 
me^ sIr, but I must teil you tbat in your contention that tliere ta in 
the ßotil aothing of -wbich it ia not cooycious, thero ia & petitio prin- 
cipii, wbich ha3 already dominated onr fLrat disiciLsaion, It was 
tliere us^d for the overtbrow of innate ideas and trnihtä. If we 
were tö grant this priniiiplo, we sbould not merely find onrselves 
in eonflict witb e^tperience and reason, but we abould hav^i witbont 
any reuaon to give np onr opinion^ which I think I have inade anffl- 
ciently intelügible. But oor opponents, vory clever tbougb tbey 
are, have never produced any prpof of what tbey @o often and so 
oonBdently deelare rogarding this matter, ond be«ides it is tiasy to 
proye to them tbe opposite, tliat is to say, tbat it is not poasible we 
»hould alwaya deliberately nefleet on all our thoughts. Otberwise 
the rnind would make a reliexion upon oaeh refiexion ad inßnüum, 
witboTit ever being able to paas to a new tbougbt, For instancCi 
in being cons^^ious of some pre^ent feeling, I sbould alwaya have to 
think that I thmk of it^ and again to think that I think of think- 
ing of it and so mßnitum. But I mu^t surely com© to an end of 
i*eflecting npon all the»e reflexions, and there mugt, in ahortj be 
aome thought which we allow to pass withont tliinkitig of it j 
otherwiae wo should always dwell upon the sam© tbing," ' 



128 



iNTKODucrnoN 



degree* One reality pervades them all ; no one of them 
is separated from another by any impassable barrier, 
Body is confiised aoul ; aoul is ckar and diatinct body, 
S©lf-consciousnes3 is not a nnique certainty or reality, 
but a bigh degree of cleamess and distinetaess in tbat 
whicb is already real in lower forms» The seif may be 
exclusiYGj self-liniitedj individual ; but it is so only in 
Gommon witb every otbar substance. There is no snb- 
stance wbich is not potentially an Ego, a s^lf-conseious 
being. What Descartea and Locke both ignore is the 
internal movement, the becoming, the growth and 
development, whieh is of the essen ce of every substanee» 
For them a tbing, a mind^ an idea, a principle ia what 
it is, nnchangeably ; so that eitber, as in the ca^e of 
Descaiiea, the variety of real thought is contained, perfect 
and entire, within its unity, and is to bo set foi^th by pure 
sub-sumptioDj the lifting out of class from within class^ or, 
as in the case of Locke, the unity of real thought is a mere 
aggregate of its varieties, the elements remaining un- 
ehangeable into whateyer groups we may gather thenL 

Äs againd JDescartesj Leibni^ dmies the comphte Sepmntiön 
üf Matter and Mind, 

Aeeordingly, Leibniz brings against Descartes*s view of 
mind essen tially the same argument as he used against 
Descartes's yiew of matter. The Cartesian view of sub- 
stance as that which is in itself and is conceived through 
itself, without need of anything eise, resulted in the 
complete Separation of matter and mind, Leibniz, on 
the other band, unifies without absolutely identifyiug 
them, through his yiew of substance as that which is 
continually in process of perceiving or i-epresenting all 
things. Thus, against Descartes's yiew of matter as an 
Ludependent substance, Leibniz argues that a tnie 
doctrine of substance makes matter by itself an abstrac- 
tion, for it is really the confused perception which is 
potentially clear and distmct perception, apperception or 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPETY I29 

mind. And eimilarly, against the view of Descartes that 
miiid ia an independent substance, opposed to matter, 
Leibniz maintains that pure mind belongs to God alone, 
and that mind as we have it is inseparable from matter 
and is really nothing but matter i-aised to a higher power, 
confiised perception that has passed into greater clearness 
and distinctness» As among created aubatances there is 
no body witbont soiil, so there ia no bouI without body. 

In Opposition to Lochen he holds that tfw Mind alwai/s 
thinks* 

On the other hand^ as against Locke, Leibniz contends 
that the mind is never without thought. If mind is 
a tabula rasa^ receiviug all its impressioas from outside 
itself, a mind without thought is a perfectly natural 
eupposition. And a post^ori Locke holds that in dream- 
less sleep the mind exists without thinking. Its existence 
during such a sleep iSj he thinks, assured to us by our 
recollection afterwards of what took place in the mind 
before the sleep. Further, Locke maintaiua that, 
as body can exist without motion, mind can exist 
without thought K Kow the ground of this contention 
m anliest ly is that motion and rest are not relatively 
but absolutely diötinet from one another and, similarlyj 
that clear and distinct consciousness ia absolutely and 
not relatively different from unconsoiousness. When 
a body has no appartjnt motion, it is absolutely at re^t ; 
when a mind has no elear and distinct consciousness or 
apperception, it is absolutely without consciousness. 
To this the central principles of the philosophy of 
Leibniz are in complete Opposition \ White motion and 

^ Could this b« regarded a strictly logical deTelopment of one 
aide of DescÄrtes'a philosophy, tliua röveulingr Doacartös'B Jiiconsis- 
teiicy f Descartes would esay that, aa thinking 13 the esse nee of 
mind, mmd CÄimot exist without thought and yet it may exist 
without any specific thought. 

^ Cf. I^miveaux Essiii't^ bk. Ü. ch. | ro (E* 323 a ; t, lor) i 
* PhiJakthes. But I can not concöivc it to bo more neccsaary for the 
ioul alway* think than for the body to be alwaya in motion, the 

K 



T30 



Il^TRODUCTION 



rest are apparently absolute opposites, in reality^ wheii 
w© regard them not abstractly but concretely in tbeir 
relation to the rest of the world^ they can be understood 
only as relatively diatinct. For otherwiae^ tlie law of 
contüiuity, which is tbe basis of any workable inteipreta- 
tion of tlie universe, would be broken. In virtue of tbis 
]aw, thon, rest must he eonsjdt?red aa an inünitely sinall 
degree of niotion, and every body poasesses at leaat a 
tendemy to motion or a Virtual motion, ^ven if it bas no 
c^tualj apparent, complete niotion. In the same way, 
when mind is considered concretely, as a rrnl substanee 
related (tbrough its representation of them) to all the 
other substancea of which the umrerse is composed, the 
distinction between consciousness and unconsciousnesa is 
Seen to be relative. There can be no total absence of 
perception, for absence of pert^ption (representation) 
would mean absence of relation to the reat of tbe world, 
and thua a brdach of the law of continuity. Unconscious- 

Peremption of ideaa being to the soul what motion is ta tho body**' 
, , . Theophüus. " You are rigbt, sir- Activity is no tnore insepar- 
ftble from the soul ihan frotn the body, a atate of tho 30ul without 
thüught and absolute reat in tho body appearing to m© to be things 
which are equally contrary to iiattiro and of wliich thote ia no 
in »tan CO in tho World. A substance which is onco m activity will 
h& so alwaya, for all ita improssions persist and am merely miiced 
with other new onea* Wlion we atrike a body we aronse in it i^or 
rather detormine) an infinite number of vorticos af* in a liquid, for 
at bottom every solid hm some degrei.^ of fiuidity, and eTory fluid 
has some degree of solidity^ and tliere is no way of ©vor ontirely 
atopping thoöo internal vortices, Now we may beiiove that, if the 
body is never afc rest, neither will tho souJ, which corresponds to 
it, Over be without percöption." . , . PK " But this proposition — 
thö aoul ahvays thinks— is not evident by itsolf." 77*, ''I don't say 
it is. It requires a littio attention and roasoning to see it. Ordt- 
nary peoplo recognize it as little as they rocognizo the proi^suro of 
the atmosphere or the roundness of the earth." Ph, I doubt if 
I thought last night, This ia a qaostion of fact, to be sottled by 
ßonse-experience." Th. '^Wesettle it in the satne wny in which we 
provo that thero are imper<jeptible bodies and invisible motions, 
although somo poople regard these thinga aa absurd* In tlie aam© 
way there are pereeptions without much sharpneas^ which are not 
diatinct enough for us to bo conscion» of them or to remomber 
them ; but they mako themselves Jfinown by certain conaetiuöncea 
they^ve,"' 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I31 

ness or apparent absence of perception is then merely an 
infinitely small degree of perception, and every mind 
must possess at least Virtual thought or consciousness, 
a tendency to clear and distinct perception, even although 
it may actually appear to be empty of all thought \ The 
mind is not like a block of veinless marble, from which 
the sculptor may take what figure he pleases. It has 
veins which give the outline of the statue that is to come 
forth from it ^ In other words, it is the nature of the 
mind to *look before and after,' Leibniz regards Iiis 
view as expressing the truth that underlies the Piatonic 
doctrine of reminiscence. The present perceptions of the 
mind may be regarded as recoUections of the past, inas- 
much as they were already virtually contained in these 
past perceptions and are developed from them — are, 
indeed, these past perceptions grown more distinct. And 
again, the present perceptions of the mind are forecasts 
or prophecies of the future, since all its future perceptions 
are confusedly wrapped up in its present states. 

The Petites Perceptions, 
Thus in the Monadology^, Leibniz maintains the 
existence of unconscious perceptions, on the ground 
that perception can only proceed from perception, and 
accordingly that in the passage from the unconsciousness 
of a swoon or a deep sleep to füll waking consciousness 
there must be an infinite series of perceptions gradually 
rising in degree from infinitely little perceptions, which 
are apparently indistinguishable from absence of percep- 
tion, upwards to the fuller perceptions of actual waking 
life. These little perceptions (petites perceptions, confused 
perceptions, or, as we might now call them, sub-conscious 
thoughts or mental activities) express the continuity of 

* Cf. Locke, Essay, Fraser's ed., vol. i. p. 80 note. 

* New Essays, Introduction, p. 367. Cf. Locke, Essay, Fr&BeT*B ed., 
voL i. p. 48 note, and p. 60 note. 

' §§ ai and 23. 



13^ 



INTBODUCTION 



all souls, from the soul of the pebble to tüat of the 

angel, as Leibniz puta it in his correspondence with' 
J, Bemouilli^ The characteristics of these petites 
pGrc^timSj which prevent us from being clearl^ aware of 
thenij are, he teils m% their smalbiess, their nambery 
or tbeir ijidlvidiial mdistinctness. And by means of 
them be explains such psychological phenomena as our 
eeasing to be aware of the sound of a mill or a waterfall 
when we hare bticome aceustomed to it. The perceptiona 
are still there, but * having lost the attrajctions of novelty^ 
they are not etroBg enough to claim cur attention and 
memory, which are directed to more interosting objecta* 
For all attention requires memory ; and often, when we 
are not, so to speak, warned and directed to take notice 
of certain of our own present perceptions, we Jet them 
pass without reflexioh, and even without observing 
them ; but if some one immediately afterward s draws our 
attention to them, and spealfB to us, for instancej of some 
noise tbat has just been heardj we recall it to oursei vea 
and perceive that a moment ago we had some conecions- 
ness of it» Thus there were perceptions of which we. 
were not aware at the time^ apperception arising in this 
caae only from our attention having been drawn to them 
after some interval, however small \' The petites perccp- 
^ G. Math. ÜL 560. 

* New Essay»^ Introduction, 370. Cf. bL ii* ch. g, | i (E. »33 a ; 
G. V. 121) : *We ours^lvös have also petii^ percepHons^ of whieh we 
tkre not conacious in our present Zitate. It !s true that we might 
quite well h& conscious of them and rcsflect upon thom, w^rö we 
not preTented by their tDultitude, which disti-acts oiir mlnd^ or if 
they were not effaeed or rather obscured by greater ones. . . , L 
gheald prefer to diatin^ulsh between perc^ti<m and appercepiion» 
For instance, the pereeption of light and colour, of which we have 
apperception [are couacious] i» made up of a quantity ef p&tiiss 
percepliomi of which wo have no apperceptioa [are not üoifscious] j 
and a nolse, of which we have pereeption but of which we tak© 
HO notice, becomea apperci-ptihk by a small addition or increaae. 
For if what preeedes had no efiect upon the soul, thia little addition 
would havo noue either, and no more wouM the whole have any/ 

^ New Essaysj Introductioii, P- 37i« Ot N€^^^ve{^^^x EssaiSj bk, ii, 
ch, I, § II t E. 2^24 a ; Q. v. 103) : * We think of a nnmbör of things 
at ane>Q| but take notice only of the thoughta which are moat 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHT I33 



tionSf accordingly, are merely the eonfused perceptions of 
tlie self-conscious Monad, and tbeir function and vahie in 
psychology ma,y be estimated by reference to the im- 
portance of eonfused perceptdon in Leibniz's general 
doctiiiie of subatance* However great may be tbeir 
degree of confusion, and however little we may be 
conscious of tbem individually or collectively, tbey are 
fltill perceptiona, one in kind witb tbe bigbeat, most 
distinot appereeption or self-conaciousness. Tho reaJm of 
fielf-consciousnesB inclndes the whole of substanüe ; it ia 
by no means limited to man and spiiits higher tban man. 
But in the infinite variety of substances, self-conacionsness 
eEists in an infinite variety of degroes ; and tbere are 
many substancea in whicb its degree ia infinitely little, 
that i3 to say, less than any degree tbat can be a^signed 
or named. 

Leihnk'sThmry af Knowledge in relation tö the main 
I^rtnciples of Ms l^Mlosophy, 

Thns Leibniz's tbeory of knowledge is simply tbe 
epistemological escpression of the main principles of bis 

dlstinct ; and matters can not be otherwis«, for if wö were to take 
Botice of all, wo should have to tbink att^ntively of an infinity 
of thinga ftt once, all of whieh we foel and all of which make 
impreasion on our aensea. I mj even more ; something from all 
onr paat tliougbts remnina, and nono eati over bö ontirely effaced. 
I?öw when we ^leep withont dreaming, a.nd wliön wö aro sttmned 
by Eomo blow, fall, illness, or other accident, there appears in us 
an inflnito nümbor of little confustsd feeiing!^ iiiid doatli itaolf oaii 
produro no other ©ffect on the souIb of animala, whieh must 
without doubt, floonor or later, regain diatinct pereeptioDSy for 
eTerything in nature happens in an ordörly way* , . . Eacli sout 
ret^iii« all its pr&eeding impresBiona, and cannot aplit itaelf np. 
. . * In each aubstancc the future has a [lerfect eonnexion with the 
I paat^ This is what conatitutüs the identity of thö individuaL 
Yet niemory is not neeea^ry nor eyen alwaya poaäible, bocause 
of the multitude of prenent and past impreaaions, whieh come 
together in our present thoughta, for I do not belle yo that ther© 
are in man any thoughti^ whieh have not at Jeaafc &ome eonfused 
efieet, or whieh do not leavo sorac vestige to be combined with 
later thoughta. We can certainly forgot things \ but we miglit 
äIäo reeolloct them after a long interval, if only we were reminded 
of them in the right way.' 



INTHODUCnON 



phOosophy- All truth is innatej virtually if not actually. 
Bot there are two kinds of truth. Eternal and neceasary 
truth has its ground in the principlö of contradiction. 
It ia either seK-eTident or the resült of strict demonstra- 
tion from the seif evident* * Our mind is the souree of 
necessary truths^ and however manj particular experiences 
we may have of a universal truth, we cannot assuve our- 
Belves of it for ever by induciion without knowing ita 
necessifcy through reason, , , » The semea may suggest, 
Bupport, and confirm these truths, but cannot demon- 
atrate their infaUible and perpetual certainty On the 
other hand, truth of faet or contingent truth, while 
equally innate^ is not demonatrable tiiroügh the principle 
of contradiction, but through that of sufficient reason \ 
It is obtained by induetion rather than demonstration, 
It is truth of experience, or perueption which we cannot 
analyze into perfect diatinctness and self-evidonce, becauae 
of the infinite complexity of its relations to the System of 

' Nouj:eaux. Essais ^ hk. L eh. i, | 5 (E. 209 b ; G. v. 76, 77). 

^ Thus Leibniz rejecta the view of Li>cke that our real know- 
ledge, ßs dvstinct fi^om meiely probable knowletige, ^(jxtends as 
far na the prüsent testmiony of utir äcnäes, employed abmit par- 
ticular objects that do then affect them, aod no farther/ (Essay j 
hk. iv. ch. II, § 9; Fmser's ed., voU ii, p. 332.) Cf. the correspondiug 
paüaage in tho Nouveaiix E&sais {H, 378 b ; G, 426) : 'Yet I tJiink 
tliat w© might e5;teiid the names of kiiowl«dgeand certaintyto thingg 
flther than actual seusationSj for ck>ariie!SSi and piain neäs [evidm^] 
i^xt^nd fuvtherj and I regard them as a. kind of eertainty : and it 
wouhi without donbt be an abanrdity seriouäly to doiibt whether 
thet-e are mtm in tlio world, wh©n wg do not see any. To doubt 
H^sriously is to doubt practically, and wo might take certaitity 
a knowledge of truth whioh w© caiinot doubt practically withont 
inadnesä ; and semetimeä wü tako ce^rtainty in a still more general 
«enso and apply it to casea in which we cannot doubt without 
doaerving to bö groatly blamed. But eiHäence would bö a lüminouB 
c©rtamt7, that is to aay, a certainty such that, because of tha 
connexion we se© botwecm the ideaa, we have no doubt whatevet. 
According to thia döfinition of cortainty^ we are certain that 
Constantiitopl© ia in the World, that Constantine^ Alexander the 
Great, aud JuHua Ca©sar have existed. It ia truo that boto© 
peasant of the Ardeunea might jnatly dünbt these things, from 
lack of Information j but a man of lettera and of th© world could 
not do without great mental derangom^Mit/ Cf. also Löckens 
Emtjft bk. ü. ch, aij § 75 (Fräser 'a ed., voh L p. 373). 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZ'S PHILOSOPHY I35 

things. This infinitely complex mass of relations, which 
it is impossible for us to reduce to perfect order and 
simplicity, is our confused perception. Confused percep- 
tion is, then, the representation in us not of our own 
nature, but of the system of things other than ourselves, 
that is to say, the other Monads as they are related to us. 
But distinct perception is the representation or perception 
of our own nature, of that which is in ourselves, and it is 
at the same time the evolving of some of our confused 
perceptions into cleamess ; it is not something quite 
separate from our confused perception. Thus we rise to 
a knowledge of ourselves through our knowledge of 
extemal things \ Self-consciousness implies the con- 
sciousness of objects; apperception is, indeed, the very 
fiower of perception, the beauty to produce which per- 
ception, in all its degrees, is living and growing. In 
experience or confused thought, rightly interpreted, there 
is the basis of distinct, rational knowledge, Sense, 
experience, imagination, must not be derided as fiction- 
makers by the intellect which they have nourished 

The Meanmg which Leibniz attaches to ^Perception' or 
^Representation,' How does he endeavour to avoid an 
endless Belativity? 

Something reniains to be said as to the meaning of this 
'perception,' * representation,' or * expression,' which is 
the key-word to Leibniz's theory of knowledge. There i% 
a streng Suggestion of petitio principii about it. What 
exactly does it mean? What is perceived, represented, 
expressed? And what does the perception, representation, 
expression consist in ? If the essence of every real sub- 

^ Cf. NouveaiMc Essais, bk. ii. ch. 21, § 73 (E. 269 b ; G. v. 197) : 
* The senses furnish us with material for reflexion, and we sbould 
never even think of thought, if we did not think of something 
eise, that is to say, of the particular things with which the senses 
furnish us. And I am persuaded that souls and created spirits are 
never without organs and never without sensations, as they cannot 
reason without Symbols.* 

' See Appendix D, p. ao6. 



136 



INTRODÜCTION 



stanee is to perceiy©, represent, or exprese ©rery othör, we 
Beem to have come upon ihe doctrine of the rektivity of 
human knowledge in its worst form, It seems aa if 
knowledg© must he compared to the Hf e of those unhappy 
islanders * who earn a precarious Uvelihood hy taking in 
one another^s washing/ 

Äs to the meaning of the terms, Leibniz says that * one 
thing expresses another (in my sense) wben there ia 
a eonstant and regulär [re^te'J relation between what can 
be Said of the one and what can be mid of the other, It 
is thus that a protection in pei-spective expresses the 
original fignre^' Äny two things, then, are related to 
one another as perceiver and perceived, when the predi- 
cates er qualities of the one (whatever these predicates or 
qualities may be) always vary concomitantly with the 
predicates or qnaüti^ of the other. Perception, repre- 
sentation, or expression is then a relation of barmony (or 
development according fco some law or principle) between 
the qualities of individual substances. But tbese qualities 
are tbemselves perceptiona. What, then, is the ultimate 
reality of which they are all representations ? Leibniz'a 
ans wer is that the ultimate reality is the nature of God or 
the ideas of God as an intuitive Knower. God alone has 
a knowledge which is entirely adeqnate, perfeetly realized ; 
in Him the universe is transparent through and tbrough. 
There is no reality beyond tbought, to which thought 
must correspond. Thought caunot in any way represent 
that which is entirely other than itself, that which is 
separated from it * by the whole diameter of being ^ (or by 
an even greater distance if that were possible). For no 
sign can be entirely cut off from the thing signified. Sign 
and thing signiiied niüst have some gfound of unity in 
virtue of which this relation between them is possible. 

^ Läire ä Amauid (1687) (ß. ii, 11 3) : ' Exprasaion is COHUUQII to 
all soul-prmciples Ifonum'], It ig a genus^ of which Datuu-al per- 
ception, animal feeling and intellectuaL knowlodge a^ö speCiies/ 
Cf. thLs Introductioiij Furt iii. p» i la, noti; 3. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 137 

Thus pure thought cannot symbolize, iiepresentj or per- 
ceive that which is absolutely not-thought, Confused 
thought is the symbol both of other confused thought and 
of clear and dlstinct thoughi Accordingly, aa betwöen 
confused thoughts the relation of sign and thing signified 
is such that that which is now regarded as sign may from 
another point of view be taken ns the thing sigiiifiedt and 
Tice versa. KeTertheless it is evident that the clearer 
and more distinct of any two corresponding perceptiona 
will natnrally be regarded as the thing signified hy the 
more confused perception, that is to say^ the thing which 
the more confused perception is trying to express, but is 
unable to express adequately* And thua the ultimate 
* thing signified/ the fundamental reality, which all other 
perceptions in various degrees ^jrmbolize or represent, 
must be perfectly clear and distinct thought, or, in other 
words, the thought of God. So also God is First Cause as 
well as Ultimate BeaKty, For we have already seen ^ that 
cause always reason or explanation, the relatively clear 
and distinct perception as against the corresponding con- 
fused perceptionj which is the effect. Accordingly, as the 
nature of God is absolutely clear and distinct perception, 
He must be the Ultimate Cause of all things ^ 

(Ö) ETHICS, 

Degrees of Äp2>et4tion in the Monads — Impulsej Instimtm 
Desire, Wül^ 

Every Monad has appetition as well as perception. 
Appetition is the principle of change in the Monad, that 

^ pp. io6j 107, 

^ Thia saems fco imply that God is the uJtimjifcö reality of whom 
all iudividuül creattid tliings aro modes or manffestationis. But 
Leibniz endeavours fco avoid auch a coucluaion aa this, hy maiü' 
t^aining that tho öbsohücss of tbings are independent ideas in the 
mind and understanditig of God, eteriial trutlia wb<s&e natur© k 
not subject to His TvilL It; hardly necessary to poiufc out how 
unaatisfaetory ia this ^^xplanation ; but it is manifest that tht* 
Weakaösa of lÄibniz's theory at thia poiöt is the inovitabl© conse- 
quence of hm attempt to work with two first principi^a, tho 
mutuftl relatioos of which hö has not thoroughly tliought 011t* 



138 lOTEODUCTION 

in virtue of whieh thö MoDad passes from one perception 
to another, Like perception it bas an infinite seriea of 
degi-ees ; bnt three main varioties of it may be noted, 
corresponding to the tbree main varieties of perception. 
Tbus tbe appetition of tbe lowest ckss of Monads {tbe 
bare Monads) is mere tinconscious impulse or tendency, 
a Potential blind force tendiug to become actnal. It ia 
tbe particular appetition or ehange of perception (repre- 
sentation) wbich bas its source or gronnd in unconscions 
parceptions. This bare impulse may be compared to a 
watcb-spring wound np, whicb tends to nnwind ItseK ^ ; 
it is a tendency such as tbat of * the stone whicb goes by 
the most direct bnt not always the best way towarda the 
centre of the eartb^* The appetition of animal 8oul3 is 
instin ctive appetite or desire, whicb proceeds from feeling 
or conscioua, yet relatively confused, perceptiona, Like 
the appetition of the bare Monads, it seeka immediate 
present satisfiaetion, baving notbing to guido it but the 
eonsciousne&s and memory of tbe animal soub Finally, 
tbe appetition of rational aoula is self-conscious desire or 
willj a principle of change wliose basis is appereeption or 
clear and diatinct rational knowledge ®. Appetition, like 
perception, is one and the same tbrougbout all its degrees 
and varietiea, from bare forco to tlie freest, most rational 
Yolition. And in the nature of man we find all degi^ees 
of it ; he is not a purely rational will, but has instinctive 
impulses and passions, whicb belong to the middle cliiaa 
of appetitions, and physical powers which belong to the 

^ Nouveattx ^ssöts, bk- Ii* ch. ao, | 6 (E. 248 b j v. 15a, 153). 

* Ibid. hin. ii. eh. ar, § 36 (E. 259 a ; Q, v* 175), 

» et ibid, bk. ii «h. aij § 42 (E. 261 b; G. V. iBo) : ' There are 
unfolt [ittmisiW^] inclinationa, of vvbicli we bftvo no oonsciousnesB 
[apperception] ; tLere are feit [sieti.^fi'fe] incliiiEttiong, who&e existena^ 
and obj^^ct yve know, but -which are formed wjfbout <mr being 
aw&re of it, and theöo are confused incli tnitionfi, which we Attribute 
to the body, altbough there nlwayj? in the mind something cor- 
responding to them ; and üiially, thore are distincfc iaclinations 
which roflson givea us, and of whoee forcö and fqrmatioii we are 
awaro/ 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I39 

lowest class. As on the cognitive, so on the practical side 
of his nature, the law of continuity holds. 

Feeling, Pkasure and Pain. * Semi-pains ' and 
* Semi-pleasures,' 

The Chief features of Leibniz's ethics are fixed by these 
general considerations. In applying them it is necessary 
for US, who have become familiär with post-Kantian 
distinctions, to remember that the usual threefold 
division of mental elements into Cognition, feeling, and 
will, is not of older date than the age of Kousseau ^, and 
accordingly that Leibniz still works with the Aristotelian 
twofold division of the elements into theoretical and 
practical. Thus the * appetition ' of Leibniz covers both 
feeling and will (in our sense of the terms), as well as the 
lower forms of both, which are conscious and unconscious 
forces more or less restrained from füll activity, that is 
to say, more or less potential or Virtual. Accordingly, as 
appetition and perception always accompany one another, 
Leibniz maintains that there is no perception absolutely 
colourless and entirely unchanging or at rest. Every 
perception has an element of feeling and activity, although 
the degree of it may be infinitely small. If we can be 
pardoned the anachronism of using a phrase which Lotze 
has made familiär, we may say that every perception has 
a * value ' or ' worth ' ; but it must not be forgotten that 
for Leibniz this value is not anything absolute or pre- 
eminently real, but merely the unrealized potentiality of 
cleamess and distinctness in the perception^. 

Speaking then of human nature, which includes all 
the varieties of perception and appetition, Leibniz says 
that * there are no perceptions which are entirely indifferent 
to US, but when their effect is not observable we can call 
them indifferent ; for pleasure and pain seem to consist in 

* It is usually attributed to Tetens {circa 1750). But it first 
comes into prominence through Kant. 

^ Cf. Lotze, Microcosmus, bk. iii. ch. 4, § 4 (Eng. Tr., vol. i. p. 366). 



140 



INTRODUCiaON 



an obsenrable help or hindrance ^/ This, he -wams us, is 
not to be taken as a strict definition of pleaaure and pain^ 
for he doea not think it possible to give such a definition, 
But bis account of these feelings seema to foUow directly 
from bis general point of view, Pain is easentially a 
hindrance or restraining of a Monad'a appetition, wbü© 
pleasure is its free action^, They are tbua enturely 
relative to one another. And wbüe we speak of the 
hindrance or freedom of appetition as pain or pleasure, 
only when tbe appetition bas reacbed the degree of eon- 
öcionsnesa, yet consciouanesa is separated from unconscious- 
ness by no bard and fast line^ and consequeutly appetitions 
of a lower degree may be regarded as miiiutely painful or 
pleasant, according as they are retarded or advanced, Tbus 
Leibniz speaka of ^ semi-pains ' and ' seml-pleasur^s ' or 
* little imperceptible [^inaperc^tihles] pains and pleasure«,' 
correBponding to the petites percßptmis in the theory of 
knowledge. Like tbe petites percepttons these semi-pains 
and senii-pleasures may, by growing in individual inten- 
sity or by combining into one totality, become observable 
in consciousness as complete paina and pleaaures". No 
Soul can ever be absolutely at rest^ abaolutely witbout 
appetition* And no created soul can be purely active, 
with a perfect freedom, Thus every soul has continual 
appetition^ whieh is partly free and partly restrained, 
That is to say, every soul bas €ontinually pleasure and 
pain in some degree* 

Äccordingly Leibniz takea great intereat in tbe *nn- 
easiness' in^ wbich Locke finds tbe first movings of 

^ Nmveaux Esaats^ bk, ii. ch. aOj § i (E. 346 I» ; 149}. €f. 

Locke's Efi^aif voorrespondiDg place), with note in Friiser'a ed,, toL i* 

^ Cf. Nommux K^aiSj bk. ii. ch. aij | 42 (E. 261 b } G. v. 180) : ■ I 
thiük thßt fundameatully pkasur© ia a fe«liiig of perfeKtion, and 
pain a feeling of Imperfe^stion, provlded the feeling ia sufficiently 
marked for us to be defiuitely conaciona of it Is'en ap^cemir]/ Ct 
De tribus juris nat^irae ßt genimm gradtbm i^Mollat, p, ai); *Pl©aanre 
1b nothing eise than the sense of increasing perfection.' 

^ See Nomtiaxix Essais fhk. ii. eh* ao, § 6 (E, 248 a ; t* 151, rsa). 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I41 



desire ^ This uneasiness is not exactly pleaaure or pain, 
bat a vague feeling of diseomfort or restlessness, that 
tencl8 to pasa into more detinite desire and so to produee 
action. It is ihm for Leibnijz; the confused perception 
and undeveloped striving or appetition out of which, by 
a process of evolution, clear and distinct perception and 
free volition arise. In so far as this evolution is re* 
strainedj we suffer pain : in so far as it proceeds smoothly 
without impediinerit, we enjoy pleasura Thus eveiy soul 
instin ctively aeeks its own pleasure : it follows the line 
of least reäistiinee. This it does in virtue of its own 
nature, which is to unfold itself spontaneously from 
within, its present state üowing entirely from its past 
and holding a prophecy of its futnre* Soul-activity is 
pleasure, soul- res traint is pain ; and it is of the essence 
of the soul to be active, for every simple substance is 
priniarily a force, 

Freeäomf Libeti^ of Indiffermce^ and the ' WiU tö wÜV 

From this Leibniz's view of freedom directly follows* 
There can be no such thing as a liberty of indifiference^ 
an absolutely undetermined choice ; for that would imply 
discontinuity in the life of the soul. An absolutely un- 
determined choice can only mean that the state of the 
soul when it makes the choice is not an orderly unfolding 
of the State of the soul preceding the choice, but is a 
beginning of action de mm. And this is contrary to tho 

* JVowwaujc Essats, bk. ii. ch. so, § 6 (E, 347 ; G. 150), Cf* 
eb. ar, § 36 (E* 258 b ; G. v. 174) ; * If yon eonaider your ^^wn- 
eaaiiiesa " aa a real diseomfort [tJ^amr]^ I do not admi t that in this 
sense it the sol© goad to action. Most frequently tbe goad ia 
thoae little unfelt [_iiiseniäbk^ perception^?! which w© miglit call im- 
fffirceptible linaptfrc^tMe] pains, wcns it not that the notion of pain 
impH«s apperc^tifm. TLtists llttle itn pulse« consist in the contLnual 
freeing of oui'aelves from httJo hindrimeos, at whioh our nature 
worka without thinkiiig abotit it. In thia really con^ista that un- 
eßäineaSf which we ioel without knowing it, which maket^ us act In 
passion ua well aa when we appear most tranquD^ for we are iiever 
without some aetivity und motionj which comes morcly from this, 
that nature is alwaya workmg ao to put haraelf moi% at 



132 



INTEODÜCmON 



all QoulSf from tlie soul of the pebble to iliat of th@ 
angel, as Leibniz puts it in hm correspondence with' 
J, Bemouilli\ The characteristics of these petites 
perceptimSf which prevent ns from bemg clearly aware of 
them, are, he teils us^ their smallnesa, their number, 
or theh* individual indistincttioaö. And by means of 
them he explains such psychological phenomena as our 
eeasing to be aware of the sotind of a mill or a waterfall 
when we have becomo accustomed to it. The perceptipns 
are still there, but 'having loat tbe attractions of noTeltj, 
they are not strong enough to daim our attention and 
memory, which aro directed to more interesting objecta 
For all attention requires luemory ; and often, when we 
are not, so to speak, warned and directed to take notice 
of certain of our own present perceptions, we let them 
pass without reflexiohj and even without observing 
them ; hui if some one nnmediately afterwards dmws our 
attention to them, and speaks to us, for instance^ of some 
noise tbat haa just been beard, we recall it to ourselves 
and perceive that a moment ago we had some eonseious^ 
nesB of it Thus there wer© perceptions of which we 
were not aware at the time, apperception arising in this 
case only from our attention baTing been drawn to them 
after some interval, however small The pettte^ percep- 
' O. Math. HL 560. 

' New EssaySi Introduetion, p. 370* Cf, hk. ü, ch. 9, | i (E, 333 & ; 

V. 121 1 r * We oursei veg have also petiieii perci^tionsj of which we 
are 13 ot conacious in our present st^te,. Ii ia tniö ttat we mighi 
quitö Wöll he cotifieioua of them Bjxd reflect upon them^^ wer© we 
not prevejited hy their inuUitudej which distraets our mind, or if 
they wore not effiicod or mth©r ohaoured by greater onm. , . . I 
shoi^ld prefer to distinguish between p&rc^tion and apperceptiofu 
For inatanco, the Peremption of light and eolour, of which we hfcve 
apperception [are con&eioüs] is made up of a quantity of päitax 
perc^iimSy of which we have no apperception [are not con*sciou9] ; 
and a noiBC^ of whi^h we liave pcrception but of which we take 
no notice, be<^onies appercepüble by a small addition or incraose, 
For if whafc precedes had no effect upon the «oul, this litt Je addition 
wowJd have none either, and no more would tho whole have any/ 

^ New EsmySf Introduction, p, 371, Cf. Nau^eawx: EssaU^ bk. ii* 
ch, I, S II :.E, 2S4 a ; G. v. 103) : * Wo think of a number of Oiinga 
at once, bnt we take notice only of the thoughts whiiih are moät 



STATEMEOT OF LEIENIz's PHILOSOPHY I33 



tionSf aecordingly, are merely the confiiBed perceptions of 
the self-conseioua Monad, and their funetaon and value in 
psychology may be estimated hy reference to the im- 
portanee of eonfiised perception in Leibniz's general 
doctrine of substance* However great may be their 
deguee of confusion^ and however Uttle wo may be 
conscious of them infiividiially or collectiTely, they are 
still perceptiona, one in kind with the highest, most 
diatinot apperception ot self-conseiousness. The realm of 
self-consciousness i Heindes the whole of snbstanüo ; it is 
by no moans limited to man and spirits higher than man* 
But in the infinite varie ty of snbstanceSj ©elf-consciousnesB 
©xists in an infinite varie ty of degi-ees ; and there are 
many anbstances in whicli its degree iä infinitely little, 
tbat 13 to say, less than any degree tbat can be asaigned 
or named. 

Leihniä's Theory of Knowledge in reluihn to the main 
Frimipks ofhis FMlm(ypky. 
Thu3 Leibniz's theory of knowledge is simply the 
epigtemologieal expression of the main principless of bis 

distinct ; and matters can not be otherwis^, for if we were lo tako 
Botict) of all, wti should Jiavö to think atk'ntively of im iüfiaity 
of thinga at oTice, all of whidi we foel and all of which make 
impreasion on our sense^. I say even more : something from all 
ourpaab tlioughtä remainaj and none ean ever bo eßti^ely effacied. 
Nöw whon we fileep without dreaming^ and when we are stunned 
by BOino blow, fall, ilhiess, or other aceidcnt, there ftppears in us 
an in&nite mimber of Uttle confUEiöd foi^lingä^ and doath itsGlf can 
produce no other effect on tlie soula of aniraala, which must 
without doubtj sooner or later, regaia dijstmct perception 9j for 
everything in nature happena in an orderly way. , . , EAch &oul 
retains all its preceding impressiona, and cannot split itgelf up. 
- , , In euch substance the future has a porfoct coniiexion with the 
past. This is what constitutes the identity of tho individuaL 
Yefc mcmory lä not neceasary nor even alwaya posaible, becauaa 
of tho multitude of pro^ent and fiast impre^sionaT which come 
together in our preaent thoughta, for I do not belieye that there 
are in man any felioughts which have not at leaat some confused 
effect, or whi<;h do not leave somo vestige to be Combi ned with 
later thonghts. We can oertainly forgot things ; but wo might 
also recolloet thom aftor a long int^rval^ if only we were reminded 
of them in the right way*' 



144 



lim^ODTTCnON 



do not at the time deliberately coutemplate that they 
shall af terwards have thia effect \ 

Moral and metapkifsical Nece^sityu 

On the other band, Yolition is not absolutely necea- 
sitated as the syatem of Spiiioza requires. Will is not 
to be idenüfied with the abstract und erstand in g, whose 
prindple is that of contradiction. Will does not invari- 

* €f. NoHveaux: Essais, bk. ii, ai, 5 »3 (E» 255 b ; Ö. 167) : 
* We do not wiU k> will, but we will to do, and if wb willed to 
willj we shnuld will to will to %vill and that would go on 
ir{ßjntum. Yet we must not overlook the fact that by volimtary 
actiona we often contribute indirectly to other voliintary actiouai, 
and though we eannot will what wo will, as we cannot «ven judge 
what we will, we may neverthelesB so act beforehand that when 
the timo comes wo may judge or wül that which we would wHh 
to be ftble to will or judge to-day. We deTote ourselvea to the 
people, the kind of reading, tho oonditions generaUy that are 
favourable to a certain aide, we ^ive no heed to what coine^j from 
tlio oppoEäite side, and by these and many other directions which 
we give to our minds, u^iually wilhout definite Intention and 
withont thinking of it, we aueceed in deceiving onraelves or at 
Isaat in ch an ging ouiselves, becoming convertä or porrerts, according 
to the Gxperiöucoa we have liad-' 

There is an intere^ting sviggestion of the views of Leibniz in 
Montaigne'8 Essais^ bk. ii* ch. 14. Leibniz may quite well have 
read it, vlt is a pleasant fancy/ &aya Montaigne, *t0 think of 
a inind esaetly halaneed between Iwo liko desires. For it is 
indubitable that it will never come to a decision, inaamuüh as 
determination and clioicö Lmply inequality of value ; and if we 
Bhonld be set between the wine and th© bacon, with an cqual 
desiro to drink and to eat^ therö is doubtleag nothing for it but 
to die of thirst and hunger. To provide agahist anything ao 
iuconveiiient a& this, the Stoica, w^hen they wero asiked how otir 
aoul comea to mak© eholce between two indifferent things, so that 
out i>f a large number of erowns we take one ratlier thati an other, 
though they ai^ all alike and there ii* no reason which disposes 
nsä to a preferonce— the StoicH reply that thU motion of the aoul 
ia extrnordinary and exceptional, ariaing in us from a strangoi 
aecidental and fortujtoua impul&e, It eeema to nie they might 
rather have eaid that not hing comea before us in which thore ia not 
some differenco, however alight ; and that, to aight or to' toueh, 
there ia alway& sonie preference which tempts and drawa na, 
though it be imp^arccptibly : juat aa if we auppoae a piece of 
twine equally atrong thronghoutT it ia utterly impoasible that it 
should ever break, For in what paii of it is the break ing to begin, 
th© liaw to appear ? And for it to break in ©very piirt at once is 
againat all nature.' Cf. New E$sai/3j Introduction, 372. 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I45 

ably act from a reason the opposite of which is self- 
contradictory : it frequently acts from a sufficient reason, 
that is to say, from an inclining or probable reason. We 
do not act merely because we must, because the eternal 
nature of things makes it absolutely impossible to do 
otherwise. We act towards an end or ideal which is 
not a mere fiction of our own Imagination, but a recogni- 
tion of the fitness of things, a more or less clear perception 
of the best among various possible courses of action. Our 
will is thus determined by a moral, iiot a metaphysical 
necessity, by the inclination which arises from its re- 
cognition of the best, however perfect or imperfect 
that recognition may be. Our will (being our conscious 
appetition) moves in accordance with our ideals ; f or 
these ideals are nothing but our perceptions, the potenti- 
allties of our nature, and not merely of our own nature, 
but of the nature of all things, since our perceptions are 
representations of the whole universe. 

Freedom is Spontaneity + Intelligence, 

Accordingly Leibniz, following Aristotle, regards free- 
dom as consisting essentially in spontaneity and intelli- 
gence. But intelligence is not to be interpreted merely 
• as the abstract understanding of pure self-consciousness : 
it includes every degree of perception or representation. 
There is thus an infinite variety of degrees in freedom, 
and no actual concreto substance is subject to an abso- 
lutely pure necessity, that is, to a necessity which is other 
than an infinitely small degree of freedom. And as all 
Monads alike have spontaneity (for they unfold the whole 
of their lifo from within themselves), the degree of freedom 
belonging to any Monad depends on the degree of its 
intelligence, that is to say, on the degree of clearness 
and distinctness of its perceptions. Similarly in human 
beings, an action is free in propoition to the cleamess 
and distinctness of the reasons which determine it. Thus 
a capricious or wilful action, far from indicating any 

L 



146 



INTEODUCnON 



special freedom of will, is rather lacking in freedom, 
since its determining reason is so obscurö or eonfused 
that it is hardly possible to describe it, Iis obseurity 
leadB people to oyerlook it and to fancy that the action 
is entirely mthout roason, No human action is unde- 
termined, as none is absolutely necessitated ; hui the 
highest freedom accompanies the most perfect knowiedge, 
and God is the freest of beLags, not because H© can do 
whatever He pleases, nor because He always aets spon- 
taneously, from tho necessity of His own nature, but 
because every act of His is determined by infinite wisdom 
to the best possible ends* 

Good and Mml, The End of CondtKt 

80 also good and evil ar© relative terms» Aotions are 
good in so far as they are determined by elear and distinct 
perceptions, evil in so far as their determining- reasons 
are eonfused* As error is eonfused perception and is thus 
imperfect truth, so sin is the action or appetition which 
flows from eonfused perception, and is thus impeifect 
righteousness. Now sinee it is of the essence of the soul 
to be continually active, since its activity is more free 
.the clearer and more distinct are its perceptionSy and 
since pleasnre consists in the freedom of its activity, the 
end of conduct is the highest degree of free<loni, which is 
at onee the highest degree of pleasure or felicity and the 
highest degree of perception or knowledge. Every soul 
more or less blindly seeka pleaaure ; but the blinder it is 
the more does it tend to seek satisf action in present, 
momentary pleasure, Its blindness or confuaednßss of 
perception means that it does not think the matter out, 
that it does not take into account th© deeper nature and 
eonnexions of things, and thus fails to find the best way 
to freedom, felicity, wisdom. The soul instinctively tries 
to take the shortest way to happiness ; but the way that 
is reaUy shortest is apt to appear to purblind souls a 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIZ'S PHILOSOPH Y I47 



roundabout way— an Umweg — and so they fail to achieve 
their end. * The stone goes by the most direct, but not 
always the best way towards the centre of the earth, not 
being able to foresee that it will meet rocks on which it 
will be broken, while it would have more nearly attained 
its end, if it had had the intelligence and the means to 
turn aside. Even thus, going straight towards present 
pleasure, we sometimes fall over the precipice of misery ^' 
*We must not abandon those old axioms that the will 
follows the greatest good it perceives and shuns the 
greatest evil. That the truest good is so little sought 
after is mainly due to this, that in matters and on occa- 
sions in which the senses have very little influence, most 
of our thoughts are, so to speak, insensible [sourdes] (I call 
them in Latin, cogitationes caecae [blind thoughts] ), that is 
to say, they are void of perception and feeling and consist 
in the bare use of Symbols, like the work of those who 
make calculations in algebrä, without looking from time 
to time at the geometrical figures. In this respect words 
usually have the same effect as arithmetical or algebraic 
Symbols. We often reason in words, hardly having the 
object in mind at all. Now this knowledge cannot move 
US : something vivid is required that we may be moved. 
Yet it is thus that men most often think of God, of 
virtue, of happiness; they speak and reason without 
. definite ideas. Not that they cannot have these ideas ; 
for they are in their minds. But they do not give them- 
selves the trouble of carrying on the analysis of their 
ideas ^' 

' Nouveaux Essais^ bk. ii. ch. 21, § 36 (E. 259 a ; G. v. 175). 

^ Ibid. bk. ii. ch. 21, § 35 (E. 257 a; G. v. 171). As this 
passage suggests, Leibniz is füll of moral optimism. Cf. § 38 of 
the same chapter (E. 260 a; G. v. 177); *Wheii I consider how 
much ambi^ion and avaricie cän effect in all those who once 
set themselves in this line of life, which is almost entirely without 
sensuous and immediate attractions, I despair of nothing, and 
I hold that virtue, accompanied as it is by so many substantial 
blessings, would have infinitely more eflfect ' [than these vices], * if 
some happy revolution of the human race were some day to give 
it vogue and make it fashionable.' 



148 

4f 



INTRODUCTIO?f 



f Justice. Self-hve^ Love of Älan and Love of Goä, 

1 Self-love, more or less enlightened, is the ground of all 
our actions. And the more enliglitened our self-love is, 
th© higher is tha ethiml valu© of our action and the better 
are ita results, But as, like all other Monads^ our souls 
are not mere self-eontred atoms but reflect the whole 
universe^ our self-loye is at the isame time, aec Ording to 
its degree, a love for others* To love otliei-^ is to desire 
their good as we desire our own, Äiid as it is the 
essence of our souls to represent or perceive all other 
ßouls, the more enlightened our own desire of good is, 
the more are we seeking the highes t good of others and 
fulfilling the ends of God, We can really love others, 
and expresa our love to them only in proportion as we 
oleai'ly perceive what is best for them j and the more 
clearly we perceive what is best for Ourselves, the more 
clearly we perceive what is best for them, This followi* 
from the very Constitution of our being. In other words, 
we seek our own perfeetion, however blindly ; and we 
are so united to all other men, that in reali^ing our own 
perfection we are also realiÄing theirs, Thus the more 
enlightened our self-love is the more disinterested does 
it become and the more nearly does it approach to a pure 

\ love of Ood K 

Accoixlitigly love is the root of law. Law is not a 
merely external ari-angement, an arbitrary command, an 
expression of bare power, It äs a moral power^ and 
'moml* means that which is natural to a good man, 
' A good man is one who loves all men^ so far as reason 
allows, Accordingly/ says Leibnizj * justice (which is 
the ruling vhrtue of that affeotion which the Greeks call 
4>ikavßpai7rla) will^ if I mistake not, be most fittingly 
defined as the charity of a wise man, that is to say, charity 
in obedience to the dictates of wisdom, . , . Charity is 



1 Cf. 0» the NoUons qf Right and Justice^ p. 385 (E. iiB b). 



STATEMENT OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 14g 



universal benevolence, and benevolence ia the habit of 

Thus the ethical progress of man is an approach to the 
reality that is in God, a hringing forth of the image of 
God whieh ia hidden in the soiil, through growing en- 
lightenment, thiit is to say, through the appetition of the 
mid paasing fomard to ever elearer and more distinct 
perec^ptioiis, This featuro of the philoaophy of Leibniz 
leads Windelband to deacrihe bis ethics as expresßing 
' the Philanthropie ideal of raorality which waa character- 
istie of the Ä ufMünmg period * in Germany, * * ' Enh'ghten 
thyaelf, and have a care for the enlightenment of thy fel- 
lows ; 90 aball you all be happy that is the philosophy 
profeaaed by the whole eighteenth Century in Germany ^' 

* 0» tkt Ndwns q/" Righi m\d Jttsiice (1693), p. 283 (E. 118 a), Cf. 
Nmiveaux Essais, bk. iL ch. aS^ § 5 (E. a86 b ; G. v. 232): * Ac- 
cording to this i^otion' [externally impos^d law]j S>ne nnd the 
Käme actio n would be at tJie samf^ lime momlly good or morally 
bad, linder diiferent legiBlatorsj just aa our able author ' [Locke] 
*cünsid©red itrtw asthat which is praised^ and accordißgly on© nnd 
iliö same action would be virtuous or nfit, according to the differ*?i:kt 
fjpirtions of men, New,, aa that is not the meaning that is »studly 
given to morally good aiid virtuous actions, I ahould pr<jfer for my 
part to tnke- aa Ihe measuro of moral good and virtue the invariable 
rule of reason^ which it ia the office of Ged to maintain. So wo 
may b© assurf^d that by His meany, every moral good bocomea also 
Ä phyaical good^ or as the aticionts aaid, overy liotiourable act is 
useful ; in place of which j if we would express the view of our 
author^ wo should have to my that moral good or ovilis an impotsed 
or ordained [irtäiUuH/] good or evLl^ which he who h&a command of 
power endeavom-ä by rewarda or penalties to make ixa do or shun* 
Th© good thing is^ that what proceeda from the genoral ordinane*^ 
of God iB coüfortiiable to nature or to reaaoß/ 

' Windelband, Geschichte dir neueren Phikmphief vol. i. p* 477. 
Cf. Vm der Gltkksdigkeü [E. 673 a j G. vii» 89) : 'II now a oobl« Ikoht;] 
peTÄon attaitia to thh^ that in the midat of all luxury and honours 
he yet fiuds bis greateat enjoymeut in the aetivitiea of iiis under- 
ütaitdiug and the practice of virtue, thon I hold him doubly noble : 
in himsolf^ on account of tliia liappiness and true joy of hia ^ and 
for others, since it ia most certain that this personj on aceount of 
hia power aiid üisight, ^an and will also im part light and virtue 
to many othorä, for auch an im partin g meana a rellected llght 
upon the giver, and those who have the same common aim can 
help one another and give new light in the fnvesitlgation of truth, 
the increÄse of human powera, and the promotion of that which 
ia best for alL Thni the exalted bappine&s of noble [hohe'} 



INTRODUCTION 



and also enlightened persona appears from this that they can do 
as much for their happiness as if they had a thousand hands and 
a thousand lives, indeed as if they were to live a thousand times 
as long as they do. For our life is to be counted a true life in so 
far as we do good in it. Now he who does much good in a shorter 
time is the same as him who lives a thousand times longer; which 
is the case with those who can get a thousand and more than a 
thousand hands to work along with them, and consequently in 
a few years more good can happen for their highest peace and 
enjoyment than otherwise many centuries could bring to pass.' 



PAKT IV. 



HISTÜRICAL AND CRITICAL ESTIMATE OF THE PHILOSOPHY 
OP LEIBNIZ. 

Relation ofLeibniz to earlier Thinking, esfpeciaJly to tlie 
PeripcUetic and Atomist Positions, 

No genuine thinker can set himself outside of the 
Philosophie succession. However Protestant or revolu- 
tionary he may be, his problem is always to a great extent 
determined for him by the Systems of the past. Unless 
intellect is to be called * bloodless ' these Systems may be 
Said to be in his blood ; he could not turn against them if 
they were not in him, if he had not made them his own. 
He may cease to seek for truth in the perplexing world, 
and try to find it in what he takes to be the simplicity 
and certainty of his own nature ; but, whether he knows 
it or not, that very nature of his is to a great extent what 
the tiresome world has made it. He may ignore history 
or scorn it, but he cannot escape from it. 

The conviction of some such truth as this was very 
streng in Leibniz. He held it against the fashion of his 
time. The early part of the seventeenth Century was 
a time when the new feit itself to be so very new, the 
modern so very modern, that, with the infallibility of 
youth,, it could afford to despise what seemed ancient, 
worn-out, and superseded. When * our moderns ' (as 
Leibniz frequently calls them) were not contemptuous 
of older thought they were unconscious of it. In fact, 
history for them meant a blind tradition, which they had 



INTBODUCTIOJf 



cast off. Desearteäj for instance, when he turned from 
courts and camps to meditation by Iiis own fireside^ 
professed to renounce entirely th© methods and result^ of 
earlier thinkers, and to draw from hia own unaid*^ con- 
sciousness a System of truth which no learned sophistry 
i^ould shaka Deacartes was the discoverer of the * plaiu 
man/ Unaophisticated mothor^wit will of itself produce 
absolutely certain knowledge, if only we put the right 
instrument into its bandSj or in other words, if we 
suggest to it a right method Thinking thns^ Descartea 

^ Cf» Becherche de la Verite par les I/tim^erea NaiureUeSj (Euvres d6 
Ikmaries (Cousin), yoL xi. p. 334 : ^My purpoae in thrs work is to 
hviii^ to light thü wealth of oar natui-e^ by tlirowing open to every 
one tlie way by whioh he may find in h im seif,, withont borrowing 
anything from anybody eise, the knowledgo that is neceäÄiiry for 
the condiict of hia life, aod by which ho may aftemards tnaka nsa 
of thU knowledge to maater the mo^t abstruije scieuces to which 
humim rea^on can attßiii» But Je&t t!i© magnitude of my plan 
ahould üt once illl your mind witli such ama Zement that you ean 
\m lo^igev find it possible to have any eonfidenc© in what l say, 
I may teil you that wbat I am undertuking ia not so dilHeult as 
might be imagined. In fact, the branches of knowledge which ar© 
not beyond the readi of the human mind ar© nnited togethor by 
so wonderfol a bond and can bo deduced from onü an other with so 
eomplotü ft necessity, that not muoh art and skill aro reqnired to find 
them out^ provide<i w© begin with the most simple aud learn to 
l ise gradually to the most ©xalted. This I intend to show hore^ by 
meauB of a succoasion of reasonioigs ao clear and so commonplace 
that every one will se© that, if he haa not noticed the aaine things 
m I havö, it is only becauste h© haa not turned his eyes in tlio right 
direction nor given bis thoughta to the same objects as I have, and 
that 1 wo more deserve glory for having discoyered thew things 
than would a poasant deserve it for having foiind by tihanco under 
liia feet a treasm"e whieh had long reniained hidden^ though 
diligently »ought after, . . . I will not inquire into what oth^ra 
havo known or liav© not known* Snflico it to observ© that, 
althongh all the knowledge we can deslre were to he found in 
books, yet tho good they eontaiu is mixed np with so mneh that 
ia tiseleas and ia scattered throughout so many big volunies that lifo 
is not long enöugb to read them, and to reeognize what is ngeful 
in thom would requirtj more ability than to ißnd it out for our- 
aelvea. So I hope the roader will not be displeaaed to find her© 
a ahorter way, and that the truths I bring forward will be accept- 
abk to liim, althongh I do not borrowthem from Plate or Arisfcotle 
but offer them as having value in thems^lYSs, like monoy which 
haa the uame worth whether ifc comea from a peasant'a purse or 
from the treaaui^y.' CL Discourse on Meth&d^ Part vi. (Vüitch*B 
Tranalation, pp. 109 et aqq,). Huot aaya that * though Des^iartea 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPH Y I53 

inevitably tumed bis back upon tbe bistory of tbougbt, 
counting it little better than ' old wives' fables\' 

In Leibniz, on tbe otber band, tbere is a double re- 
action — a reaction against tbe scorn of bistory, and a 
reaction against tbe extremes to wbicb modern pbilosopby 
bad been carried in its Opposition to Scbolasticism, Tbe 
wbole bent of Leibniz's tbougbt was against sbarp and 
absolute divisions. Tbougbt does not proceed per saltum. 
In tbe bistory of tbinking, as in all otber bistory, * tbe 
present is laden with tbe past and fuU of tbe future^.' 
Tbus, for Leibniz, tbe Scbolastics may bave been wrong, 
but tbey were not absolutely wrong. And tbe moderns 
may be rigbt, but tbey are not entirely rigbt. Notbing 
in tbe past is iof be completely set at naugbt, for out 
of tbe past tbe present has come. Tbe one cannot be 

had carefully studied the ancient philosophers and several of the 
moderns, he yet affected to appear ignorant of them, in order that. 
he might be regarded as the sole discoverer of his doctrine. In 
this several of his disciples have too thoroughly foUowed his 
example ; for they have imitated his feigned ignorance by culti- 
vating a real ignorance.* TraiU phüos(yphique de la faiblesse de V Esprit 
humain, bk. iii. ch. 10. Voltaire also gives point to the general 
opinion regarding Descartes by the satirical Suggestion that 
Descartes had *never read anything, not even the Gospels.' Les 
SystemeSj line 37 ; (Euvres CompleteSj vol. x. p. 169. 

^ It was not only the fact of a revolution in thought that gave 
rise to the Cartesian disregard of history : the very nature of the 
revolution itself contributed to this end. The Substitution of 
a mechanical for an a priori dogmatic way of explaining things 
was inevitably connected with a fresh interest in the study of 
mathematics, and this led to a preference of mathematical to 
historical methods in philosophy. Cf. Rdgles pour la Direction de 
V Esprit, (Euvres de Descartes (Cousin), vol. xi. p. 211: *We shall 
never be mathematicians, even although we were to know by 
heart all the demonstrations of other people, if we are not capable 
of solving by ourselves all kinds of problems. In the same way. 
though we have read all the reasonings of Plate and Aristotle, that 
will not make us philosophers if we cannot bring to any question 
a steady judgment. In such a case we should, indeed, have 
leamed not a science, but history.' Also, p. 209 : * Regarding the 
object of our study we must inquire, not what others have thought 
nor what we ourselves surmise, but what we can see clearly and 
manifestly [avec emdence\ or what we can deduce with certainty. 
This is the only way to obtain real knowledge \la science'].* 

* Cf. Wallace, Logic of Heget (2nd ed.) ; Prolegomena, pp. 203 sqq. 



154 



INTRODUCTION 



understood without the other* Leibaiz from. his earliest 
days had been a vast raider of book^, and bis erudition 
tenipered bis imaginativ© optimism with reverence and 
cauti on . Th iis bis phüosopbi zing most of ten takes tb e form 
of hypothesis or Suggestion ratber tban that of dogma or 
demonstration. In the Kantian sense his philosophy is, 
of course, ' dogmatic * and not * critical * ; but to some 
©JEtent he foreshadowa tbe ^ critical spirit \ ' As a thinker, 
he counte as foreign to him nothing that men have 
thoiight, and his ideal philosophy wonld be a philosophy 
which says clearly all that all previous thinkers have 
stammeringly tried to say. So people haye called him an 
^eelectic/ and posslbly his fame has snfFered from the 
imputation. But tliere is no lack of originaHty in the 

* metaphysical romance"^' he brings us, for be ia to he 
called an eclectic mainly in contrast vvith the Cartesian 
extremists, who repudiated all obbgation to the past. 
Whüe convinced of the yalue of bis own bypotbeses, 
Leibniz ratber glories in his indebtedness, rejoicing to 
find him seif in the plulosopbic eueeession« *I despise 
almost nothing/ he saya, * escept judicial astrology and 
trickeries of that kind V * It happens soniehow that the 
thoughts of other people are usually not displeasing to me, 
and I appreciate thejn all, thougb in divers degrees\' 

* There ia as much or more reason to beware of thoae who, 
most often tbrough ambitioBj claim to put forth sometbing 
new as to mistrust old Impression s. And after baying 
devoted a gi*eat deal of tbonght both to the old and thö 
new, I have come to tbe conclusion tbat most of tbe 
received doctrines can be taken in a right sense. So that 

* Leibniz tlie dogmatic phiJosopliy cotifies in all pointa ao 
near to tlie criticiil tliat onlj one atep m needed to rise from th© 
poiiit of yiew of the ono to th&i of ihe other/ K, Fischer, Gmeh. 

tmteren Fhü., ¥oL iL ch. ar^ ^ i. 

^ Hegel, Gesch. d. Fhihsophief vol. iii* 408. Kant ftlao speaka of 
the univerae of Leibniz aa *fl kind of enchaoted Tvorld' [ffi>ie Äti 
von bezauherter' Wdt], EoaetiJtnmZj L 521 ; Hartenstein, in. 445. 

^ Lettre ä Bm^rg^iet (1714), (G. iii. 562)* 

* Späcimen D^nmmcum {Q* Math, vi* 336)* 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I55 



I wish clever men would seek to satisfy their ambition 
rather by building and making progress than by going 
back and destroying'.' 'This System' [Leibniz's own] 
'appears to combine Plate with Democritus, Aristotle 
with Descartes, the Scholastics with the moderns, theology 
and ethics with reason. It seems to take the best from 
all sides, and then to go further than any one has yet 
gone. ... I See now what Plato meant when he regarded 
matter as an imperfect and transitory thing ; what Aris- 
totle intended by his entelechy; what is that promise 
of another life, which Democritus himself made, accord- 
ing to Pliny ; how far the Sceptics were right in crying 
out against the senses ; how animals are automata, as 
Descartes .says, and have nevertheless souls and feeling, as 
people think ; how a rational explanation is to be given of 
the views of those who attribute life and perception to all 
things — such people as Cardan, Campanella, and (better 
than these) the late Countess of Conway (a Piatonist), and 
Our friend, the late M. Fran9ois Mercure Van Helmont 
(though otherwise bristlingwithunintelligible paradoxes), 
with his friend, the late Mr. Henry More ^' 

^ Nouveavx Essais^ bk. i. ch. 2, § 21 (E. 219 a ; G. v. 92). 

* Ibid. bk. i. ch. i (E. 205 a ; G. v. 64). Leibniz might have 
added the name of Spinoza, who says that ' all individual bodies 
are animate, though in different degrees/ Ethics, Pt. ii. prop. 13, 
Scholium. Cf. Lettre ä Basnage (1698) (E. 153 b ; G. iv. 523) : * When 
we penetrate deeply into things, we observe more reason than 
would be believed in most of the sects of the philosophers. The 
lack of reality in the things of sense, according to the Sceptics ; 
the Pythagorean and Piatonist reduction of everythiiig to har- 
monies, numbers, ideas, and perceptions ; the " One" and even the 
one Whole of Parmenides and Plotinus, without any Spinozism ; 
the Stoic connexion, compatible with the spontaneity of others ; 
the vital philosophy of the Cabbalists and Hermetics, who attri- 
bute feeling to every thing ; the forms and entelechies of Aristotle 
and the Scholastics ; and on the other hand the mechanical 
explanation of all particular phenomena, according to Democritus 
and the moderns —these are all combined together as in a centre 
of perspective, viewed from which the object (confused from every 
other point of view) reveals its regularity and the harmony of its 
parte. We have failed to accomplish this by our sectarian spirit, 
limiting oursei ves by rejecting others.* The writings of Leibniz 
are füll of similar passages. 



INTRODUCTION 



Descartea tum seif * took a good part of hia best thoughts ' 
from ihe men of old \ And thus, Leibniz would say, it 
is better frankly to own oiir obligations and to go back to 
the past tliat may, if possible, draw from it neglected 
tnithßj by tbe aid of which our present theories may be 
improved and thinking Tiiay go forward, For the idea 
of progress oii the basis of hlstory controls the mind 
of Leibnizj to %vhatever objects he directa bis thmk- 
ing^, Accordingly^ admitting the value of the modern 
m&chanical pbilosophy, and yet being conscious of its 
nnpeifections and dissatisfied with some of its results, 
Leibidz turns back to Seholasticism and its roota in the 
philosophy of Greece, to 'recover the gold from the 
niire,' and so build tip a more perfect System ^ Thus 
Di II mann rightly contencls that Leibniz ean be properly 
understood only if we recogniz© that his main endeavour 
is to reconcile the modern meehanieal view of things with 
the ancient doctrine of *substantial forms. ' Yet it must 
not be forgotten that Leibniz songht to effect this recon- 
eiliation by modifying and reconstructing, and not by 
merely dovotailmg one System into another. 

The way of explaining phenomena by reference to 
* Bubstantiiil fornis/ which Descartes and Gassendi rejected 
in fayour of a meehanieal explanation of nature^ was a 
growth of the Petipatetic philosophy, which in cours© of 
time had run to seed. It sprang originally from the 
sound Äristotelian idea that aU events or particular things 
are to be explalned by reference to actiye pi-iiiGiplea^ not 

* Lettre ä Nicaise (1692) (E. tso a ; O. ii. 534)* Cf. De sttlfi pfttfeso- 
phico NisoHi (1670), § 34 (E, 67 a ; G. iv. 154). 

^ Thu3 one of his lateafc (and not Imat able) expositors» E. Dill- 
jTiann^ offers Leibniz a homage which lie kirn seif would At onee 
hiwo (;oademii€sd, For Dillmann regardsj tb« philosophy of Leihniz 
&B final and all siiffitiienfcj if only it bt) rightly understood. * The 
Monadology is the most perfeet fruit of philosophiciiLl r^Boxioii« 
the moat completö and briUiant system in the history of philo- 
sophy/ {Neue Barsiellung^ &e*, p. 525.) There ia a struiigo iruny 
in the fa et that bo able und devoted a di&ciplö htts so completö ly 
missed Iiis master's spirit. 

^ LoUre ä Remmid (1714) (E, 704 b ; G. iii, 635). 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I57 

entirely external to the events or things, but appearing in 
them. But the meaning, the spirit of Aristotle's method 
was lost sight of. *Find a principle, a form, ofanykind,' 
came to be the rule of explanation. And thus the number 
of *substantial forms' or principles of substance was 
multiplied indefinitely, while, in addition, the most 
minute changes in substances were each explained by 
reference to some ' accidental form ' or principle of 
accident. Anything sufficed as an explanation so long 
as it was called a form. Thus when no intelligible 
account of a phenomenon eould readily be given it was 
attributed to some hidden principle {qualitas occuUa), 
which was described by the name of the phenomenon to 
be explained. Thus, for instance, Toletus^ gives us the 
valuable information that ' the substantial form of fire is 
an active principle by which fire, with heat as its instru- 
ment, produces fire.' After making this amazing state- 
ment he recoUects that fire is sometimes produced by 
things other than fire, and he proceeds with grave 
elaboration to prove that *fire can result from all the 
substantial forms capable of producing it in air, in water, 
or in anything eise.' 

This may be the reductio ad absurdum of the Peripatetic 
Scholasticism ; for indeed petitio principii could no farther 
go. It is almost worse than the virtus dormitiva of 
Moliöre's satire. But the author does not appear to have 
Seen the humour of it. Can we wonder, then, that 
Descartes turned his back upon history ? To him it 
seemed that an explanation to be an explanation must at 
least be intelligible. There can be truth and certainty, he 
thought, only where there is clearness and distinctness. 
Accordingly all these hidden principles and inexplicable 
forms must be thrown aside as philosophical lumber, a 
screen of ignorance and a source of confusion. In true 
explanation there must be no obscurities, fancies, or 

* Francisco de Toledo (1532-1596), a Spanish cardinal and theo- 
logian, author of Summa Casuum Conscientiae, 



INTEODUOTION 



guesses ; but it must cansist in tracing the necessary 
eonnesions of tlungs or finding definitely nieasurable 
i^lations behveen them— connexions and relations wbich 
the understanding can clearly grasp. That is, in briöf, 
tbe mecbanieal view of what explanation ought to be, 

the Cartesians held it in Opposition to tbe Scholastics. 
Fow Leibniz, as we have seen, is not so exclusiyely 
enamonred of tbe clear and distinct as Descartes was. 
He tbinks Deacartes has gonö too far in tbe zeal of bis 
reformation. Doubtless tbe Scbolastics were guilty of 
gross absnrdities, but if we are to be satisfied witb no 
explanation whicb is not absolntely perfect in its intelM" 
gibility^ we sball bave to do witb out explanations of most 
thingSj and our seience will perforce he very abstract anrl 
very limited. For to be perfectly intelligible or clear and 
distinct in tbe Cartesian sense, an explanation mmt ei t her 
be a self-evident trutb or must he logieally leducible to 
sucb a trutb* And Leibniz maintains tliat, wbile ideas 
or abstractions (' possible ' thiugs) may be eapable of sucb 
explanation as this, it is impossible eo tliorougbly to 
explain uny actoally existing finite thing or phonomenon, 
We may ' clearly and distinctly * explain how such a 
thing is possible ; we can not * clear] j and distinctly ' 
explain wby it exists. No absolute reason can be given 
for its existence ; we must be content %vith a suffieient 
reason. An ©xamination of tbe meaaurable relations or 
connexions of tbings does not jdeld an exbaustive account 
of their nature^ and aceordingly, while such an exam- 
ination ia valuable so far as it goes^ it requirea to be 
supplemented by other considerations. The infinite 
complexity of things makes a perfect analysis impossible, 
and consequently, if we confine ourse]ves to a strictly 
matbematical method^ our science must reniain a science 
of abstractions and not of actual tlüngs as tliey exlst, 

LeibniÄj then, admits the value of the mecbanical view 
HB regards phenomena, considered in abstraction from tbe 
reabties of which they are tbe phenomena, but he returna 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I59 



to the older philosophy for an explanation of the realities 
themselves. Descartes has done well in Clearing away 
the great maßs of forms, which explained nothing, and in 
accounting for all the changes in nature by regarding 
them as due to variations in the distribution of one 
constant quantity of motion. But motion is not a deep 
enough principle to explain reality. It is entirely apparent, 
phenomenal, on the surface ; and therefore it cannot 
explain that which is half-hidden, which comes and goes, 
which passes from potentiality into actuality. But this 
is the characteristic of every real thing, every res completa. 
In so far as it exists, and is not merely possible, it has 
come into being ; it is its nature to pass from potentiality 
to actuality. We cannot have a better example of this 
than the human soul, in which we find continuous process 
aiong with unity and self-identity. Thus it seems to 
Leibniz that real things or substances are to be conceived 
As analogous to the human soul, as forms or living prin- 
ciples in a sense deeper than that of the later Scholastics, 
who had, indeed, almost entirely emptied the term 
* form ' of signification. Going back to the source of these 
views that had so degenerated, Leibniz finds the nearest 
approach to what he is seeking in Aristotle's *entelechy,' 
the principle of a thing in the sense of its implicit perfect 
realization, what it is in the thing to be or become. Thus 
Leibniz Supplements the Cartesian physics by the idea 
that mere body or matter is an abstraction, existing 
nowhere, and that every real existence has a soul or living 
principle. And in this way the Monadology restores to 
philosophy, with new force and meaning, the infinite 
number of forms which was the chief feature of the 
Peripatetic philosophy. 

Leibniz's relation to Atomist philosophy is for the most 
part a negative one, and it is hardly necessary to add 
anything to what häs incidentally been said regarding it. 
He is on the side of modern science in rejecting the idea 
of an absolute vacuum. And when he sometimes speaks 



i6o 



INTBODUCTION 



of thö Monada as atoms bis object is probably to nhow 
that the 3Ionadology expresses clearly what the ato miste 
are groping for. His leading thought in this cotmexiou 
is that a rmd whole preaupposea a real isnit, that is to say, 
a iinit which is essentiaüy connected with the lybolej 
representative of it, and not in a merely aecidental or 
indeterminate relation to it. The atoniists are right, he 
would say, in insmting upou a real unit^ but, on thßir 
view of reality, it is impossibl© to find any aucb unit ^ 

Leihnü*s 'Sufficimt Emson ' in relatmn to the * Cause ' 
of Descartes and Spimza* 

When we look, not at wbat Leibniz was himaelf awaie 
of doing but at wbat he aetually did withovit clearly 
knowing it, we may i*egard bis uae of the principle of 
aufl&cient rcaaon as a development of wbat was implied in 
the uae whicb Descartea and Spinoza made of tbe notion 
of ^ cause/ Deacaa-t^s, as we have aeen^, developa his 
System under tbe guidance of the principle of contradietion 
alone* But in order to pass from the subjectivity of tbe 
pure Ego to an objective, ©xternal i'eality, be flnds it 
necessary to ha%*e reeourse to the pxinciple that everytbmg 
niust bave an efficient cause wbich is at least aa real as the 
effeet (and may be more real than it). Tbis principle he 
asaumea without any attempt to demonstrate ita vaUdity, 
and it is tbe real basis of bis proofa, in the first place, of 
the existenee of God^ and in the aecond place, of tbe 
existence of an external World*. The proofs of tbe 
©xistence of God form the keyatone of Deseartea's aystem* 
Tbeir function ie to make up for the inevitable imper- 
fectiona of a logic based solely on tbe principle of contra- 
dietion. Clinging, as he does, to the dualiam of mind and 

^ Cf. this Introdttctiorij Piirt ii. pp* 37 sqq. 
' Thi$ Introductlon, Part ii. pp, 58 sqq. 

* Cf. Miditatim III and the niathematically orraoged argumenta 

in the Eipons^s aux Deuxiemes Objections^ 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPH Y l6l 



matter, of thought and external existence, Descartes could 
not rest satisfied with the idea of a most perfect being. He 
must get beyond the idea to the reality ; he must justify 
not one or another idea but thought itself. In the charac- 
teristics of ' clearness ' and * distinctness ' in ideas he had 
found a criterion for the eonsisteney of thought with itself. 
A clear and distinct idea completely satisfied thought, but 
it still remained to be shown that such an idea has 
objective validity ; that there actually exists that which it 
represents. Now according to Descartes, it is the truth- 
fulness, the eonsisteney, the goodness of an actually 
existing God (who would not be perfect had He not these 
qualities) that assure to us the validity of our clear and 
distinct ideas. 'Even the principle,' says Descartes, 
* which I have ah-eady taken for a rule, namely, that all 
the things which we clearly and distinctly conceive are 
true, is ceitain only because God is or exists, and because 
He is a perfect Being, and because all that we possess is 
derived from Hirn. . . . If we did not know that all which 
we possess of real and true proceeds from a perfect and 
infinite Being, however clear and distinct our ideas might 
be, we should have no ground on that account for the 
assurance that they possessed the perfection of being true '.' 
Accordingly, as regards real existence (apart from that of 
the pure Ego), everything in Descartes's System ultimately 
turns upon this unexplained principle of cause, by means 
of which he proves the existence of God, and which he 
again employs in establishing the reality of the world. 
God must exist, for otherwise no adequate cause can be 
assigned for the existence of the idea of God in us. And 
again, we must postulate the real existence of external 

* Metliod, Pai-t iv. (Veitch's Tr., p. 80). Cf. Meditation IV: *It is 
impossibie that God should ever deceive me ; since in all fraud 
and deceit one meets with some kind of imperfection ; and 
although it may seem that to be able to deceive is a mark of clever- 
ness or of power, the wish to deceive always indicates, without 
a doubt, feebleness or malice ; and accordingly such a wish cannot 
exist in God.* Cf. Hegel, Geschichte der Phil, iii. p. 319. 

M 



INTEODUCTION 



things as the c&um of certain ideaa in us* unless we ai^ to 
fcsuppose that God deceives us 

Spinoza takes the one substajice, God, as bis etarting- 
point of absolute certaintyy and accordingiy proofs of tbe 
existance of God have for him no meaning. Kevei-theleas^ 
he does not altogetlier dispense wifch the notion of causa 
Ostenäibly he reduces the relation of cause and efifect to 
a logical connexion, like that between a geometrical figure 
and ita properties. But ho makes use of the notion of 
cause to introduce variety into the perfect unity of sub* 
Htance by doiscribing it as cause of itself (causa mi). And 
in hiß distinction between natura naturans and natura 
nuiumia he endeavoars, by a further application of the 
notion of cause, to bridge the gulf which his logic has set 
between the infinite (as purely indeterminate) and finite 
or determinate existence. Natura naturans is aubstanee 
expressed in attributos or * God aa the f re« cause of all that 
is,' Niihim naiurata is ^ all that follows froua the necessity 
of the Divine nature or from any one of the attributes of 
Gody i e. all modes of God^s attributes, conddered as 
things which exist in Godj and without God can neither 
exist nor be conceiTed^/ In short, causa sui or substance 
is analyzed into two moments, cause (natura naturans) and 
oflfect (natura naturata) ; but both of these are nltimately 
the same thing. Apart from this distinction without a 
difference it would be impossible for Spinoza to identify 
his infinite substance with the actual world. And yet^ 
in spite of it, for Spinoza the finite, as finite^ remains 
unreal. 

Kow this notion of cause, which Deseartes and Spinoza 
employ without attempting to ©xplain or justify it, is, in 
a mor© general form, acknowledged by Leihniz as an 
independent logical principle, that of sufficient reasoa. 
There must be, not merely an adequate cause but a 
bufficient reason for the exist ence of eaeh individual thing, 

' Cf. Miditatim VI, passim. 

^ Ethicsj Part i, prop, 2^ SchoUum^ 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 163 

And as we have seen \ the eufficiency of the reason rests 
iiltiinately on th© nature of God as perfeet in vriedoni, 
goodneöSj and power, Manifestly there is here a M'orking- 
out of what 19 inor0 vaguely implied in Descai-tes's 
repeated referenees to the perfection of tlie eliaracter of 
God m onr wan-ant for the reality of thinga. And the 
argiiment of Spinoza (hawever inconäistent it may be) ia 
based on the coni?ictiön that every finite thing must find 
its place in the one all-embi-acing Bystem, that is to say, 
mnst follow from th© natura of God in whom are all 
perfections. Thiis the addition of the principle of auffi- 
cient reason to that of contradiction ig not an entirely 
noTel Buggeetion on the part of Leibniz, but is an out- 
growth of what was already involved in the reasonings of 
his immediate predecessors. It is a step towarda the 
reconciling of their inconsistencies by bringing into clear 
coneoionsnesa a principle which they blindly and imper- 
fectly employed. 

The PMhsophij of Wolff. 

The philosophy of Leibniz suffered grievously at the 
handa of hia immediate disciplea Probably this w^as 
inevitabla Few of hia writings were published in hk 
lifetrme, and his philosophical opinions were diapersed 
through mas9es of manuscript which might well be the 
despair of bis friends. And the philoaophical aystem 

^ Tliis IntroductioTi, Part ii. p. 66. 

* *It hü8 been with Leibniz aa with eevorül philoaophers of 
antiquity, wlio migbt bave sjiid : May God preaery© im frora our 
fnenda ; aa for our enemi^s, we ouraelvea shall flblo to protecfc 
cnirselvoa from them/" Kant. Entduckung nach der aUe nmie Kritik 
liflr reifen Vi^nmifi durch eine äliere mthekilkh gemacht tc^den ^IL 
Hos^tikran^ i. 478; Harten stein, iii. 390, Cf* Wallace^ Logic (f 
Hegd (:2iid ©d.) ; Prolegomma, ch. 17. Kant himself in one of bis 
variier writinga [Träume eines Geistersehers^ &c, ; Eo^enkmnz, viL 45 ; 
Hartt?ii stein, iii, 58) spe^kf; of * Ijeibniz'3 amuaing idoa, according 
to wbicb wo might perbaps swallow in 011 r m>ffee atoms destmed 
io become human bouIb.' And & natural iat of the end of last 
Century, Otto F. Müllei-j thought that be bad dls^oyered Monada 
linder the micro&cope I 

M 3 



INTRODUCTION 



itself must have seemed as broken m was ihe expression 
of it, The two principles of contradiction and sufficient 
reason stood side by sidßj and there wa^ no clear account 
of the relation between them. A System with two 
independent priociples can have no stability, and this 
defect niust somehow be removed. On the other handj 
Newton had triumphed in the long controversy, and his 
fame had led to Leibniz'ö discredit. Leibniz's metaphysics 
eeeraed in some points incompatible with the Newtonian 
physics, and must therefore to some extent be modified, 
This systematizing and modifying of the phUosophy of 
Leibniz wei'e accomplished by Christian WoliT {1679- 
1754)1 who himself, however, strongly objected to l^eing 
caOed a mere disciple of Leibniz, or an elaboiator of the 
Leibnitian philosophy, 

Wolff''a Position may be i-egarded as in mm^ respect» 
a return to the Cai-tesian attitnde of mind. His Solution 
of the difficulty arising from the supposition of two co- 
ordinate first principles is to make the principle of siifßeient 
reason a logical inference from that of contradietion, and 
thus to make the law of contradiction the one supreme 
law of thought. He holds that the difference between 
'something^ and ^ nothing' is absolute, ' sonietbing' being 
that of which there in some notion, while 'nothing' is 
that of which there is no notion \ Thus everything must 
have a sufficient leason, i, e, some reason why it exists 
rather than does not exist, for otherwise soraething would 
procjeed out of nothing. But ex nihilo nihil fit : there iss 
no middletei-m between * so mething ' and * nothing \' So 
in Wolff the antithesis of being and not-being is supreme, 
to the exclusion of the notion of becoming» * The impos- 
sible is nothing/ And on the other band, *the possible 
is always something^/ It ought logically to follow that 
everything possible is acttial, and that there is no distinc- 
tion between essence and existenoe. But at this point the 



' Ibid. loi, 10a. 



^ Ibid. 7CI. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHT 165 



Leibnitian influence rea^serts itself, and Wolff becomes 
confused. His mtliless logic gives way* ' * Besides the 
possibüity of a being, something eise is still needed for 
its existence. ' * Existence or reality ia the complement of 
possibility \' As an iUustration of what he means he 
takes the case of a tree which 13 potyentially in the seed, 
but which requires for its actual development (its exis- 
tenee üs a tree) the co- Operation or complement of other 
existing things* Thus Wolff returns to the Leibnitian 
tüstinctiou between the ^ possible ^ and the ^ compossible,* 
after he has emptied of all meaning the principlo of 
sufficionfc reaaon, on which the diatinetion rests. To put 
it otherwisej if the actual existing * something ' ia more 
than a merely posaible ^ something * {as Wolif^s po^ition 
here implies)^ then there niiist be a middle term between 
the actual 'something* and * notliing/ And ihis, of 
e^urse, is flatly contradictory ofWolff'ö original principle, 
Thuswhile Wolff makes a showof logical conipletaneBs 
and System, he is really hacking in pieces the philoaophy 
of Leibniz. He is fascinated by its individualist element, 
the Belf^uflficiency and mutual exclusi veness of the Monads, 
which we have seen to be connected, in the thitiking of 
Leibniz^ with the survival of a narrow interi^retation of 
the principle of eontradiction^ Wolff carries to an ex- 
trem© tliis tendency (which, afler all, is not the supreme 
power in Leibniis's thought), and givea ua, as the outcome 
of the bare principle of contradiction, an abstract Lndi- 
vidualism, just as Spinoza had already from the same 
principle deveioped an abstract universahsm or pantheism. 
It is because of the essentially dogmatic character of the 
principle that auch extremes can each be repreaented as 
flowing from it. As employed by Spinosta and by Wolff 
th^ principle can legitimately yield nothing but the bare 
self-identity of the data or assumptioas with which each 
begins hia work. Accordingly {as in this case) if the 

* Onlologiaj 173, 174- 

" This Introductioiij Part ii p. 6a 



i66 



INTEODUCTION 



prösuppositions ara in complete Opposition to one another, 
we may have two contrary philosophieal systema, both 
apparenlly flowing from thö same first principle, 

Wolff, then, rejects the law of conti miity and returns 
to a Position which haa some analogy with tiiat of 
Descaiies. Osten sibly his philosophy is a Monadology ; 
renlly it is a kind of combinatioa of Monadology with 
Ätomism \ The Cartesian dualisni h restored in the forni 
of a distinction between spiiitual and physical Monads, 
The spirityal Monads alone, in Wolffs opinion. deserve 
the name of Monads. The others are ' elementsof tbings/ 
atüfm naiumß- These physical atoms or uneonscious 
Monads are no longer regarded as living mirrors^ repre- 
«enting or perceiving the wbole uniyerse, They are still 
automata, but thoy are no longer sonls. They have 
notJiing- in common with the spiritual Monads except the 
characteristics of unity, siinplicityj and activity, Thus 
the whole of Leibniz's hyi>otheaes regarding uneonscious 
thinking, peiites perc^tiomj &c,, ai-e tbrown aside, and we 
have, in placo of Deseartes'a two substances {tliought and 
extenaion \ two sets ot independent particular substances. 
the phenomena of the ono set being thoughts and of the 
othor sei motions. Äs an inevitable consequence of this, 
the System of pre-estabJished harmony, as Leibniz con- 
ceived it, disappeara also. Wolff retains the name, but 
he regards the harmony not as a hypothesis l^y which to 
oxplain the relationa of each independent particular sul> 
atance to every other, but merely as an explanation of the 
connexion between soul and body, between spiritual atoms 
or Monads and eorporeal atoms, According to Leibniz 
there could be no real interaction between Monads. But 
Woltl^^s * atoms of nature/ being purely physical^ do 
really influence one another. He sees no difflculty in 

^ et Schilling, Sämmtliche Werk^^ voL vi. p. ii6: *A8 often 
happenSj the imin^diute succG'asora of Leibniz aet asidc th© really 
speculative part of his doctrijie^ the Monndology* For examplö 
tho moat eelebrated of them^ Wolff, udmitä it iato hia sy&fcein oaly 
iti tht) guiae of fi hypotheai»/ 



ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 167 

holding that motion can be tranaferred from one to 
another His difficulty is the original Cartesian problem — 
How can a piirely thinldng substance influence an abso- 
lutely non-thinking aubsttmce, or how can motion pass 
into thought ? And the pre-established harniony is, in 
WolfFa view, preferable to Occasionnlisni merely becans© 
it means one large and comprehönsive initial miratile 
rather than an endless series of miraculous interventionB 
of God, 

Thö natural, physical world is thus, ac cor ding to Wolff, 
entirely snbject to median ical laws, Thero is, indeed, a 
realm of final causesj but the ends of things are com- 
pletely externa! to the things themselves. The linal cause 
of a physical substance is notj as in the view of Leibniz, 
to be found in the nature of the substance itself' m its 
tendency towai'ds self-realixation, bot in a law imposed 
npon it from out aide. Thns the Wolfflian teleology 
beconies almost chüdish, and siiggests at times the naive 
explanations of things which are to be found in such 
writers as Bernai^din de St. Pierre, who teils us that the 
melon is mad© lavge in comparison with other fruits to 
indicate that it onght to be eaten not in aolitude but en 
famüle, and that the cow with only one calf has four teats 
because the human race is fond of milk, Wolff hardly 
rises to this height, but he regards the stars as existing to 
give US light at night, and he points ont that * the lighfc 
of day is of great advantage to us ; it enables ns to carry 
on comfortably certain works which comparative darkness 
would make impossible or dilHculty and also more expen- 

* Here agniii WolfiTs poeition is glaringly inconsistetit. Hia 
phyaiuftl atoma or Monads ar© supposed to liftVö a unity Uite that 
of the Leibaitian Monade Yöt he deniea to thetii that whioh, for 
Leibniz, is th© principle of thi^ unity, viz, a soul differmg not in 
kind but in dogre« from th© con«cioiis and rationaJ soul. The aUmi 
najtura^ are, in short, noithör atoms nor Monads, but a coutradictory 
jimiblo of th© chara4?teristio3 of both. Wolff regards the a/omt 
naiwrae aä 'in themselves indivisible,' and thus distinguishes them 
from (Storni matenaleSf which ar© Ha themaelvea divisible,' but which 
cannot b© a<;tually divided by any natural power. S©e Cosmobgiaf 
1$ lEb aqq., 186 sqq, aad 232. 



j68 



INTHODUCnON 



sive This doctrine of final causes m a most essential 
pari of tlie Wolffian System. Foi\ acc Ording to Wolff, 
although nature ultimably explicable by pur^ly 
mechanical laws^ we cannot aetually reduce it to its 
ultimate elernents, and consßquenÜy, in explaiiiing 
phyaical plienomena as they are preaented to us, we must 
continually have recourse to final causes* So also, while 
WolfFj adopting the phrase of Leibniz, speaks of God as 
freely choosing to create * the best of all possible worlds,' 
he takes * best* as meaning not *best on the whole/ but 
i-ather *best for mankind,' Thus the optimism of Wolff 
is as shallow and arbitrary as his teleology^ and it is not 
sui-prising that Kant, e\m in tlie early years when he 
followed Wolff on moat points, deserted him in thia 
matter, and turned back to views more akin to the greater 
thoughts of Leibniz» 

JReMion ofihe FMosophi/ ofZeihnü to that ofKunt 
In the ear liest writings of Kant (who, through his 
teacber Knutzen, was bred a Wolffian), questions regard- 
ing Space are diseussed — questions, for ins tan ce, as to the 
imöon why onr Space has three dimensions and as to the 
possibility and reality of other Spaces having more than 
three dimensions. Kant was evidently already some- 
what disaatisfied ^vith the current Wolffian view of Space 
and was begiiming th© cours(3 of inquiiy that ultimately 
led to the doctrine of the Transcendental Aesthetic^ a doc- 
trine more in harmony with the view of Leibniz than 
vvith tbat of Wolff According to Wolff, * real * Space 
mnst be distinguished from * imaginary ' space, although 

^ Vf^münftige Gedanken von dsn Absichten rf^r natiirHch»n Bing^^ Cf, 
AwtfiikrlfchE Nachricht von seinen eigemn Schrißen, §§ 186 aqq, 

^ 'Leibniz^a tloctrine of aenao aa confused tbought— confiiaed ju 
hiuult a way m to make repi-esent the world as an order of ihings 
in spacö and tiine — tliöugli Kant explicitlj rejects it, ia ja fuct 
rather elahorated fchan superseded by his doetrine of «pjice and 
time as forms of sensibihtjj nudör which alone espeiiene* ia 
poaaibki, btit whleh preveot what is Im© of phenomena fmm being 
tnie of tbings in thera^^lves, and knovrlödge from i-eauhirig tho 
totality will eil it üeeks/ T. Green, Wfirks, voh iü. 135* 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNiz's PHILOSOPHY 169 



the i'esülts obtained from consideration of the notion of 
* imaginary ' s^mce may justifiably b© applied to ^real' 
Space ^ *Real ' spac© is tbe order of co-existing thinga* 
and m LQseparable from the tbings themseives. Ood 
alone cnn havo a perfectly adeqiiate notion of it and can 
thiis actually perceive ita continnity* But we eaii form 
an abstract or imaginary ■ notion of space, by thinking 
it as cüstinct from (or indifferent to) the eo-existing things 
of which it m an * order ' ; and thia imaginary Space is, 
of conrse^ homogeneaus and continuous. The space of 
matbematica and phyaics is thus ' imaginary space ' ; but 
it ia such that the iawB of mathematics and phyaics are 
valid in relation to 'real ' space. Manifestly we have here 
neither the view of Leibniz nor that of Newton, but a 
doctrine which points to a possiblo reconciiiation l^tween 
them. On the one hand, space is not mereiy confused 
perception. As space it has reality : it is a real order in 
which physieal things exist Eut, on the other hand, 
tliis real space is not the space of the mathematician. 
H© deals with a kind of projection or symbol of it, and 
thus the Newtouian position also is with out WolfTs 
assent. It might easily be shown that the Wolffiiin 
düctrine of Space is riddled with inconsiatencies, af a Idnd 
siniilar to those which have been notieed in WollFs 
account of individual subatancea. But the matter of 
main interest is that Kant received the problem of space 
in the form which Wolff had given it ^'j and that Üirough- 

* (hitdoffiaj 599w 

ä In annlcgy with tini© whieh *the order of Süciceaaive tliinga 
in fl coafcitiuous sßries,' space in dofined aa *the ordor simul- 
taneous things, in so far as ih^y co-exiafc/ OntoLogiaf 589* Cf. 

^ Kant 's criticism of Loihniz illuströtos thi&. Cf* Fotimkriiie der 
Metaphysik seit Leibniz und Wolß (Rosenkranz, i. 516; Hai tüiifit«»in, 
nL 441): *ThG prindpJe of the identily of indiscernibles (princi' 
piam ideniitatia indiscertiibiUum} ia that, if from A And B, which» in 
respeet of all their internal <?h&racteristi<?s (of qüality and of 
quantity) aro ontirely alike^ w© mako a concept aa of two difFeront 
thingsi;, we are in error, and we ought to Ii&vö taken tlmtn for one 
aikd thä aarae thing {numero eademj. Leibniz could not ad mit thal 



IlfTRODUCTriON 



out the writinga of Ins pre-critieal period^ we find Kau 
workitig towards a view of Space in which the Leibnitiaii 
and Newtonian poaitions shall be reeonciled, Althougli 
he does not himself express it in this way, his problem 
might fairly be regarded as tbat of finding a siugle con- 
teption of spaoe which can tako tho place both of the 
* real ' and of the * imaginary ^ space of WolfF. In what 
sense can space be regarded as at once real and ideal ? 
Not in the Wolffian sense ; for that practically involves 
a cirmlus in düfinimdo : ' simultaiieous er co-existing ' 
physical tkings presuppose Space. Nor m the Newtonian 
view more aatiafactory, for, while it recognizes that spaci 
is prior to actual cases of spatial existence and while it 
maintains the reality of space, it implies that the whole 
universe is set in spaoe and that the spatial sy stein of 
relations has a leal existence independent of the thingfi 
related. Accordingly^ through a course of thinking which 
we need not here trace Kant arnves at the position which 
he expounds in the Critiqm of Pure Eeasofij nainely, ibat 
space m a form presupposed in the possibility of oi 
Bense-experience, It is not in any way given ab extra ; 
but it is the eondition of there being externality for us. 
It is not a thing Id itselt a real object ; but as it is a per- 
fectly pure perception, free from all the contuigent detail 

we could still distinguish them through their pluces in space (as ife 
ifl p>ssiblü tü perci^ive quito idmilar and equal spacest outt^ide of on« 
iiiioLht^r withuut being iible to s^y that they arö otie and thö sam^' 
?*pacei for othenvisö we could put the whole of infinite space into 
a eubie inch or less). LeLbniz eonld not admit thiSt for ho re- 
cognizes no other distinction among thing>3 than that which iä madi* 
through notions [BfJ^t^e], and i-efus^js to 41 1 low any way of repre- 
sentation Bpecifically distinct from this, auch an intuitmn [^1«- 
aekauwigjf and mor© especially intuition a priori, On thi* oontrary 
he thought that thia munt bu reduced to pure notiona [Begriffe] of 
lio-exi Stenose or suc^^ession^ and thus he set hicnself against commtitL 
fc*nse, which will never be per&uaded that the existente of a drop 
of water in on© place makes it iinposaible für a perfectly Bimilar 
and equal drop to exist in anothor place,* 

^ For a fuU account »es Caird^a Örttic<il PhÜQsophy 0/ Kantj voL i. 
IntriKliictioD, ch. 5, espeuSally pp. 164-168 and 178 j8a. Alao 
bk. i. ch, pp. 304, 305. Cf. Hutchison Stirling^ T^t'Boük Kanif 
PP- 34^43 ftnd 366 eqq. 



ESTIMATE OF LETBKIz's PHILOSOPHY 171 



of sensG, it eatiBfios tbe requirements of ^^ewtonian 
mathematies eyen better than if it were an independeiit 
entity, On the otherhancl, while it bolongs to perceptiou 
or dir^ct Lntuition and ia therefoi-e not, as Leibniz and 
Wolff held, a relation or ord*>r among tlungs which are 
prior to it, yet it is subjective or ideal, it beloDgs to our 
minds, and aeeordingly the diJiieuUies inseparable from 
the Newtonian view of apace (as expounded by Clarke, 
for instance) are avoided. 

But mere sense-pereeption under the fornis of space 
and time ia not, according to Kant, a complete experience. 
It requireg the oomplement of eonception, which is thtJ 
fiinetion of the «nd erstand ing, Here Kant believed him- 
seif to l>e in complete Opposition to Leibniz^ and yet it 
may well be doubted whether the Opposition is really au 
great as Kant aupposed it to be. In the üritique oflHim 
Meason Kant does draw a much sharper line between per- 
ception and conception than Leibni^s did. Kant may \m 
Said to regard the ditference as one of kind, while for 
Leibniz it is a differenee of degree, Leibniz, as we bave 
Seen, gave to pereeption an exceedingly wide meaning, 
a meaning which includea conception and i'epresentation 
of every kind, whether conacious or nnconacious. But 
Kant'ö 'pereeption' is limited to aense-representation. 
Nevertheless Kant'a * pereeption ' is avowedly abstraetj 
and the eonfused pereeption, which is Leibniz's name for 
sense-knowledge, is abatract also, though in a aomewhat 
düferent way. In fact, for Kant the distinction between 
pereeption and conception ia a distinction between abatract 
elementa in a eonerete whole of experience, while the 
corresponding diatinction in Leibniz is a distinction be- 
tween degrees of perfection in one quality or fnnction, 
Thus for Kant sense-perception is abstract, because its 
reality always implies a compiementary element, w^bile 
for Leibniz it is abatract because it is imperfectly deve- 
loped, because it contains the potentiality of greater 
perfection. The weakness of the Kantian position is its 



172 



IKTHODUCTION 



tendency to ove^-sharpen the distinction between percep- 
tion and conception by ignoring the idea of development, 
wliil© the defect of Leibniz is Iiis inclination tu deüne the 
coramon quality or f unction {* perception ' ) by ita lowest 
rather than its highes t terms, to int-erpret it, not as essen- 
tially seif 'Con sei ousnessj which is its most perfect develop- 
ment, but as mer© representation or multiplicity m unity, 
to which consciousness und self-eonsciousness are added 
characteristics \ Yet while Kant makes an advance froni 
the Position of LeibniXj they are on similar lines^ and we 
can read their reconciliation in Hegel ^, 

Leibniz does not give any clear aecount of the relatiotis 
between the principle of contradiction and that of suffi* 
cient n^ason, aa h© uses them in his philosophy ; but it is 
evident that he eonsidered them to be, in som© way, 
ultimately in harmony. The tendency of Kant, on the 
other band, is to emphasize the distinction between them, 
whüe treating each, apart from the other, as abstracL 
The eourse of Kant's pre-critical tiünking makes this clear. 
He begins with the Wolffian view that the principle of 
suffieient reason is redueibl© to that of contradiction \ and 
accordingly, that the principle of contradiction is th© sole 
ultimate principle of knowledge. But gradually he comea 
to see that the principle of contradiction has to do with 
nothing but the form of thought and that ityields merely 
a self-conaistent System of knowledge, baaed on dogmatic 

* In this, I th}uk, there is to be found the öXplsiJation of the 
fiepüiation (alniüst amouiitmg to n distincrtion of kiiid) bötweeii 
rational aouls ^nd tlie other Monads, which Leibniz makee with 
auch appfireiit ineonsistency. Cf. thia Introduction, Part iü. p 116. 

^ ^The doetrinea of Leibniz formecl the j>erman(int atmoaphöre 
of Kant's mind* Iiis readmg of Hume in tniddle life no doubt 
helped to determine the mode in which he abf^orbed and trans- 
formefl them ; but it wag upon tliern^ m wo find in tho üritique no 
lesa than in hia earliör writitiga, tliat his inind constantly worlted, 
and there would be a bett^r case, at aiiy rate, for deacribhig hitti 
as a corrected and doveloped Leibniz than for ptitting him in auch 
a relation to any one eise." T. H. Green^ WorkSj voh iii, p. 134. 

* Cf. Fiincipiij^m prhmrum cognitimis mäaphyaicae 'nova dilucidaik 
i^lSS) (BoaenkranZf i. 4; Hartenatäin^ iü. 4). 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBKIz's PHILOSOPH Y I73 



presuppositions* It ensures order änd necessary con- 
nexioii in tiiought, but it is inadequate to reality^ It 
gives th© logical ground üf thmgs Uf)0ische Grund} hui 
not tlie gmuiid of tlieir reality ilieal grund) K Tlius the 
principk of contradietion is iiisufReieiit when treatöd aa 
the ultimate priocipie of nietaphysics. Kant developö 
this Position in connexion with tlie problerii of proving^ 
the esistence of God. He rejecta, aa a begging of the 
question, the Cartesiati demonstration which maintains 
that existence is neeessarily involved in the perfeetion of 
the most perfect Being. Existenc«, Kant says, cannot be 
a predicate. That is to say, you cannot take out of any 
subject more thm is contained in it ; the principle of 
contradiction will never entitle you to pass from any 
mere idea to ttie reality of that idea. Pure thought, 
determined by the piinciple of contradictionj always 
presuppoees something * given/ and thus reality must 
ultimately lie outside of pure thoughL Thus, for example, 
the real cause of ynything is alwaya more than a mere 
reasüii : a causal connexion is not a merely logical con- 
nexion. It is this line of thinking that leads Kant to 
emphasize the distinction between logical und erst an ding 
atid empirical sens^j and to lay stress on ^ exjierience ' (un- 
rationalized and unexplained) aa the ground of reality^ 
in a way that recalls the position of Locke, Thue, whil<j 
admitting the certainty of mathematics^ Kant protests 
agaiiist the use of a purely mathematical method in deal- 
ing with metaphysics or with tho theory of knowledge, 
on the ground that such a method is * merely synthetic, ' 
that is to say, on the ground that it does not analyze 
actual experience but deduoes from (or bnilds npon) arbi- 

1 Cf, Der i^ins-tg mfigKchß B$n>el^nmd sti einer B^omtraiim dm 
Daseim Gottes (1763) (Rosenkranz, L 161 ; Hartenütehi, vi. 11), K&nt 
makcs advunces towarda this position in thu Essay on Die fahohe 
Spitsßndigkeü d^r i?Msr Sfulltygistischm Figuren (i'jSs) (Rosenkranz, i. 55 ; 
Hartenstein, i. i), and in tlio Versuch den Begriff dtr tugcUirm Grösfi^ 
in die WdtucdsheÜ ehizuführ'ti (1763) '(^Roseakranss, i, 113; Hart<in- 
btein, i. 19). 



^74 



INTRODUCTION 



trary or at least mind-made presiippositiona ^. Finally ia 
the Critique of Pure Mmsm we have Kant'a Solution of th© 
Problem m to the relationa between a priori a posteriori^ 
thought and experienee. And bis eontention is that the 
a priori is not merely that which is self-evident and can 
be expressed in aii analytic Judginent, but that wbich 
experience oniversally and necessaiily inTolves as the 
condition of its possibiUty, 

ThiSj after all, ia but the working out of what is out* 
lined by LeibnLs, when he insists on * compos-gibility/ or 
necessity arising from the System of thingSj as the ground 
of reality. For Leibniz the real is the *fitting/ that 
which haa its place in the best possible System or world : 
tbr Kant the real is that which is in an orderly experience 
constituted by principles which are the logical a priori 
conditions of its possibility. In the phüosophy of Kant, 
accordingly, we have a more thorongh appHcation of the 
principle of sufficient reason, which Leibniz had imper- 
fectly applied. Leibniz's explanation of the existence of 
the actual system of things as the result of a choiee among 
all possible worlds is du© to the inconsistency in his posi- 
tion which comea from working with two co-ordinate first 
principles, The totality of possible worlds is at once a 
System and not a System. If it were a syst ein, the choice 
by Grod of the best possible world would be determined 
hy the nature of the whole System of possibles, The best 
possible world would be the best world in that System, 
and thus the problem of Leibniz would not be solved by 
the ' choice/ but would inerely be can-ied a stage f arther 
back, On the other band, if the totality of possible 
worlds were not a System, the choice of God would prac- 
ticaUy be arbitrary : at least it would be grounded on no 

' Cf, Unf'ermichung über die BeunichJiBii dtr Gmndsätse der mitwrlicJirn 
Th^G^agie und d^ Moral (1764") (Eo&eri kränz, i. 75 j Hartenatein, L 63). 
Se« also Kant'& Imiugural Thesis on bucoitiing Professorin Königs- 
bergf De muir^i sensihüis afg«« inteliigibilis formit et princtpiis (1770), m 
whieh th© diütiiiction between «ense and undftrstanding Je brought 
to tbe fihurp«at p^iint, (Kofienkranz, i. 301 ; Harteufiteiii} iii. ^^SO 



ESTlitATE OF LEIBKIZ^S PHILOSOPHY I75 

reason intelligible to us. Ood would chooae the best 
possible World ; but it would be the best possible lor no 
other reason than that He eliose it. Thus the totaüty of 
possible ideal worlda has the appeanince of being a Byatem, 
while reaOy it is not. It is this ambiguity that eonceals 
the fundamental inconsistency of Leibniz^ — the incon- 
sistency of regarding God as both within the System of 
things and quite oufcside of it (as the Creator), making 
Hirn at once the source of the if^^hol© systam of mntually 
exclusive Monads and the highest Monad of the series^ 
without whom the system would itself be iiicomplete* 
The principle of sufficient reason^ rightly understood, in- 
volves the supposition of one all-embracing system ; but 
though Leibniz had certainly an inkling of the truth 
of this, bis individualistic tendency and his dread of 
Spinozism prevented him from fully realizing it» 

For Kant there is but one system of experiencei, that 
which actuaOy exista. The supposition of a choice among 
possible worlds is no part of his philosophy, But in 
Kantus doctrine the * thing-in-itself * perforins very much 
the sam© function as did the ' choice ' in Leibniz's schem© 
of things. Each is a way of allowing for a possible reality 
other than the actual system, although the need of this 
arises from one cause in Leibnizj and from another in 
KanL Leibniz wishes to avoid a doctrine of blind neces- 
sity : Kant is afraid of a pure relatiyity, They both feel 
that the ultimate ground of the system of mutually related 
things must be aought in some principle outside the 
System itself \ The dogmatism of Leibniz appoars in his 

^ Cf. Critifiue qf Pure Eeamn, Koflenkranjs^ ii. 524; Hartenatöinj 
iL 513 (MeiJclejolin'B Tr., p. 414) : * Th© notionB of r^aJity^ of sub- 
ütiätLCti, of causulity, of necessary existence itaelf, have tio aigniß- 
isanoe in dottjrmining: any objeet^ beyond their use in making 
possible thß empirical Cognition of a thing. They may thua be 
usüd to expiain the possibility of things in tho worid of stmse, but 
tbey cannot be usöd to oxplain tho possibihty of the unücrsa itself ; 
üifice in this case tbe ground of explanatioa must He outs*ide the 
World) and can therefore bö no object of ä pois^iblo experience. 
NoWj TBlatively to the worid of sense, I niay admit such an inconj- 
prfebensible being, the object of a mere idea ; though I may not 



176 



iNTEODtrcrnoN 



making Ulis prineipl© a real and indepeiident * constitutive ' 
grouiid of the World, and he glossea over the difficulty of 
explaining its rektion to the world by raetaphors such as 
the ' Divine ehoice ' and the producing of created Monads 
by continiial * fulguratione of Divin ity.' The criticism of 
Kant, im the other band, leads him to Interpret this 
lütimate principle negatively, as a merely * regulatiTe * 
idea, of the absolute natnre of which the speeulative 
reason can eay nothing, Its realily, however, ia assured 
to US by the practica! reason, and in it we mui^it suppose 
that there js a reconeiliation of necessity and freedom, 
of the kingdom of nature and the kingdom of grace, of 
niechanism and teleoiogy, We can not give a completely 
sÄtiBfactoiy account of the phenomeniü world as a eystem 
governed by final eauses, for we have no speculative 
knowledge of the ultimate inteliigenee and the ends it 
sets before itself. We may guess at final causes ; bnt 
we cannot und erstand their proda cing anything^ apart 
From mechaaical causes. And on the other band, wbUe 
we cannot help regarding the phenomenal world aa a 
niechanical System, ' absolutely no human reisen (in fact 
no finite reason like onrs in quality, however much it 
may surpass it in degrea) can hope to understand the 
p roduction of even a hl ade of grass by mere mechanical 
causes\' We must, in eeiiain casos, postulate adaptation 
to ends, But we can quite conceive an inteliigenee which 
can thinlt the world^ not dsseurBively from part to part as 
we do, but immediately and completely, from w^bole to 
part, and for such an inteliigenee, final and ©fficient 
cause, freedom and necessity, would be harmoni^ed. 
For it to know and to creat© the world would b© the 

Ädmifc its existeac© in itself. . . . It is only a aomething in gs^ei^ 
which I know not iii itaelf, but to whieh^ äs a ground of syätematie 
Uüity in Cognition, I attribiiie chflractoriütics anal^g<>us to tho 
not Jons of th© und^ratjiDding in the eixipirical spher©/ 

* Kant» Orüique 0/ Judgmtnt^ Purfc Ii* div. ii, f 77 , RosenkranK, iv. 
301 ; Hartenstein, TÜ. si8B ; BerGard's Tr,, p. 336). See the whok 
paüjsage. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I77 



same thing : creation would be its thought. Thus Leib- 
niz and Kant are at one in placing the ultimate synthesis 
of things, the sufficient reason of experience, in some- 
thing that is beyond experience itself, and that is related 
to experience in a way which Stands in need of further 
explanation. Leibniz, however, falls into a contradiction 
which Kant avoids. For Leibniz regards God as at once 
the highest of the Monads (the ultimate term in the 
series) and the Creator of the Monads, i. e. the sufficient 
reason of the world which they constitute. But if God 
is one of the series of Monads, it seems impossible to 
regard Hirn as their sufficient reason, as choosing to 
create the System of which He is an element. And on 
the other band, if the essence of the Monads is to repre- 
sent the universe, and if He ' cictus purus) perfectly realizes 
the universe within Himself, having perfectly clear and 
distinct perception, what place is there for a System of 
Monads apart from Him ? Kant avoids the difficulty by 
the shaip distinction he draws between experience and 
the thing-in-itself. He can thus regard God as related 
to the World in a way which we may attempt to describe 
as causal, creative, or otherwise, but which it is impossible 
for US ever with certainty to define \ In short, so far as 
cur theoretical knowledge of things is concemed, the 
account we give of the relation of God to the world is 
simply a useful hypothesis, by means of which we may 
give unity to our knowledge, and avoid the fallacies of 

* Cf. Critique o/Pure Reason (Hartenstein, ii. 508 sqq. ; Rosenkranz^ 
ii. 519 sqq.), Meiklejohn, pp. 410 sqq.: *The notion of a supreme 
intelligence is a mere idea, that is to say, its objective reality does 
not consist in its being immediately referable to an object (for 
in this sense we cannot establish its objective validity) but it is 
merely a Schema of the notion of a thing in general, a pchema 
constructed according to the conditions of the greatest unity of 
reason, and serving only to produce the greatest systematic unity 
in the empirical use of our reason, inasmuch as we deduce this or 
that object of experience from the imagined object of this idea as 
the ground or cause of the object of experience.' Cf. also Rosen- 
kranz, ii. 598 ; Hartenstein, ii. 581 ; Meiklejohn, p. 471. 

N 



178 



INTBODUCTIOK 



dogmatiam \ Yet, while Kant thua escapea the contra- 
diction in Leibniz's view, he cannot b© said to give us 
a satiöfaetory Solution of the difficulty^ 

The Infimnce of Leihnk on Fichte. 

In the modern idealism which first took shape in the 
writings of Fichte, ther© may be traced the influence of 
oertain leading ideas in the philosophy of Leibnis^ to 
which Kant had inevitably done lesa than justice, The 
work of Fichte is generally regarded as an endeavour to 
give System atic unity to the philosophy of Xant hy get- 
ting rid of the thing-in-itself, regarded as entirely outside 
of experienca Indeedj until Kant repudiated his inter- 
prefcationj Fichte regarded himself as an expositor of the 
true Kantian view, and a defender of the critical philo- 
sophy against the misunderstandings of its unintelligent 
dia^iiples. Piehte^s main idea is that experienee (in the 
Kantian sense) has its hasis in a self-consciousness (an 
Ich'imt) which is itself the root of the distinction hetween 
the empirical ego and the empirical non-ego, between 
eubject and object. Both subject and objeet are logically 
involved in the original self-consciousness, out of which 
all experiencej both in its matter and in its form, may 
be deduced* Thus all reference to a reality beyond 
experience becomea unmeaning as well a,i unnecessary, 
The unity of th© universe is maintained with pantheistic 

* D. Nolen {La Critique de Kant ä la Mäaphysique de Zei&wis, pp, 331 
et sqqO fegard^ th© Monadology aa a neeeesary compIem€siit to the 
'Criticiani * of Kant. It aeems to hitn tlia^fc ttie ^ thing-iü-itaelf * ha^ 
in the philostophy of Kfint^ a funetioti simOar to that of the 
'posalbl© thiDg'^ or *essen(ie' m th© eyatoni of Leibniz. An 
ingeaiotts attempt has also been make by Otto Riad«! {Bis Monado' 
logischen Bestimmungen in Ranis L$hrs tom Ping an sich) to nhow that 
tb© things-in-themaelyes, in aofar as thoy &re coaceivi*d a±f positive, 
hav© the charact^rietica of Monads, There is a bmt of the sam© 
view in Ueberwög'a Commöntary on tb© two editiona of the CYiiique 
0/ Pure lUasotL 

* For Kant's accouot of his own r©lation to L©ibniz sw Appendix 
l^t p, 20a 



ESTIMÄTE OF LEIBNIZS PHILOSO PHY I79 

completeneas ; and the syshem of Fichte hm well been 
described as * Spinojsa in terms of Kant V 

Now the Heed of a thing-in-itself, such as Kant postu- 
latesj ai-isea from the thoroughnesa of hm Separation 
between perception and conceptlon, between sense and 
understanding. They are correlative ; yet they ar© treated 
by him as if quite independent, so that the i-esult of 
their combination is a merely phenomenal world, Per- 
ception eannot evolve from itself the fonns of the tinder- 
standing, through which alone it loses its blindness ; and 
conception cannot produce for itself the matter of sense 
and experience, without which it is empty. But thia 
dtialism indicates, in a negative way, the necessity of a 
noumenal world, however completely such a world may 
be beyond the reach of onr intellectual comprehension 
or proof. It is in revulsion from dogmatism that Kant 
bolds thia position. And thus he is continually poLnting 
out that the great error of Leibniz ia that of regarding 
experience aa a System of concepts^ which may conatitute 
an internal! y seK-consistent wholej but which has no cer- 
tain contact with reality. Such a dogmatisrn, Kant holda, 
has no ans wer to scepticism^ and thus to giYe up the 
Bharp diatinction between perception and conception is 
to lose our grasp of reahty and truth. 

AtKsordingly it ia not surpriaing to find that, in setting 
aside the thing-in4tself (as Kant understood it), Fichte 
goes back to the doctrine of Leibniz and proceeds to 
dewlop, under new eonditionSj some of ib leading ideaa^ 

^ Adamaon'a Fichte (Blackwood*« Philogopliical Clasgics)^ p. 130^ 
3 *The tim© is come forreviving the philosophy of Leibniz, . , , 
Kothing is furlhcr removed from tho thought of Leibniz than the 
apeculatiTe dream of a world of things-in-themselyes, which no 
mind comprehonds or knows, but which nevertheless acta upon ua 
and produeoä iill our ideaa, The flrst of hia thoughta, that whicE 
he makoB hia starting point^ ia, that tho repreHentatioiia of extemal 
things aris« in the soul in virtuo of its owq law^t^ as In an isoIat«d 
World, and as if nothing wera present in it except Qod (tha Infinite) 
and the bouI (conaciousness of tho Infinite)* . . . In thug ejcpreasing 
himself Leibniz Bpok& for philoaopherH. Büt now-a-days peoplo 
will inaifit on phüosophiisingj even when philosophy is th© la^t 

W 2 



i8o 



IHTEODUCTION 



Leibni^, in antagonisni to the dualist position of Descai'tea, 
does not lay stt'eas on the distinctiou of subject and obje^t, 
but conesives the imiYerae aa an infinity of aubjects^ eaoh 
self-suf&cient and *jn tlie sea of life enialed/ For Kant, 
the diatinction of subject and ohject ia all in alL Ficlite 
still gives füll vveight to the distinctionj but conceivea it 
as overcome in the unity of self-conaciouaness, or ralher 
as flowing necessarily from that unity in its most abatract 
and indefinite fomij and being lost in that unity in its 
highest and most perlect form. Thus, according to 
Leibniz, the whole succession of a Monad's atates, all Ha 
perceptiona of the univei*se, proceed spontaneously from 
within itself, * aa if there were only Grod and itself in tlie 
World*'; and evory created Monad üontains within itatdf 
both matter and form^ wliich are in reality degreas of 
one power or funetion, Similarly, the ego of Fichte, the 
primal self-conscionsness, ia a perfectly spontaneous foixje, 
producing from within itself the empirieal ego and nun- 
egOj subject and objecto making its own external World, 
projecting that world through the power of imagination, 
and continually striving towards the ultimate overcoming 
of this diatinction between out er and inner in a pur« 
* intellectual Intuition/ Accordingly Fichte throwa down 
the barriera which Kant had raiaed between perception 
and coneeption, and return s to the position of Leibniz 
that all knowledge ia one great process of development, 
though, of eourse, he gives a very different accoimt of 
this development from that which we find in Leibniz^* 

thing thej are fitted for. If any one tellä ua that no idea [For- 
»kUun^] cftfi arise in us from an esternal actione thurti is öndleaa 
üstonishmonL To be a phlloBopher oiie must belttjvö tliat the 
Monadll have windfjws, through whicsh things tiom& and go." 
(Schölling, SümmÜkhti Werks, vf>I i. sa Idem eu ein&r FkUohophic der 
Naiur^ ccniimend*id by Fichte, Werke, i» 5^5 iiote.) 

^ Lettre ä Foudter (1686)^ (G. i. 38a), Cr. ^ew S^iitem. § 14. 

^ ^ The final notion of Fichte'« philosophy, expressed more ck^rly 
in the later worlts than in the Wissensckaftsiefiref m thut of the 
dlvine or spiritual orderof which fiait© sipirits are the mntiLfeN Nation 
or realiisation, and in th© light of which human life and it» 
HUrrounding^ aj'pear aa the trontinuous progreas in Over highor 
ätagea tuwards reaÜzation of the fiual eiid ot reaaon, üiider Hiia 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY l8l 



The reality of the world of sense is for Fichte a result of 
the activity of imagination. Our mind creates our sensa- 
tions ; but it creates them unconsciously, and thus our 
imagination attributes them to things outside of us, 
objectifies them. Yet imagination does not give us mere 
illusions, but truths more or less perfectly expressed. * If 
it be shown, as the present System should show, that 
upon this activity of imagination rests the possibility of 
our consciousness, our life, our being for ourselves, that 
is to say, our being as ego [unseres Seyn als Ich], this 
activity of imagination cannot cease, unless we are to 
make abstraction from our ego, which would involve a 
contradiction, since that which makes abstraction cannot 
make abstraction from itself. This activity of imagina- 
tion, then, does not deceive us, but gives us truth, the 
only possible truth ^' There are, as it were, two sides 
to our knowledge of things. In so far as it is Sensation 
(that is to say, an idea unconsciously created by the mind) 
it is a product of the non-ego, the object ; while in so far 
as it is an idea consciously * projected ' by us or referred 
to sonaething, it is a product of the ego, the subject. 
But the action of ego and non-ego is reciprocal, and they 
both have their source in the original self-consciousness 
from which they necessarily proceed*. 

It is, of course, beyond the scope of our intention 
to consider the many essential difFerences between the 
Systems of Leibniz and of Fichte : to have indicated their 
connexion is sufficient. And the words of Schölling may 

conception, the oppositions of thought which play so important 
a part in philosophy — being and thought, mind and nature, soul 
and body, freedom and law, natural inclination and moral eflfort, 
mechanism and teleology — are reconciled. They appear in their 
due place as different aspects of the several stages in and through 
which the Spiritual Order is realized.' Adamson, Fichte, pp. 219, 
220. 

* Fichte, SämmÜiche Werke, i. 227. 

^ *The ego, as understood in common unscientific language, 
posits neither the external object nor itself, but both are posited 
through general and absolute thinking, and through this the 
object is given for the ego, as well as the ego for itself.' Fichte, 
Werke, iL 562. 



l82 



INTRODUCTIOir 



be taken as showing that this connexlon was from the 
first fülly realized. 'Since Leibniz/ lie says, *if we set 
aside secondary doctrines which do not eount, we aee 
that the reiU, ihe finite^ is gener ally placed in the region 
of the ideah The whole real World has no exiatence in 
iteelfy büt only in the repreaentations [ Vorstdlun^en] of the 
aouh , . , Fichte takes up this ide^ilism Tvhich is a denial 
of the independent heing of the real, and, in this regard^ 
he does not go beyond Leibniz. The only difference 
hetween them i.^ tlns» Leibniz cannot explain why th© 
soul or the Monad is snbject to affeetiona which produce 
in it finite represantations ; or, i£ he tries to find the cause 
of this» he ia obliged to place it in God, in the Infinitej 
which involvea him in inevitable contradictions, Fichte, 
on the other band, finda that the finite nature of the aoul 
has its explnnation in the absolutely free activity of the 
soul itself and result^ from this, that the aoul by its own 
act posits itself for itself m finite, aa separated from tlie 
absolut c aUj and consequently inxposes on iteelf the ne- 
cessity of contemplating no longer this absolute all, but 
only the negations, liniitations, bounds of its infinity 
Accordingly it may be said generali y that in the philo- 
Süphy of Leibniz will and intelligence (appetition and 
perception) are co-ordinate prtnciples of things (the will 
of God, for instance, not being prior to His undei-stand- 
ing nor His understanding to His will), while the 
philosophy of Fichte is essentially a practkal idealism, 
in which will (in however undefined a form) is ultiniate 
and predominant. The * principle of the best ' (the ten- 
dency to realize the moral order which is the expresaion 
of the infinite good will) is with Leihniz the determining 
principle of actual, aa distinct from merely poasible 
existence^ while with Fichte it is the ultimate ground 
of all reaüty, of the one System of things 

^ Sohening, Prapdedendik sut muerm Phitosophis. Werke, voh u 

p. 135. 

* Au ejte«üeiit accoitut of Fi cht« 's histoncal position is gLven ia 




ESTOIÄTE OF LEIBNIZ'S PFfILOSOPHY 183 



Schopenhauer. 

Ab regarda the main principies of Ms philosophy, 
Schopenhauer {however unconsciously) Mlows Fichte', 
His starting-point m the Kantian distinction Iwtween the 
intelUgible or noumenal and the tmpirical or phenomenal 
character of h r^ial sühject -** As in the philoaophy of 
Fichte, the ultimate reality is will, The ^ Latelligible 
character' is a will, which is the source of the ^empirical 
character ' ; and in general will is a pure activity which 
iB tho source of the System of phenomena. Thua the 
World is will + idea (i, Vorstellung, representation, phe- 
nomenon). The absolute is the purely practieal activity 
of will, which gives rise to the relative or mutually 
conditioned, in a way which ia beyond explanation, 
for our understanding cannot pasa the limits of the 
conditiooed, the phenomenal world* ßut this uJtimate 
wül is essentiaily destitute of anything that can fairly 
be deseribed as ethical character. The world is not a 
progress towards the re^liKätion of the best, but rather 
an unfortunate episode in the existence of the eternal 
will, and the high est good is to be attained not by allow- 
ing this will or striving {will to live) to have free course 
in US, but by suppresaing it as much as poasible* The 
expression, 'the world as will and idea,' recalls the 
Leibnitian view of substance ss essentially appetition -+- 
perception. But Schopenhauer, like Fichte^ gives to 
will a metaphysical priority, which is not attributed 

Wallaee*Ei L^gic of Begel^ Prolegomen a (and ed.\ eh. 11. Seö also 
cha. la and 13 for an acconnt of ScJieUing with suggestive referencea 
iQ LeibDi^. In cli. 13 there a lucid explanation of tb© varioua 
meanlnga of the term * Evolution,' it used by Leibniz and by 
later writor», Cf. voL ii- 434* 

* ' Except his pessimism, whieh ia no neces&ary consequence of 
the ©ystem^ there U absol^utely notbing in Scliüpen]iauer*& philo- 
flophy whieb ia not contained in the later works of Ficbte/ 
Adamson^ FicMß, p. aig. Thoupb thia is tb© sitatement of an expert, 
I \entur© to tbink it a little too sweeping. 

* Üriti</ue of F^ure Beasorif Roöünkranz, ii. 4^3 j Hartenstein, iL ^30 ; 
Muiltlejübn, p* 333, 



IXTKODUCTION 



to it by Leibniz. Aguin, Sehopenhauery reducing the cate- 
guries of Kant to causality > interpi-eted in a wide sense), 
gives great importance to the prindple of sulHcient reason 
■which (in one or other of four different forms) be regards 
m the governing principle of the pb^nomenal World. 
LAU öur ideas [Vorstellungm] stand to one another in a 
regulär [gesetjsmäsmg] connexion, whicjh as to its form is 
determinable a priQr% and on account of which nothing 
flelf-sufficient and independent, notMng separate and de- 
taehedj can beeome an object for us, It is this connexion 
which the principle of sufficient reason, in its univer- 
sality, expresses^/ The principle of contradiction is 
Osten sihly subordinated to that of sufficieiit reason, it 
being regarded as one of th© general laws of thinking, 
discovered by induetion and used as a judgment * raetar 
logically true,* which may be the ground or sufiicient 
xe&son of other judgments^ But here there is clearly 
an inconsiateney between Bchopenhauer*s logical theory 
and bis metaphysic. His absolute, the ultimato will, is 
(however far he may be from aeknowledging it) really 
determined by the principle of contradiction, in its 
abatimt form^ for the will is conceived as that which 
absolutely is, that which is apart from aU relation, that 
which may, in some mysterious way, produce a System 
üf difterences, but which has an identity that is perfectly 
iiidependent of them, Accordingly, while Schopenhauer 
indicatea the deeper and more comprehensive Interpreta- 
tion of the principle of sufÖcient reason as underlying 
that of contradiction, he does not allow it to monld bis 
System, 

Herhart 

Another t hinker who owes something to Leibniz and 
something more to Kant and to Fichte, is Herbart (1776- 
1841)» He is not content to subordinate the principle of 

^ l7eZw (ffd xi^fadie Wurzd dm Satzes vom zurmchendm Grunde^ eh. 3, 
I 16. 

3 Cp* Veber die merfiMhe IVu-rsd, &c., ch, 5, | 33. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 185 

sufficient reason to that of contradiction, but he practically 
endeavours to do without the former principle as far as 
possible. The task of philosophy he regards as that of 
eliminating the contradictions that appear in common 
consciousness by transforming the ideas which are given 
in it*. This transformation, for Herbart, practically 
means abstraction. Every bit of experience, being given, 
has something real in it ^. But its reality is that which 
it is, apart from conditions or relations to other things. 
The real is always something, a g^uäle, a * this ' or * that ' 
of some kind. But it is absolute position (in the Fichtean 
sense) or affirmation without negation ; it has absolute 
self-identity, so that it is perfectly simple and not, like 
the Monad of Leibniz, a substance involving in its unity 
a plurality of qualities ; and it is pure quality, without 
any quantitative element or aspect, so that it is neither 
a divisible totality nor an unbroken continuum. These 
'reals,' like the Monads, are infinite in number, and each 
is difPerent from every other. But they are absolutely 
unalterable, they have no characteristic analogous to the 
perception of Leibniz, and they are not impenetrable, for 
any number of them may equally be thought as occupying 
or as not occupying the same point in space. Like the 
Monads, no one * real ' can act upon another ; otherwise 
they would cease to be absolute. And each * real ' is the 
immediate cause of one and only one phenomenon of 
experience, so that the statie variety of the world is due to 
the power of * self-preservation ' (Selbsterhältung) in each 
* real.' The actual changes which we find in experience 
are due to the different aspects in which the * reals ' appear, 
when they are in different relations to one another, 
although their true natures remain unchanged (as in the 
phenomena of colour contrasts). And these different 

* * Mere uncritical experience or merely empirical knowledge 
only oflfers problems ; it suggeats gaps, which indeed further re- 
flexion serves at fi^sfc only to deepen into contradictions.* Wallace, 
Heget 8 Philosophy ofUindy p. Ixiii. 

2 * Wieviel Schein, soviel Hindeutung aufs Sein.' 




INTEODUCTION 



relations of the ' reals ' to one another are, agaln, due to 
the possibility of conceiving the * reals ' as both together 
in one point and apart from one another, Accordingly 
the äoul, being a * real/ must not b© represented as havuig 
in itself povvers, facultie^^, qualitiea» &e. It is absolute! j 
aimple, and has not hing but * seltpreservation,' which 
apparently is little more than a permanent possibility of 
relation to other * reals/ None of the t'unctions and 
chaiucteristics of mind belong to it intrinsically. They 
are to be astribed to other things, qnite aa much as 
to the mind or soul itself, They are merely names 
for the phenomena or aöi>ects of certain * reals ' (one of 
which is the soul) in certain relations to one another, 
Theae phenomenal (of course, not real) interactions of 
the ^ reals' admit of mathematical caleulation^ and 
accordingly Herbart is the father of those who apply 
matliematical methods in empirical psychology This 
is natural in one whoae thougbt is so eompletely 
dominated by the abstract uae of the prlnciple of contra- 
diction. And, in short, if we leave out of account the 
influence of Fichte lipon his psychology, may regard 
Herbart's work as a remodelling of that of Leibniz, on t!ie 
aupposition that the principle of sufiicient reason is to be 
dropped. 

EegeVs Solutim of the Dualism in Leibnis. 

In the philosophy of Hegel we have a Solution of the 

dualism between the principle of eontradietion and that 

of suflicient reason, as they are used and conceived by 

Leibniz. The problem indicated by this dualism under- 

Hos the whole course of German speculation from the 

time of Leibniz onwards. Wolff, in a negative way, gave 

* His application of mathematical methods, however, diffei-i* 
entii-ely from that which occurs in the psych o-physiea of the 
Fcchn^r Schoo 1^ and in modern phyaiological pajohology. For 
a füll oiplftnatioti, aee Wallace, Megd's Btiks<^h]f qf Mmd^ pp. l:Kviii 
»qq. It mjiy also be noted that LeibniÄ^s theories regarding uu- 
«jünscloua and peiifes peroeptiona are developed and applied in tlie 
psyohology of Herbart. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIZS PHILOSO PH Y 187 

preciaion to the problem by suggestiog the most superficial 
possible Solution, reducing the principle of sufiicient 
reason to that of contradietion. This (though Wolff 
perhaps did not realize it) was little better than telling 
Leibnk tlmt be bad dis<;overed a mare's nest. Kant, 011 
the other hand, gives positive preciaion to the problem by 
the sharpneas of his distinction between the absolute and 
the relative, while Fichte and Schelliug, in diffei"ent ways, 
endeavour to make explicit the unity to which the Kaiitian 
divisions point Their re-employment of the principle of 
development or progressive aelf-realizationj which is so. 
impoilant a feature of Leibniz's thinking, brings ua to the 
verge of HegePs Solution of the problera, Hegel practi- 
cally reveraes the procedure of WolfF^ by ahowing that fehe 
principle of contradietion presupposea that of sufficient 
reasoB, and that each by itself is an abstract espression 
of the principle of seÜ-consciousneas \ The real is not 
merely in se {as it would be if the abstract principle of 
contradietion were uUinmte), nor ia it merely in alio (as it 
would be if the abstract principle of suflicient reason were 
ultiniatej which, of course^ no one maintains). But the 
real is that which becomes itself through being in alio, 
through being not itself, There is no such thing as a 
purely analytic or a purely synthetie judgment ; but 
when we attribute any quality to a subject, we attribute 
to it not merely a difiference from other thinga but a 
oneneas witli that from which we differentiate it\ The 
univerae is a System of auch perfect unity that the oppo- 
sites it eontaina nve all contraries and never eontradictories. 
Absolute contradict»ries or absolute differeneea are ab- 
atractions* To say, aa did LeibniZj that no two thinga are 
exactly the same impliea that no two things {not even the 
most extreme oppoaites) are entirely different, Ä muat 

* See Caird'"» Hegel (Black-wood'a Philaaophical Clasaioal, cha. 7 
and 8. Also Wallac©j Prokgümena to the Logic qf Heget {anä ed.)^ 
ch. 30. 

* Cf. Caird, Cntical Fhih$i^hy o/Kant, vol. Li. pp. 64 sqq. 



INTRODUCTION 



have Bomething in common with noirA, iftheir Opposition 
ie to liave any meaning. * The other stands over against 
its other ^' That is to say, th^ir dlfference must have 
some ground» some underlying unity. And on the other 
handj every identity, ©ven the identity of a thing with 
itself, impliea some difference, There is no pure grouiid, 
no absolute first principlej independent of a suffieient 
reaaon. Hegel regards tlie umvei^ as itself one absolute 
System. The World we know is the only world, and it 
is not a merely phenomeiial System, the expression of 
something heterogeneous with it (like the arc electric 
light between two opposite points of carbon , nor is it an 
inexplicable product of something other than itself, such 
as an uneonditioned will, nor yet is it the production of 
some Doum'enal absolute. It hangs upon nothing; it 
needs nothing to hang upon. The universe is one System 
of endless mutual determinations, yet not a merely static 
System nur a System of cyclical revokitions, endlessly 
repeatedj which would involve the supposition of an 
extern al absolute aa th© source or support of all. It ia 
rat her an evolution of that whose end is in its beginn ing, 
that whose development is free, because, being all-com- 
prehensive, it is .perfectly self-determiued, 

Thus Hegel points out that ^ it is the notion which 
Leibniz had in his eye when he spoke of sufficient ground 
and urged the study of things linder Its point of view/ Byj 
the notion Hegel naeans * a content objectively and intrin- 
aically determined and hence self-acting/ Thia would 
sufficiently describe the Monad of Leibnis? if we keep out 
of view the Monad's absolute particularity, its isolationas 
one of an infinite series of independent units, or, in other 
words, if we omit from the conception of the Monad all 
that is due to the priuciple of contradicfcion, intei-preted 
abstractly as a pritieiple of pure or immediate self-identity. 
This isolatiouj of courscj is an essen tial elemeut in 

* Hegel» Logk^ § iig (Wftllace's Tr., sand ed., aas), See the 
whole pasaage, and alao pp> 994 sqq. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY 189 



L<^ibni2's conception of the Monad, and the result is that 
while his speculation points to a view of the universe as 
one System in which the elements ai-e intrinsically and 
not externally combined, he does not go far enough to 
secure this metaphysical position, just as he does not 
push his logical analysis far enough to reconcile the 
principles of contradiction and sufficient reason. The 
Hegelian * notion ' is thus the completion of what is 
vaguely shadowed forth in the Monad of Leibniz, and 
more especially in the Monas Monadum, in which all is 
(however unsatisfactorily) brought to unity. For the 
notion implicitly contains all in itself, and all is realized 
through its logical (not temporal) development. Like 
the Monad, the notion is not in time any more than it is in 
Space; it comprehends both. The difference is that by 
Leibniz the development is conceived as a continuous 
growth or increase in a certain fundamental quality 
(clearness and distinctness of perception^, while by Hegel 
it is represented as a dialectic movement from that which 
is relatively abstract, through its correlative abstraction 
(or its * negation ') to that which, comprehending or 
uniting both, is relatively concreto. For Leibniz develop- 
ment is from small to great (witness, for instance, his 
petites perceptions ) ; for Hegel development is from frag- 
ments to wholes, or rather from the vague and undeter- 
mined to the definite and determined. 

Accordingly what Leibniz means by saying that the 
Monad (or its qualities) cannot go out of itself and cannot 
be entered or influenced from oiitside, would by Hegel be 
expressed as the doctrine that thought or self-consciousness 
is reality, the universe, and that accordingly it can neither 
go beyond itself nor have anything beyond it. It may 
sunder itself ideally, but it cannot really go out of itself, 
for there is no * out of itself.' In the same way the Monad 
may ideally be sundered into active and passive elements 
(entelechy and materia primä^, but it can really give 
nothing and it can really receive nothing. The difference 



igo 



IKTRODUCTION 



Ski this point between the attitude of Hegel and that of 
Leibnk h due to the fact üiat while L^ibniz int^erpi-ets 
' perception ' as that which it iö in its lowest form {mere 
* representation ' or * expression and regarda eonacious- 
ness and self-consciousness as developments from it hy 
inereaae or addition, Hegel interpreb * representation ^ or 
relation in gener al as being essen tially that which it is 
in its highes t form (aelf-üonsciousness)^ and rega rds th© 
lower forms as ^ abstract ' or incomplete foreahadowinga, 
nndeveloped expressions of it, For Hegel as for Leibniz 
the universe is organic; throughout, Ko part of it is 
actually other than self-determined, for the unity of the 
whole and its parts is absolutely complete. so that no part 
can he conceived as having any reality by itself. Loibniz 
holds that the Monads must be conceived on the ■ analogy' of 
the souL Hegel insists on a unity whieh is elüser than mere 
analogy, and which, at the same time, expresses itself in 
the greatest posslble variety ; he regards self-corLSciousnesSj 
explicitly or implicitly, as the reality of every pari, every 
meniber,or organ, of Üie whole. In shojrt, it may be 
said that in Leibniz's account of simple substanc« we have 
the first Suggestion of the transition from suhstanc© to 
subjeet (as the ultimate reality of things), which is brought 
to eompletion by Hegel ^ 

Lotzens Mficonstruction of the H^pofheses of Lmbni^. 

It seemed to Lotze that the * bold Monkm ' of Hegel 
'undertoök far more than human powors can achieve/ 
although *its leading idea by no means loses its Talue 
through the great defects in its execution This ' leading 
idea * was in Lotze's opinion the ^ reconciliation of oppo- 
sites/ the over Coming of the contradictions in thought by 
bringing all knowledge to System atic unity. But Lotze's 

^ Cf. generallj Caird^ Critieal Phüosophy of KanU vol, Ü, bk. i. 
ch. la, espeeially pp, 6fl sqq, See also MQmdohgtjj 5 30, 

» Lotz^j MetaphifsiCf bk. i* eh, 7, § 88 (Eng. Tr., vol. i, p. ao6). 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNiz's PHILOSOPHY I9I 

intörpretation of * thought ' ifi yery different from that of 
HegeL Although he expressly repudiatad the Suggestion 
that he is to be counted aa a follower of Herbart^ Lotze's 
Position as regards thought and the re€onciling of its 
cotitradictionä is more akin to the view of Herhart than 
to that of HegeL Like Herbart he regards thought as 
e^iaentially analytic, ae interpreting rather than co-nstituting 
reality^ and the work of science or phüosophj is thiis not 
that of Jaying down an absolute all-eomprehensive eystem, 
expressing the whole evolution of reality^ but that of 
unÜying our knowledge^ resolving the contmdictions that 
appear in common experienee. Thought cannot pierce to 
the mjier nature of things^ cannot understand them so 
tboroughly that it could make them, To use a distine- 
tion which has become a commonplace among writers on 
natural science, thought can descnhe but it cannot eJcpMnK 
It can give an account of what happens^can expresa inthe 
form of general laws the relations between things, so asto 
be able to ealculate occuiTences, and can poßsibly reduce 
these laws to one general syst^m ; bnt it cannot teil what 
the things themselves really are, how they originally came 
into being, and why tbey are so and not otherwise. In 
short, thought is goyerned solely by the principle of 
eontradietion ; the principle of sufficient reason {in 
Leibniz's sense) is beyond it. * Eeality is infinitely richer 
than thought, . , , We know that in fact the nature of 
reality yields a result to us unthinkable, It teaches us 
tliat being and not-being are not, as we could not help 
thinking them to be, contradictory predicates of ©very 
«ubjeet, but that there is an alternative between themj 
arising out of a union of the two which we cannot constmct 
in thought This explains how the extravagant utterance 
could be ventured lipon, that it is just contradiction 

1 Ff>r a fuller account of thia diatinetion, see Mei'z, History qf 
Fnropmn TftüUgM in the Ninekenlh Century ^ vol. i. pp. 33 7^ 3^fj B^Bt notea. 
Venn (Empirical LögiCf ch. ar) minimizes the diötiiicfcion^ hol ding 
explanation to be general izatioü. 



192 



INTRODUCTIOK 



•whkh conatitutes the truth of the real. Thoa« who us©d 
it regarded that as cantradictoiy which was in fact 
flüperior to logieal laws — which doea not indeed abrogate 
tliem in their legitimate application, but as to which no 
Hort of positive conjecture could possibly be formed as 
a result of such application \ ■ 

The revolt of Lotze against th© idealism of Fichte, 
Schell ing, and Hegel was due to the bad treatment which 
the * Philosophy of Nature' had received at their hands. 
The self'Confidence of a thought which had found itselt 
absolute resulted in a Naturphilosophie whieh despised 
factß ; and Lotze^ as a scientist, feit it necessary to bring 
down thought from * the bjgh horse of idealisni/ and 
aasign to it the humble work of Observation and descrip- 
tion, * The study of medicine, which I had chosen as my 
life-workj made it necessary forme to aequirea knowledge 
of natural acience, and hence (in brief) I eame to see how 
completely untenabb ia a great part of the views of 
Hegel, or rather the whole of them, in tho foi-m in which 
they are puiV It was to a large extent through his 
medical studies that Lotze arrived at one of the chief 
doctrines of his philosophy, viz. the universaüty of mecha- 
nism aa an account of the relations between phenomena. 
*The father of modern physiology,' Johannea MüUer 
(1801-1858), had clianged the whole aspect of biological 
science by extending the conception of mechanism to all 
the phenomena of life \ Lotze took a further step in the 
same direction when he defined mechanism as ^ the eon- 
nexion of all those universal laws, according to which 
every individual in the created world acts upon every 
other*/ The sphere of mechanism is thus extended ao as 

* Lotze, Mtitaphysic^ bk. i. eh. 6, | 76 (Eng. Tr,, vol. i. pp, 178* 
179). Ena the whulo chapter, in wbich the viewa üf Leibniz aiid 
Herbart life ditscuased. 

^ Merz, Hhtmy 0/ Europ^n Thmght in the NineteEtifh Cenhtnf^ voL i, 
pp> ai6 fiqq. ; nL Lotze^ Mdaphysic, bk« iU eh. 8, §| 324 sqq. (Eng. 
Tr-, voU ii. p. J38;, 

* StreitaiJir^ p. 57. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I93 

to include the phenomena not merely of inorganic and 
organic bodies, bnt also of mind, * Tbe fünetion of 
mechankm in tbe construction of tbe world is, without 
an exoeption, universal in its extent ^' The conception of 
meehanism governs all seience, for ihe principle of all our 
thinking is tbe piinciple of contradiction, wliich can 
only accept what is given in experience and systematize 
its laws. 

But Lotze protesta strongly against the view that 
mechaniam gives ns a final esplanation of tbe reality of 
the World. The laws of science are laws of pbenomena ; 
they do not account for tbe things themselvea* We may 
say tbat the essence of a thing is to stand in relations to 
other tbings. But tbe tbing itself is more tban the 
relations, and mechanism gives tjs an account of tbe rela- 
tions only- Tbüs wbile * the function of mechanism in 
the construction of tbe world is universal in its extent, it 
is entirely subordinate üi its importmceV As mere 
thoüght is by itself inadequate to reality, so mechanism 
(the System of laws whicb it is the work of seien to 
discoTer and express) is not an eternally necessary System, 
eonstituting the very nature of tbings, but is raerely the 
way in wbicb the ultimate idea, the good, bas freely 
chosen to realize itself ^ !Not tbongbtj but goodness is 
ultimate, and * tbe establisbing of mechanism is the first 
ethical deed of tbe Absolute. The fact that there is 
a kingdom of universal laws appears to me to b© compre- 
hensible only in a world whose ultimate principle is an 
ethical one ; anotber world (if I were to try to form for 
jnyself the notion of it, wbich is for me absurd) might, it 

' Kkin& Schriffm^ nL 310, 

* loc, citj cf. MiüTOcosmiis, Introduction (Eng. Tr,, vol. i. p. xvi). 

^ * Mechanism ia but the coUoction of all the instnunental forma 
in which God has willed that created beiDgs ahall act on one another 
with their unknown naturcsp and that all their states Bhall bö 
welded into th© endleaa chain of a world-history. Thia view 
explores the sphertj of means, not th© spbere of onds to which those 
minister/ Micrw^osrnm, bk. iü, Conclufllon. (Eng, Tr., toL L 
p. 3900 

O 



194 



IKTRODUCnON 



appears to me, have arisen — a ■world without this thread 
of con&ecutivenessj without this veritas in the mme of the 
old metaphysie Accordingly for Lotze the ultima te 
reality k a personal God, who Bets before Himaelf the 
highest moral ends, and has established the *absolutely 
valid System of laws which rules the world ' as Üie best 
means of securing these ends, Thought is a meana of 
attaining to complete experience ; mechaniam is a means 
of realizing the best. *There is no natura of things" 
outside of God/ limiting the sphere of His cboiee. But 
on the other band, His choice is not arbitrary, but is 
governed by Hm perföct idea of wbat is absolutely 
beat. 

In this the irtfluenc© of Leibniz is so manifest that it 
does not surprise us to find Lotze writing to the yonnger 
Fichte : *I went willingly through the splendid gateway 
which ha [Her hart] is convinced that he has been abl© to 
ereet as an entrance to bis metaphysic ; the gateway of 
the Leibnitian Monad-world Thus, accordingto Lotze, 
we are constmined to conceive the real world as a world 
of Monada, wbich are ultimately one in nature. In addition 
to meehanismj or the system of laws governing {or ©x- 
pressing) tha relations between things, there are the tbings 
themselYes, the facts, whicb may be eonceived as Monads. 
And both of these (the laws and the facts) presuppose 
a universal and all-pervading substancej whieh is merely 
a postulate of thought, but is a reality for feeling, and 
which {being intelligible only through tbe idea of a 
personal Deity) realizes the liighest moral ends in tba 
sphere of tbe facts by means of the laws. Things are to 
b© thought of as Monads, because nature is to be eon- 
ceived as animated tbrougbout; all things are endowed 
with *niode8 of Sensation and anjoyment^,* Otherwise 

^ StreUachriß. p* 57* 
ä Ibid. p. 7, 

* Microc&smu9, bk. iü. ch. 4, § 3 (Eng. Tr,, vol. i, p, 360)» GL 
Lotze's fearly writing — Femies d'un Idiote sur Dßäcartts^ Spinosa «£ 
l£ihnii&, (Kkijie Schrißerif voL ül. p, 564.) 



ESTIMATE OP LEIBNlz's PHILOSOPHY 195 

we Bhould have to regard all natur© m merely machinery 
for the drama of human eonsciousness— a Yiew wLich 
could never satisfy our * longings ' and ^ cravings/ But 
this monadology or * hypothesis of ünext€nded atoma' caa 
never, for Loize^ be more tlian a hypothesis* Thonght 
ean never determme its truth, becanse it is a hypothesis 
regarding the naturc of things, and thongkt haa to do 
only with their reMions. The monadology is ' a concep- 
tion of whose essential truth we are eonvinced, yet to 
wMch we can hardly expect any further coneession than 
that, among the dreams of ©ur imagination, it may be 
one of those whieh do not contradict actnal faota 

Lotze is here manifestly more in harmony with Kant 
than with Leibniz ^. And he further differs from Leibniz 
in maintaining that the Monadaare not completeiy isolated 
from one another^ so that eaeh contains ite own relations 
within itself* If Leihniz*s doetrine be true, * while none 
of the members [of the real world] condition each other, 
eyerytliing goes on m if they all did so; accordingly, 
while it does not really form a whole, yet to an intelli- 
gence directed to it, it will bare the appearance of doing 
flo ; and, in one word, its reaüty consisU in a holiow and 
delueiye imitation of that inner consisteney which was 
pronounced to be^ as such, the nltijnate reajson why its 
realization was possible^,* Accordingly for Lotsse 'every 
Single thing and event can only be thought as an activity, 
constant or transitoiy, of the one existence, ita reality 
and substance as the mode of being and substance of thiö 
one existence, its nature and form as a consiatent phase 
in the unfolding of the same*/ The pre-established 
harmony of Leibniz is thus set aside by Lotze \ Its place 

* Microcosmusj hk. i'iL ch» 4, § 3 (Eng. Tr., L 360; cjf. i. 363). 

' For an excellont acoount of the greneral relation gf Lot^e to 
K&nt, flee Jones, Fhilosophy of Lotse, pp» 64 sqq* 

» Metaphysic^ bk. L ch. 6^ § 79 (Eng, Tr-, voL i. p- 184)- Cf* the 
wliolo content, 

* loc. dt. 

= 'Only if th© courso of all^ even of the most trivial, events 
were flxßd by immutable predeatinatioji, ^ould the asäumption of 

O 2 



INTEODUCmOX 



13 taken by the eonception of mechanism^ through wliich 
we desciibe the relatioos in which things are for thought. 
Such relationa aa those between the phenomena of the 
Boul and the phenomena of the body can b© described on 
purely mechameal principles : that is to say^ the condi- 
tions of their connexion can he stated as laws. And the 
theory of a pre-establLshed harmony is not requked (not 
to say that it is insnflfieient) to explain Jww the phenomena 
of the soul have any connexion with thoae of the body— 
how, for instancoj physical nerve-motion passes into 
psychical Sensation» It is impossible for our thought to 
explain thia j but it is just as impossible for our thought 
to explain how one physical phenomenoii is invariably 
connected with another physical phenomenon— how^ for 
instance, the b Urning match is connected with the explod- 
ing gunpowder^ In neither case can thought do more 
than deseribe a connexion invariable in our esperient^. 
Science must be content with a ^ praetical occasionalkm ' 
as distinct frora the * theoretical ' {i. absolute ontological) 
' occasionalism ' of the Cartesians^ 

Thus in Lotze we find the principles of the philoaophy 
of Leibnix modified by Kantian influenees* Like Leibniz, 
Lotze in his application of the principles of contradiction 
and of sufficient reason keeps them sharply apart froni 

a pre-BBtÄblisbed harmony — not, Indeed, expfain afiytldng, but — 
tolerabJy well descriJjB the faefea. * * * It i» only if in dl vi dual thingü 
di> not fioat independent or left to tbemäelves in a vacuuni aeross 
wLich no connexion ean reach— only if all of them^ being finite 
Individuals, are at th^ s&mo time oiily parta of one single infinitt» 
auLatazice, whi<;h ^mbracea tbem all and cherialieis them all withiu 
itselfj that their reciproeal action, or what wü call bucL^ ia poseible/ 
MicrocmtnitSj bk. ix. ch. i, § 5 (Eng. Tr.^ vol. ii. pp, 597^ 598). 
Cf. Metaphysic, bk. 1, ch. St l§ ^3 aqq, (Eng. Tr., vol. L p. 150% 

^ ^ As in our Ufe we se© tb© phyaieal motiona of external natura 
emplöy&d as stimuli to excite that in ourselvea whioh is far 
higher — conscioua Sensation : bq, we think^ throughont the unirerse 
tnechanical events are but the externa! tLä^uc of regularly crosaing 
stimuii, designed to kindle at innumerable pointa, with in in- 
numerable beings, th© true aetion of a more intelligent life/ 
Microcüsmus^ bk, üi, Concluaion. (Eng, Tr., töL p. 399-) 

" Btreitachri/tj p, 96. 



ESTIMATE OF LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I97 

one another» But, unlik© Leibniz, he r^rds the principle 
of contradietion as, indeed, uniyersally applicable bot 
completely eubordinate in importanee. According to 
Leibniz, mechatdßni in the real world is subordinate to 
teleology, efficient to final causam But at least th© c*o- 
ordinate priority of the principle of contradictioii is secured 
by the conceptdon of tho ' possible ' things or ' ©ssenceSy' 
the realm of ideas, in the understanding of Gk>d, Lotze, 
on the other hand, does away witb this realm of ' poaöi- 
bles/ making the * principle of the beat' abaolntely 
fiupreme, allowing the choice of Go<l to be independent 
even of the principle of conti-adicfcionj independent of all 
save the ideal of absolute ethieal worth, A violation of 
the law of contradietion is an absurdity for us ; but God 
might Goriceivably (if at had been the moat perfect means 
io the reahzing of the best) haye made a world in which 
the law of contradietion did not hold, But as Leibniz 
gaye no clear explanation of the relations between the 
two principles of contradietion and suffieiont reason, so 
Lotze does not explain the Subordination of the one to 
the other, but maintains that any such explanation is 
beyond the reach of human thought, 

Prem early years Lotze was familiär with the works of 
Leibniz, and his writings continually suggest Leibnitian 
ways of looking at things. But, though an inheritor of 
Leibniz's ideas, he could not ^ take over ' the phOosophy 
as a whole. * I haye, indeed, in general neyer had the 
presumption to deelare myself the succesaor of Leibniz, 
in the sense of being his heir , . . but I must have the 
presumption to admit that I could only have entered into 
possession of this inheritance mm heneßcio inventarii ^' 

Other Influemm of Leibnü. 

It would be impossible briefly to indicate the füll 
influence of the philosophy of Leibniz in other directions. 



IKTRODUCTIOIf 



Willi© the aeadBmie writers on philosophy missed much 
of bis best thought, its spirit was feit in the literature of 
Germany throtigh the works of Lessing and Herder ^ 
Ifor was Leibniz*s tbinking altogetberwitbout effect upon 
EngUsh literature; for^ though tbe doctnn© is sadly 
straitened into Platitüde^ tbat sense of tbe varied wbole- 
ness and harmonions System of things wbich porvades tbe 
Theodk^e ia cleverly expressed in tbe Essa^ ofi Man by 
th© phrases of whicb Pope was a master \ Again, with 
regard to the inflnence of Leibniz upon natural acience, 
reference may be made to tbe way in whicb bis idea tbat 
tbe organism is a group of smaller organisms, bas been in 
various forms developed by natumlists like Euffon and 
has finally gained something like scientific verification in 
tbe cell-tbeory of Scbwann, Jobannes Müller recognized 
this by giving to tbe cells tbe somewbat inappropriate 
name of ' organic monads Modern psyehology also, in 
tbe attention it directs to ' sub-eonscious ' processes and 
in its analysis of sensations and perceptions into olements 
whicb are indiyidually unnoticed (e. g. tbe * over-tones ' of 
Helmboltz and tbe ' local signs ' of Lotze)^ owes much to 

1 See MerK's Ldbni^ (Blatkwood'ft PhilosophieÄl Clasaics), pp. 195 
sqq. There are also trace« of the influenc© of Leibniz in th© works 
of Schiller, -who is said to have wrifcten his poem. J>ie Frmndmh^ 
when his mind waa füll of ideas suggeatöd by the reading of 
Leibniz. This ia the poem frotn whicb Hegel in hig Geschichfß d. 
FhÜ.f vol. i. p* 91 (©d* 1840), quofcea the well-known liiies Freundks 
tcar der grosse Wtli^imeister^* &.C. The poem belougs to SehiUer^fi 
* First Periode 

^ See Inimdudim to the edition by Mark Pattiaon (Clarendon 
Press), Bolingbroke aaid of Pope that he was ^ a veiy great wit, 
but a very indiffei'ent pbilo&opher,* 

' Gf. Buffoii'a Hiifisfoirfi Ncsiurdle^ &o. (1787), toL ir* p> ^ ; *LiFing 
being^ contain a !Äi:ge number of living and aetiTe moleculea. 
The lifö of th© animal or of the plant appeara to be only the reaiolt 
of all the activitiea^ of all the little indlvidual lives (if I may so 
«peak) of eacb of these active moleculeSj whoae lifo is underived 
{primitive] and appearB incapablo of deatruction*' 

* Weismann regarda the unicellular organism aa immortab Cf. 
Essays 'itpm H^edä^, (Eng, ed. by Poulton^ SohDnland^ and 
Shipleyi pp. 35 aud 37), For a good aocount of the relation of 
Leibniz'a philosophy to modern scientific thought, see Watson, 
Comkj MUl und Spender ^ pp, 1 36 aqq. 



ESTIMATE OP LEIBNIz's PHILOSOPHY I99 

Leibniz's far-reaching Suggestion of the unconscious petites 
perceptions. For this Suggestion also (if for little eise) 
Hartmann's Philosoph^ of the ünconscious is indebted to 
Leibniz \ And further, in these days when we are so 
persistently assured that *the real is the individual,' 
Monadology may be said to be in the air, and we need 
not be surprised to find that, in one form or another, it 
has its adherents in theologians like Dorner, philosophical 
teachers like Croom Eobertson, and expositors like Dill- 
mann. 

The fruits of the philosophy of Leibniz are as widely 
scattered as its roots were far spread. The materials of 
his philosophy were derived from every sphere of thought, 
from every generation of thinkers, and he gave to the 
future as liberally as he borrowed from the past. * Nicht 
Vielwisser war er, sondern, soweit der Mensch es kann. 
All- und Ganzwjsser, und sein Erfassen, sein Erkennen, 
war stets zugleich schöpferischer Act^' 

* See Tr. by Coupland, vol. i. pp. 16 aqq, 

^ ' He was learned not merelj in many things but, so far as 
a man can be, in all and everything, and his very comprehending 
or acquiring of knowledge was also an act of creating.* E. Du 
Bois-Reymond, Leibnizische Oedanken in der neueren Naturmssenschaß, 
in his Beden, Erste Folge, p. 33. 



IKTRODUCTION 



APPENDIX A, 

BXPLANATIOlf OF THE PRE-ESTABLISHED HARMOKT BY 
A SPECIAL- INSTANCE. 

In a letter to Ärnauld (1687) (G, ü. 113) Leibni^: gives an 
account af the way in which his theoiy may be applied to 
a particular case (that of the relation between a pin-prick 
in the body and pain in consciousness), *We have now to 
inqnire how the soul ia conBcious of the motiona of ita body, 
sinee we can aee no way of explaining by what channela the 
activitj of an extended maas can pass into an indiviaihle being, 
Ordinary Cartesians declare that no explanation of thia union 
can he given. The authors of the hypothesis of occaaional 
cause B think that it is nodus vindice digntts, cui Det^ ex Machina 
intervemre debeat For my part I explain it in a natural way. 
From the notion of Bubatance or concrete [aceompU] being in 
generale which declares that itapresent atate is always a natural 
conseq^uenee of ita preceding Btate, it follows that the natnre of 
each individnal Bubstance, and conaeqnently of every bouI^ m to 
expreas the universe. Each haa been from the firBt created 
anch that, in virtue of the lawB of ita own nature, it muat 
happen that it ia in harmoay with what takea place in bodiea, 
and especiallj in its own body. We need not then be aurprieed 
to find that it has the power of representing to itself the pin- 
prick, when thia takea place in its body. And, to complete my 
explanation on this point, we have 

State of the body at moment A. State of the soul at momeat A, 
State of the body at tliß foUowiiig Stato of the soul at moment Bp 
jnoment B, 

(Pin-prick.) (Paiii-) 

* Äa, then^ the state of the body at moment B follows froni the 
ßtate of the body at moment A, ao the sfcate of the aoul B h 
a conaequence of A, the preeeding etate of the aame soul, 
according to the notion of snbatance in general, Now the 



APPENDIX A 



20I 



itatei of the aoul are natumlly and eBientially eipresaionB of 
the con'eaponding Btatea of the world, and eepecially of the 
bodiea which far the time belong to tke soqI. Accordingly, 
Bince the pin-pricli in a pari of the atate of the hoäj at the 
moment B, the representation or expreBsion of the pin-prick 
(i, e. the pain) will be a part of the aoul at the raoment B ; for 
aa one luotion follows from another motion, so one repreaenta- 
tion follows from another representation in a aubstance whoae 
nature h to be repreaentative. Thua the soul muat nee da he 
conacioua of the pln^prickj whea the lawa of relatioa require 
it to expreaa more diatinctlj a more observable change in the 
parts of its bodj. It is tme that the soal is not always d ist inet ly 
coti9ciom of the canaes of the pin-prick and of its Coming pain, 
when these are etill hidden in the repi*eaentation of the atate A, 
aa when we ij^leep or in some other way are unaware of the 
appnoach of the pin. But that ia becaaae the motiona of 
the pin at that time make too little impreaaion, and though 
we are aLready in some way aÄected hy all theae motiona and 
their repreaentationa in our aonl, and thua have within ua the 
representation or expreasion of the eanses of the piö-prick, and 
eonaequently the caiiae of the representation of the same pin- 
prick, that ia to aay, the cauae of the pain— y et we can unravel 
them from the multitiide of other thonghts onJy when they 
become noticeable. Oiir aoul reflecta only npon the more 
marke d phenomena, which atand out from the others ; not 
thinking diatinctlj of any, when it thinks equally of alL After 
thia explanation, 1 cannot i magine where anjbody can find the 
leaat ahadow of f arther difficulty, unless he is prepared to 
deny that God can create auhatancea which are so made from 
the heginning that each in virtne of its own nature ia after- 
warda in harmony with the phenomena of all the othera. Now 
nobody aeema to deny thia poflsihiÜtyT and aince we aee that 
mathematieians repreaent in a maehine the motiona of the 
heavenly bodiea (aa when 

Jura poli remmqu© fidem legesque diso mm 
Ciincta Syraeofliua trMistuht arte »enex, 

which we can do to-day much bettei than Archimedes could in 
hia daj), whj could not Crod, who exe eis them inßnitely, from 
the heginning create repreaentative auhstancea in auch away 
that they expreaa hy their own lawa, according to the natural 
change of their thoughta or repreaentations^ all that ia to 



202 



INTEODUCTTOU 



happen to eveiy body? Thia seemi to me not only eaay 
to coticeivBj hui also wortby of God and of tlie beautj of tbe 
universe, anJ in a waj neeessary, since all flnbatances muat 
ha?e a mutual harmony and connexion and all mnst expr<*a3 
in tbemfielves tbe game universe and the universal cause, wbicb 
ia tbe will of tli ei r Creator» and tbe deerees or lawä wbicb He 
baa establiabed in order to make tbem fit into one anotber as 
well as posaible^ Tbus tbia mntual correBpoTideTice of diö'erent 
substances (wbicb, speaking witb metapbysical etrictness^ can- 
not act tipon one anotber^ and yet are in iiarmony aa if one 
did aet upon another) ia one of the atrongest proofa of tbe 
exißtence of God or of a common cause wbicb eacb efFect muat 
always esrpress acc Ording to ita point of view and ita capacity 
of expres&ion, Otberwise tbe pbenomena of different minda 
would not barmonize, and tbere would be as many Systems as 
aubstances ; or ratber, it wouM be entireiy a matter of cbance 
if tbey u^ere aometimes in harmony/ 



APPEKBIX B. 

FORMATIOl^ OF THE IDBA OF SPACE, 

In § 47 of tbe fiftb letter to Clarke, Leibnie gives an account 
of tbe origin of the idea of apace* will bere abow bow 
men come to form to tbemaelves tbe notion of apace. Tbey 
consider tbat manj tbings eiist at once and tbey obeerve in 
them a certain order of co-exiatence, according to which the 
relation of one tbing to anotber ia more or leas aimple, Thia 
order ia their Situation or distance. Wben it bappeua tbat 
one of tboae eo- existent tbings c banges ita relation to a mul- 
titude of otbera^**itbout tbeir changing their relationa among 
tbemselve^ ; and tbat another thing, newly come, acqnirea 
the same relation to' tbe otbera the former bad ; we then 
aay it ia come into the place of tbe otber ; and tbia change we 
call a motion in tbat body, wberein ia tbe imme diäte cause 
of tbe change. And tbougb severai, or even all tbe eo-exiafcent 
things should change acc Ording to certain known rulea of 
direction and velocity, we can always determine the relation of 



APPENDIX B 



203 



Situation which eaeli acquirea with reference to every otfeer, and 
we can even determine the relatioD which anyother [co-existent] 
woüld have [to this], or which this would have to any other, if it 
had not changed or if it had cbanged otherwise. And supposing 
OT feigning that among ttose co-existenta there is a sufficient 
number of them, -which have undergone no change, then we 
may say that those which now have to thoae fixed esistents 
a relation such as that which others fonnerly had to them, 
have the same place which these lattei' had. And that which 
comprehenda all these place s is called Space, which shows that 
in Order to have an idea of placej and conaequently of Space, 
it ia sufficient to conaider these relations and the rules of their 
change 9, with out nee ding to fancy any ahaolnte reaÜty outaide 
of the things whoae aituation we conaider. And, to give a kind 
of definition : place ia that which we aay is the same for A and 
for B, when the relation of co-eiiatence hetween B and 
C, E, F, G, &c., ia in perfect agreement with the relation of 
co-exiatence which A formerly had with the aame C, E, F, G, 
&c. ; provided that in C, E, F, &c*, there hae been no cause 
of change, , - » . Place U that which ia the aame in 
different moments to different existent things, when the re- 
lationa of co-existence between each and certain other esistents, 
which are supposed to continue ßxed from moment to moment, 
agree entirely togethei% Andß^ed €xißteni^ are thoee in which 
there has been no cause of change in the order of their co- 
esistence with otheri, or (which ia the same thing) in which 
there has been no motion. In ahort, Space ia that which 
r^ulta from placea taken together. And here it ia right to 
consider the difference between place and the relation of 
Situation which is in the body occupying the place, ' For the 
place of A and B is the aame ; whereas the relation of A to 
the fixed hodiea is not exactly and individually the aame as 
the relation which B (that com es into ita place) will have to 
the same fised bodiea : theae relationa are only in agreement, 
For two different objects, aa A and B, can not have exactly the 
same individual affection ; it being impoasihle that the same 
individual accident should be in two objecta or paas from one 
object to another, Bnt the mind, not aatiafied with mere 
agreement, looks for an identity, for aome thing which ahould 
be really the same, and conceives it aa outaide of the ohjects : 
and thia is what we here call place and space, But this can 
only be an ideal thing, Lnvolving a certain order, in which 



204 iKTEODUCTlOIff 

the mind conceives relations ta be applied.* (E, 768 a ; G. vii. 
400.) 

I have made Bome BÜgbt alteratioBB in Clarke's tranalation 
for the aake of cleürness. Äs tö other detaile of Leibniz's 
doctrine of apace, cf. Fraaer'B ed. of Locke's Essay, voL i, 
pp. 15S and 1B6. 



APPENDIX G. 

THE MEÄNING OF CAUSB. 

In a draft of a letter to Arnanld {1686) (G. ii, 68) Leibniz 
expounds his view of cause as foUowB :— 'The hypotheBis of 
concomitance is a consequence of my notion of substanee. 
For, in my view^ the individaal notion of a substance includes 
all that iB ever to happen to it, and it is in thia res pect that 
concrete things [Mres accomplis = res comphtae ?] differ from 
those whicb are not so. Now, the sonl being an individnal 
stibatancet its notion, idea^ essen ce or nature must inelude all 
that is ever to happen to it ; and God, wha sees it perfectly, 
sees in it all that it will ever do or euffer and all tho thoughts 
it will have, Aecordingly^ since onr thoughts are nothing but 
the consequences of the nature of our soul and arise in it 
in virtue of its notioHj it is uBeleas to seek in it the influence 
of any otherparticular substance^ besides that such an influence 
is absolutely ineiplicable* It is tme that eertain thoughts come 
to US wben tbere are eertain bodily motions, and that eertain 
bodily motions happen when we have eertain thouglita ; bot 
that is be cause each substance eipreases the entire univerae 
in its own way, and that espression of the universe which ie 
a motion in the body is perhaps a pain in relation to the soul, 
But we attribute aetivity [action] to that substance whose 
eipresiion is the more distinct, and we call it cause. ThuB 
wben a body passe b through water, there is an infinity of 
motions of the parts of the water, auch as there muet be in 
Order that the place which the body leaves may be fiUed up 
a^ain by the shortest way. We say that this body is the 
cause of the motions, beeause by its meana we ean explain 
distinctly what happen s ; but if we consider what is pbyeical 



APPENDIX C 



205 



and real in the motion, we may equally well suppose that the 
bodj is at rest and that everything eise moves, in accordance 
with the hypothesis, since the whole motion in itself is only 
a relative thing, viz. a change of position [Situation] which 
we do not know how to explain with mathematical exactness ; 
but we do attribute it to a body by means of which all is 
distinctly explained * [i. e. so far suflSciently explained, though 
not with mathematical exactness]. 'And in fact, taking all 
the phenomena little and great, there is only one hypothesis 
which serves to explain the whole distinctly. And we may 
indeed say that, although this body may not be an efficient 
physical cause of these effects, its idea is at least, so to speak, 
their final, or, if you like, archetypal [exemplaire] cause in 
the understanding of God. For, if we wish to find whether 
there is anything real in the motion, let us imagine that 
God wills directly to produce all the changes of Situation 
in the universe exactly as if this vessel were producing them 
in passing through the water ; is it not true that there would 
actually happen exactly the same thing ? For it is impossible 
to assign any real difference. Thus, in metaphysical strict- 
ness, we have no more reason to say that the vessel compels 
the water to make this great number of ripples by means 
of which the place of the vessel is filled up, than to say that 
the water is compelled to make all these ripples and that 
it compels the vessel to move in conformity with it; but, 
except by saying that God has willed directly to produce 
so great a number of motions all tending to this one thing, 
we can give no reason for it, and as it is not reasonable to 
have recourse to God for the immediate explanation of matters 
of detail, we have recourse to the vessel, although actually, 
in an ultimate analysis, the agreement of all the phenomena 
of the various substances comes only from this, that they 
are all productions of one and the same cause, to wit, God ; 
and consequently each individual substance expresses the re- 
solution which God has taken with regard to the whole 

universe It is quite right to say that my will is 

the cause of the motion of my arm and that a solutio continui 
in the matter of my body is the cause of pain, for the one 
expresses distinctly what the other expresses more confusedly, 
and activity [action] is to be attributed to the substance of 
which the expression is more distinct.* (p. 71.) 



206 



INTRODÜCTION 



APPE^fDIX D. 

LEIBXIZ'S LOÖlO, 

In the Nout^mux Esmh, bk. iv. ch, 1 1 , § 14 {K 379 a ; G. 428 
there is an int eres ting passage explaiEing in more detail a pari 
of the logic of Leibniz. It conta-ins aome remarkable anticipa- 
tions of more modern views, * Propositions of fact also may 
become general in a waj^ but it ia by induction or Observation ; 
so that it ' [the geneml propoaition of fact] ' ia nothing bnt 
a TOultitude of aitnilar facts, as when we observe that all 
quicksilver evaporatea by the force of fire; and this is not 
a perfect generality, because we do not see ita necesaity. 
General propositiona of reajson are necessary, althongb reason 
also furniehefl aome which are not abeol ut ei j general and are 
only probable, aa for inatance, when we presnme that an idea 
ia posaible, iintil a more strict inveatigation reveala ita contrary, 
There are, finally, mixßd propositiom, which are drawn from 
premiaea, of which Börne come from facta and observationa, 
while others are neceisary propoaition s r and anch are numerona 
geographica! and astronomical conclnaiona about the globe of 
the earth and about the courae of the atara, which concluaiona 
are obtained by combining the obaervationa of travelleta and 
aatronomera with the theorems of geometry and arithmetic. 
But as, according to the usage of logiciana, fhe condmion follows 
ihe weaker ofthe premises, and cannot have more certainty than 
they, thcae mixed propoaitiona have only the certainty and 
generality whieh belong to obaervationa. As to etermd trufhs^ 
it ia to be not-ed, that at bottom they are all conditional and aay 
in effect : Granted such a thing, such another thing is. For 
inatance, when I say, Every ß(fi*re which htm three side^ tmll 
aha have ihree angles^ I aay nothing but thia, that suppOHing 
there ia a figure with three aides, tMs same fignre will have 
three angles. I aay this same ßgure, and it ia in this respect that 
categoricaJ propoBitions, which cam be atated unconditionaHj 



APPENDIX D 



207 



(although fundainentally they are conditional), differ from 
those that are called hypotheticaly such as the foUowing: If 
afigure has three sideSj its angles are eqtial to two right angles. In 
tliis latter case we see that the antecedeni (namely, the figure 
with three sides) and the consequent (namely, the angles of the 
three-sided figure are equal to two right angles) do not have 
the same subject, as they had in the preceding case in which 
the antecedent was — This figure has three sides^ and the conse- 
quent — The Said figure has three angles. Nevertheless the 
hypothetical might often be transformed into a categorical 
by a slight change in the terms, for instance, if in place of the 
preceding hypothetical I were to say : The angles of every three- 
sided figure are equal to two right angles. The Scholastics have 
argued much de constantia sühjecti, as they called it, that is to 
say, how a proposition regarding a subject can have a real 
truth, if the subject has no existence. The fact is that the 
truth is only conditional and says that, supposing the subject 
ever exists, it will be found to be so-and-so. But it will still 
be asked : On what is this connexion founded, since there is 
within it reality which does not deceive ? The reply will be, 
that it is in the connexion of ideas. But it will be asked 
again : Where would these ideas be, if no mind existed, and 
what would then become of the real foundation of this certainty 
of etemal truths ? That leads us at last to the ultimate foundar 
tion of truths, namely, that supreme and universal spirit, which 
cannot but exist, whose understanding, to speak truly, is the 
region of etemal truths, as St. Augustine has recognized and 
says in a vivid way^. And lest it should be thought unnecessary 
to have recourse to this, it is to be noted that these necessary 
truths contain the determining reason and regulative principle 
of existences themselves, and, in a word, the laws of the 
universe. Thus these necessary truths, being anterior to the 
existence of contingent beings, must have their foundation in 
the existence of a necessary substance. It is here that I find 
the original of the ideas and truths which are graven in our 
souls, not in the form of propositions, but as sources from which 
application and opportunity will produce actual statements.' 

^ The reference may be to Augustine, De Qenesi ad Litteranif bk. v. 
cap. 13 sqq. (Migne's ed., iii. 331 sqq.), or to Enarratio in Psalmum 
xlix. (Migne's ed., iv. 576 sqq.). Cf. De diversis Qmestionibus, Q. xlvi. 
§ 2 (Migne's ed., vi 30). 



208 



INTHODUCnOK 



APPETiTDIX E. 

KANT ON HIS BELATIOIf TO LEIBJTIZ, 

The Wolffians endeavoured to show that Kanfc'a philosophy 
Vfm raerelj a degenemte product of Leibnitiau tlioiight* In 
reply to Eberhard, Kant in 1 790 wrote an interesting account 
of hin omx relation to Leihmz — Ülm* eim Entdeckung, nach der 
alle neue Kritik der reinen Vernunft durch eine äUere entbehriiah 
gemacht werden soll. See Rosenkranz, L pp* 478 sqq. ; Harten- 
stein, iii 390 aqq, 

'The metaphjaic of Leibniz contains three great original 
principlea : { 1 ) the principle of aufiicient reaaDn, especially in 
4M5 far aa it showa the inaufläeiencj of the principle of contm- 
(liction for the knowledge of necesaary trutha ; (2) the monad- 
ology ; (3) the doctrine of the pre-establiehed harmonj. . . . . 
it) Ig it to be believed that Leibniii de&ired his principle of 
Buf&cient reaaon to be underatood objectivelj (aa a law of 
nature), when he attached a great importance to thia principle 
aa an addition to the principlea of earlier philoaophj? It 
ia indeed so nniversally known and (within proper limita) ao 
raanifestly clear, that the poorest intellect could not imagine 
it had niade a new discovery in finding it, Thua it is that 
eritics, who have miöunderatood it have great ly ridicnled it. 
But for LeibniÄ thi^ principle was merely a ^ubjective one, that 
is to aay, a principle having referenco merely to a critique 
of reason. For what is meant by saying that, in addition 
to the principle of contradiction, there muat be other firat 
priiiciples } It ia as much aa to say thati according to the 
principle of centradiction only that can be known whieh ia 
already contained in the notion [Be^Hß^ of the object j but 
if we say anything more about the objecto something mnat 
be added to thia notion» and thna we must find a special 
principle different froni that of contradiction, for our assertione 
muat have their own special reaaon. Now propoaitiona of thi^ 



APPENDIX E 



2C9 



Ifitter kind are now-a-dajB caUed syntbetic, and thua Leibniz 
meana nöthing but this: " In addition to the priuoiple of 
contradiction (as the principle of analytic jutigmenta), there 
mnat he another prineiple, namely that of synthetic judgments/' 
Thifl waa a new and remarkable auggestion of iiLvestigatioiia 
in metaphjaics which had not jet been ündertaken (and which 

have actualiy beeil ündertaken only recently) (2) U 

it to be believed tbat bo great a mathematician ae Leibni^ 
held that bodiea are composed of Monada (and conflequeatly 
that fipace is made up of aimple parta) ? He referred not to 
the corporeal world^ but to ita aubstratum imperceptible [unet-- 
kennhat'] to m, namely, the intelligible world which belongs 
merely to the idea of reason, and in which doubtlesa we 
must repreaent to ouraelves as made up of aimple substances 
everything which we tbink therein as Compound aubstance. 
He likewise appeara^ Uke Plato, to attribute to the hunmn 
mind an original, although at present only obseure, intellectual 
intuition [Atischamn] of theae eupersen&ible realities*^ But in 
thia he did not refer to the tbings of aenäe, which he attribntes 
to intuition [Änschauunff] of a i^pecial kind, of which we are 
capable only in relation to tbinge we can really know [für um 
tt^gliche ErkenntniMe], and he regards the thinga of senae 
aa mere phenomena (in the strict me of the tenn), aa apecific 
forma of intuition peculiar to ua. With regard to thls we 
must not allow ourselvea to be perplexed by hia explanation 
of Sensation as a confuaed kind of perception. but muat rather 
enbstitute for it anotber explanation more in harmony with 
hia main purpose : for otherwiae bis aystem would be in- 
eonsistent with itself. To take this defect as a deliberate and 
careful specnlation on the part of Leibniz (aß oopiers, in Order 
to make their copy esactlj the &ame the original, reproduce 
iti mistakea of form and langnage) can hardly be credited to 
the diaciplea of Leibnis as a etervice done to the fame of their 
master* Similarly, if it ia taken too literaJly, a wrong Inter- 
pretation ia given to the view of Lefbnia regarding the innate- 
neaa of certain notions^ by whieh he means a fundamental 
faculty to which the a prwn principles of our knowledge are 
referable ; he makea uae of t big idea merely aa again st Locke, 
who recognized no other than an empirical origin of these 
pnneiples. (3) Is it posaible to believc that, by bis pre* 
eatabliahed harmony between bouI and body, Leibnia meant 
a mutual conformity of two beinga entirely independent of 



210 



INTEODUCTIOX 



one »nother as regnrd* their nature and incapable of being 
brought into connexioD througli tbeir own forcea? That 
would have been to proclaim idealism ; for whj should the 
exisätence of bodiea in gcneml be admitted^ if it ia pOBsible 
to regard BTerjtbing that takea place in tbe aoul as tbe effect 
of itä own powera, whicb it would exercise even if it were 
entirely iaolated? The aoul and tbe substratum fentirely 
xinknown to ua) of tbe pbenomena wbicli we call bodiea artj 
indeed two quite difi'erent beiiigs, but tbeae pbenomena tbcMii- 
»elves, aa merefornis of their intuition [Änschauung] depending 
npon tbe natnreof tbe subject {tbe aoul), are mere perceptions 
[VorsteUungen]. Hence tbe conneiion between understanding 
and senae in tbe same subject can be underatood aecordiiig 
to certain « ptiori laws, as well as the necessary and natural 
dependence of aense upon extertml thinga^ witbout sacrifieing 
^xternal tbinga to idealism, For thia barniony between under- 
atanding and sense, in so far aa it rendera possible m priori tbe 
knowled^e of universal laws of natnre, criticism bas given 
aa a reason that witbout tbia barmonj no experience ia poa- 
o I sible* , - , .But we can give no reaaon wby we bave juat 
auch a kind of aenae and an understj^nding of aucb a Jiature 
that tbrough their combination experience is posaible^ and 
^^1 furtber we can find no reason wby they^ aa completely 
iieterogeneous eourcea of knowledge, always so completely 
harmonize in rendering pcasible eiperiential knowledge in 
general and more especlally (as tbe Critique of Judgmeni 
show«) in rendering poasible an esperienco of nature» uuder 
ita manifold special and merely empirical laws, regarding 
^ ^ wbicb tbe und eretan ding teacbes ub not hing a prim^. Neitber 
we nor any one eise can esplain bow tbia bartnony is as com- 
plete as if nature bad been arranged expresaly to auit our 
' _ power of comprebension. Leibniz called tbe principle of tbis 
Union (e&pecially witb reference to tbe knowledge of bodies 
and in particular of our own body aa a middle tenn in tbia 
relation) a pre-e&tablished harmon^f. Manifestly be did not in 
tbia waj give an esplanation of the union, nor did be profees 
%Q explaiu it. He merely pointed out that we muat regard 
the Order established by tbe supreme cause of ouraelvea aa 
well aa of all tbings outside of ua as involving a certain 
conformity to end. Tbis purpoae is regarded aa preaent at 
creation (pre-eatabliahed) \ yet as a pre-establisbed agreement, 
not between things taken aä outside one anotber, but only 



APPENDIX E 



211 



between our mental powers of sense and understanding, ac- 
cording to the special Constitution of each in relation to the 
other. In tlie same way criticism teaches that, in order to 
a knowledge of things a priori, tliese powers must stand in / 
relationship to one another in the mind. That this was what ^ 
Leibniz really meant, although he did not clearly develop it, 
appears from this, that he extends the application of the 
pre-established harmony beyond the relation between soul 
and body to the relation between the kingdom of nature and 
the kingdom of grace (the kingdom of ends in relation to the 
supreme end, i. e. man under moral laws). Here the harmony ^ 
is to be thought of as a harmony between what foUows from 
our notions of nature and what follows from our notions of 
freedom, and thus as a harmony between two completely 
different powers in us, having completely dissimilar principles, 
and not between two different things taken as extemal to one ^ . 
another. And this harmony, as the CHtique teaches, can in" 
no way be comprehended from the nature of created things 
[Weltwesen] but, as it is for us an essentially contingent har- 
mony, it can only be understood by referring it to an intelligent 
cause of the world/ 



P 2 



THE MONADOLOGY 



THE MONADOLOGY^ 1714. 



PREFATORY NOTE. 

The Monadölogy is one of the latest of the works of Leibniz, 
having been written at Vienna in 1714, two years before his 
death. On this last visit of his to Vienna he had met the 
soldier prince Eugene of Savoy, who (probably through Queen 
Sophia Charlotte of Prussia) had heard of the one great work 
Leibniz had hitherto published, the Th4odic4e, which appeared 
in 1710. Having read the Thiodic4e, Prince Eugene begged 
Leibniz to write for him a Condensed statement of the main 
Xjrinciples of his philosophy, and having obtained this, in the 
form either of what we now call the Monadölogy or of the 
Principles of Nature and of Grace, he was so delighted with it 
that ho kept it like a jewel in a case, so that his friend, Count 
Bonneval, wrote to Leibniz, perhaps with a touch of humorous 
exaggeration ; — * Ho keeps your writing as the priests at Naples 
keep the blood of St. Januarius ; he lets me kiss it and imme- 
diately shuts it up again in its casket.' (Guhrauer, ii. 287.) 

The Monadölogy was written in French; but it was not 
published in its original form until 1840, when Erdmann, 
who had discovered the MS. in the Royal Library at Hanover, 
printed it in his edition of the philosophical works of Leibniz. 
German and Latin translations of it appeared in 1720 and 1721, 
and it was for a long time combined with the FiHnciples of 

' Erdmann gave the name * La Monadologie * to this work when he 
published it in 1840. Köhler published a German version of it in 
1720, under the title: Lehrsätze über die Monaddogiey &c. Dutens 
gives a Latin translation of the German and entitles it : Priywipia 
philosqphiae seu theses in gratiam Prindpis Eugenii, The original 
MSS. have no title. 



2l6 



THE MON^IDOLOGT 



Nainre and qf Grace, there beiDg aome doubt aa to whicli of th« 
two wag tlie treatise written for Frince Eugene. The two 
writings are aimilar in scope and iixtention, and were probably 
written abont the aame time. Gerhardt hoMa that the work 
written for Prince Eugene was not tiie Monadolög^ hut the 
Principhs Nature and of Grace. (See G, vi. 4S3 and prefatoiy 
note to the Prifwiples of Ndtut^ and of Gmce in thia edition.) 
The PHncipl€j$ of Nainiyi and of Gmce certainly appeara to be 
the earlier of the two. 

Ab to its Contents, the Monadology is to be regarded, not as 
an introduction to the philo aophj of Leibniz, hut rather as a 
Condensed Statement of the principles expressed in many philo- 
aophical papera, and eiponnded, after a aomewhat deaultory 
fashitin, in the Hi^üäkie. Leibniz himself indicated tkLs fact 
by pntting on the margin of his nmnuseript of the Monadohg^ 
a series of references to Sectio na of the Thißdk4€ in which hin 
viewa are niore fully expreased, Thus, as Erdniann aays, the 
MonndßJoify ia (in the German aenae) an ' Encyclopaedia ' of 
the philo aophy of Leibniz, and the füll understanding of it 
prestipposes some general knowledge of hin thinking, It is not 
po&aible rightly to understand it at a first reading. 

The Mmadologij expounds a Metaphysic of Substance, and it 
may for coavenience be regarded as consisting of two main 
divisions, in the first of which an account ia given of the esaen- 
tial nature of alHhe subaiances, created and uncreated^ which 
conatitntc the reality of the universe, while the second division 
explains the mntnal relationa throngh whicli they forra one 
World. §5 I to 48 make up the first of these diviaions, the 
aecond conaisting of 49 to 9a In the firat diviaion three 
principal parts may be discrim^inated ^ (a) 1-18, in which 
the nature of Created Monads ex piain ed ; {h) §§ 19-30, in 
' which three great claases of Created Monads aire diecriminated ; 
and {c) §§ 31-4S. in which transition ia made from the higheat 
class of Created Monads (the self-conscious) to the Uncreated 
Monad (Godj throngh the two great principles of Reason, that 
of Contradiction and that of Sufficient Reason, Thna a Philo- 
sophie view ia taken of the whole nniverge, considered aa 
a hierarchy of individual beinga. The aecond division of the 
Monudology^ in wkich the mutnal relationa of subatancea are 
more fully explained, may also be subdivided into three prin- 
cipal parts ; (aj §§ 49-60, expounding the general principle a 




THE MONADOLOGY 



2T7 



of the inter-relation of substances through the hypothesis of 
the Pre-established Harmony and the doctrine of *the best 
of all possible worlds' ; (6) §§ 61-82, explaining in more detail 
the relations of particular classes of substances to one another, 
and dealing with questions of organism and of the relations of 
soul and body, including birth and death, &c. ; and (c) §§ 83-90, 
in which the whole System of relations is brought to unity in 
God, the distinction and harmony between efficient and final 
causes (which had been found to be the basis of the distinction 
between body and soul), being supplemented by an analogous 
distinction and harmony between the * physical realm of nature 
and the moral realm of grace, that is to say, between God, 
considered as Architect of the machine of the universe and 
God considered as Monarch of the divine City of spirits/ This 
brief analysis is to be taken merely as a Suggestion of the line 
of thought in the Monadology; the texture of the work is 
so close that it is impossible to make perfectly satisfactory 
divisions in it. ^ 

The translation is made from the text given by M. Boutroux, 
who has collated the MSS. at Hanover and corrected some 
errors of Erdmann. Tht Monadology is given in E. 705 sqq. ; 
G. vi. 607 sqq. 

1. The Monad, of which weshall here speak, is nothing 
but a simple substance, which enters into Compounds. 
By * simple 'is meant 'without parts.' (TJieod. 10.) 

2. And there must be simple substances, since there 
are Compounds ; for a Compound ^ is nothing but a 
collection or aggregatum of simple things'. 

^ There is a slight but interesting difference between this and 
the corresponding passage in the Prindples 0/ Nature and qf Orace (see 
p. 406). Leibniz speaks here of * a Compound * in general (fe cow- 
pose) : in tlie other passage he uses the expression * Compound 
substance ' (la composee). In both cases he must be understuod to 
mean ^body/ which, he elsewhere teils us, is not a substance, 
strictly speaking (Introduction, Part iii. pp. 96 and iii). Accord- 
ingly, the expression here is more exact than that in the Prindples 
of Nature and 0/ Orace; but the difference illustrates the looseness 
of Leibniz's terminology in this connexion. 

' If the ' simple things * are, like the Monads, non-quantitative, 
can we attach any intelliglble meaning to * Compounds,' which are 
mere aggregates of them ? Does not an aggregate always imply 



2l8 



THE MONADOLOGY 



3, Kow where ihere are no parte *j there can he neitiier 
extension nor form [^figure] not diviaibUity. These Monads 
ar© the real atoms of nature and^ in a ward, the elements 
of things ^. 

4, No dissolutdon of thes6 elements need be feared, 
and there is no conceivable way in which a simple sub- 
fitance can be destroyed by natural means. (TJieod, 89.) 

5, For the aame reason there is no conceivable way in 
which a simple substaaee eau eome into being by natural 
means, since it cannot be formed by the combination of 
parts [cömpositim] \ 

elementä ivhich ans quftntitiöa, howöver smsll ? Leibniz elsöwhefe 
maktja it perfectly clear that notliing quautitativ© can ever be 
nbsolutely simple, and thus thero seems a weakneas in Iiis reasoiiing 
at fchia point. The difficulty ia fundamental and affecta the whol© 
of Leibni^'a system : it is, indeed, the crax of every Individualiat 
er Atomifit philosopby* Leibniz'a liypotljfcais of a * living [formel] 
atom/ a fertilo simplioity/ a * centre which escpresaes (or rapre- 
fcient«) an infinite circumferönce ' {Heponse aux Btßexions de BayU^ 
17035 187 a; G. IT* 56a), 13 the Suggestion of a way out of 
Atom i am ; but it does not tako ua ©ntirely out of thß wood. We 
havD fitillj in the spirit of much of Leibniz*B philosophizing, to 
ÄHk onrselTeö tlie queation— ' Are not simple " Jmd Compound ** 
purely relative terms, so that to Kearch for an absolut ely aimple 
thlng ia to exploro blind alleys ? * Kant shows ub the blind ßlloys Ln 
hissecond Antinomy (C^iYigufl o/R*re Reason^ Meiklejohn'ü Tr.j p, 271). 
See also the intere.sting analyBis and criticiiüm of Kant's argunnents 
in Hegel's Wissmsdtaß der Logik ^ bk. i. div» s, ch. i* seet^ A, note, 
Hegela Geschidiie der PhÜosopkiej voL 3ii. p. 525 (Eng, Tr., p, 449) 

* i. e» where there are no spatial distinctions. 

* Cf, New SyshMf | 3. Ordinoiy physical atoms bave form and 
ßxtension j and, thougli tliey may not be physically divisible^ yet 
they must be ideally di\"igible ad inßniinmf inai^mucli aa they 
occupy spaee, Thua for Leibniz all merely physdcal aloms are 
unreaL Cf. liönge'a Mstory q/ MatsrUttistHj bk. i. seck 4, ch, iv, 
(Eug. Tr,, vol. ii* pp. 124 sqq.)- 

* According to Leibniz a tliing ia produced by nature only when 
it comes intü bcing gradually^ bit by bit* But the Monads, kaving 
no partSj cannot come into being by the adding of part to pari. 
Yet it may be pointed out that every Monad has an infmt&l 
duvelopmentj which ia gradual, It ia not born perfect, iully 
roalized. 'Why, then^ sbould it not come into being by natural 
nieana ? 



THE MONADOLOGY 



2T9 



6. Thus it may be said that a Monad can only come 
into being or come to an end all at once ; that is to say, 
it can come into being only by creation and come to an 
end only by annihilation, while that which is Compound 
comes into being or comes to an end by parts''. 

7. Further, there is no way of explaining how a 
Monad can be altered in quality or internally changed * 
by any other created thing; since it is impossible 
to change the place of anything in it or to conceive 
in it any internal motion which could be produced, 
directed, increased or diminished therein, although all 
this is possible in the case of Compounds, in which 
there are changes among the parts*. The Monads 
have no Windows, through which anything could come 
in or go out. Accidents cannot separate themselves 
from substances nor go about outside of them, as the 
* sensible species ' of the Scholastics used to do Thus 

^ ^Consider, by way of analogy and contrast, what Spinoza says 
regarding the eternity of the human mind, Ethics, v. prop. 23. 
Spinoza dispenses with the idea of creation. But according to 
Leibniz there are created Monads, whose creation is, nevertheless, 
not an event in time, for time and spaee have to do meroly with 
phenomena, and the Monads are not in time and spaee, but con- 
dition them. Cf. § 47 and Introduction, Part iii. p. loi. 

^ The meaning is that by other things the Monad can neither 
be altered as to its nature, i.e. changed into something eise, nor 
even affected in those changes of state which it can undei^go 
without a change of nature. 

' It is implied that all changes in bodies are reducible to trans- 
position of parts, and ultimately to changes in the amount and 
direction of motion. See Introduction, Part iii. pp. 89 sqq. 

Leibniz seems here to have in view partly the doctrines of 
Thomas Aquinas and partly the scholastic theories which were 
based on the System of Democritus. The * species ' are images or 
immaterial representations of material qualities. According to 
Thomas Aquinas, the accidents of things are known to us by 
means of sensible species, or particular images, while we know 
the essences of things by means of intelligible species or general 
images. The scholastic theory in general may be said to be that 
■the sensible or intelligible 'species' in us have something in 
common with the accidents or essences in things, though there 



220 



THE MOIfADOLOGY 



neither aubstane© nor accident oan com© into a Monad 

8. Yet the Monada must have some qualities, otherwiae 
they would not eTön be existing thinga Änd if aimple 
subatances did not differ in quality, there would be 

ia & considerable variety of moi^ or less vaguB opinion aa to th© 
nature of the relatii>n. Leibniz is övidöntly tliinking of a theory 
(nöt thüi of Thomas Aquinas), according to which eense-perc^iptloii 
means that particles are detaehad from thö body pörcoived and 
paas into the percipieiitj in whom they are reconstnicted Lato 
images or representatiows of qualitiös in thü thing perceived* 
Image a of thi» kind wen* callod iUaka by Demoeritus. Cf. Kitter 
and Preller, Historm Philamiphicte Graecaef § 155. Atomiata feit boijiid 
to explain the action of body upon soul by th© auggestion of som« 
kind of inßu^sm physkm. Descarfcüs has a parallel paaaage to thia 
of Lföibniz, in which ho says that lie * desirest to rid peopl©'** minda 
of aü these littlo imßgoa, tiying throngh the air, ealled int^tional 
^dcs^ which give aa much work to tho imagination of philo- 
sophera.' Bioptrigue^ Diseours I* Üt otlier püsaagoa quoted by Yeitch 
in hiä Tjnnslatwn Iksc^rtes*s M^thod and M^ditattmSj noto 2 — * Idea/ 

" Kant pointed out that a thing may have * mtensive' aa well 
aa * extensive * quantity, i. e. quantity which is not divisible into 
apatiat parts as well as quantity whicli ia bo divisible* A alona 
descendiug from a height loses a cortain * intensive quantity* 
withont loaing any of its apatial part«. And thus a simple »ub- 
stance may^ in & corti^in senae, lose and receive quality, C£ 
Ci itiquc 0/ Pure Esason (Hartentstebi, ii, 178; Rosenki-anz, iL 145; 
Moiklejohn's Tr., 135), Kant argues that th© ssimplicity of the 
aoul (i.e. the absende of parte in it) doea not neceesarily prove its 
indestructibility, for^ tbough it lias no parfcs^ it may los© con* 
aciousness and the reat of ita ©saentlal qnaUtiea (Harteuatein, ü. 
318; Roaenkranz, ii. 793; Meiklejöhn's Tr,, p. 245). Comparo 
Kant'a ' intensive quantity' with Iiäibmz'a degreea of Perception 
and Appotition. 

^ After this sentenco Leibniz originally wrote, and tbon deleted, 
those words : 'And if aimple substancea w©re uonentitiea [riena], 
Compounds also would b© reduced to notliing/ Thia emphasizos 
the point that a being with out quality is indistinguiahable from 
nothingi ef. Hegel' s Loffic^ Wall&ce's Tn, pp. 158 sqq, Quantity 
alw&ys presupposes quality j see Introduction, Part ii. pp. 37 sqq. 
Leibniz seema also tu imply that each Monad must haye mot© 
than one quality. On the other band, Herbart (1776-1841), wliose 
Monadology owes much to that of Leibniz, and who qalla bis 
Monads ' primary qualitioa' {Urqualitätm), holds that a snbstance 
oannot be perfuctly dmpl© unleae it haii only one ultimate quality. 



THE MONADOLOGT 



221 



absoluteljr no means of pereeiving any chauge in things* 
For what is in the Compound csm eome only from the 
simple elementa it contains, and the Monads, if they had 
no qualities, would be indistlnguishable from one another, 
since they do not differ in quantity^', Consequently, 
Space bemg a phmim^ each part of spaee woiüd alwaya 
reeeive, in any motion, exactly the equivalent of wlmt it 
already had^ and no one state of things would be dis- 
cemible from another^*, 

" Kant WQuld say that they may differ in * inte naive quantity * % 
ßo© note II. Leibniz makea the distinction lj«tween quajity and 
qnantity sharp ths ATistoteliati distmetion Iwtween ttoiov 
and ir6<rov, Tet in Bome reapacta hia Law of Continuity auggeeta 
a diff^rent Tiew. 

^* E. reads one state of thinga wönld be iadistinguiahabl© from 
anöther.* Cf, Epistofu ad Des Bosses (1706) (G. iL 295) : 'If wo were 
to admifcj as the Gartesiana dosire, the plsnum and the uniform ity 
of matter, adding to theae motion aloao, it would foUow that 
nothing would ever take place araong things but a aubstitution of 
equivfllenti?, as if tho whole utiiverso wero redueed to the motion 
of a pei-fectly uniform wheel aboiit its axis or, again, to the revolu- 
tions of eoncentric circles, each made of exactly thesame materiala, 
The result of this would he that it w^ould not be posaible, Oven for 
an angel, to diatinguiah the stat© of thingü at one raonient from 
their Btate at «nother. For there could be no variety in the phe- 
nomena. Accordingly, in addition to figure, size, and motion, we 
muBt allow certain Förms, whence there arigea a distinction among 
the phenomona of mattür ; and I do not see whence these Forma 
are to be taken, if they are to be intelligible, unlesa it be from 
Entelechieg.* To avoid a posaiblo miaunderstanding, it should be 
noted that for Leibniz, the Monada ar© not in Space, which is ^ 
rolation between phenomena ; aee Introductlon, Pai*t iii* p, 101. Cf. 
Epistda ad Des Bi)sses (17^3) (E. 682 b ; G* ii. 450 ^ 'Space is the 
Order of co-exiating phenomena, as time ia the ordor of auecessive * 
phonomena. There is no neamesa or diatanee, whother apatial or 
absolute, among Monads, and to say that they are colleeted together 
in one point or diapersed throughout «pace, it! to make use of certain 
ßctions of our mind, by which we try to represent to oursei vea in 
Imagination what eannot be iTnagined but only understood.' Kant, 
misled by the position of Wolff, doea not rigbtly Interpret Leibjiiz's 
view of spaee, which he discusBes in the Ofiiiqitä qf Pure Emson^ 
Hartenstein, ii* 356 aqq. ; Rosenkranz^ ii. 216 &qq, ; Meiklejohn's 
Tr., pp. 191 sqq^ espeoially p. 19^. Cf. latroduction, Fart iv. 
pp, 168 sqq. 



222 



THE MONADOLOGY 



9, Iiideed, each Monad must be different from övery 
other. For in natura there are never two beings which 
are perfectly alike and in which it ia not possible to find 
an internal difference, or at least a differentie founded 
upon an intrinsic quality [dmamination] 

ro- I assiimo also as admitted that every created 
bein^, and conseqiiently th© created Monad, is subject 
to change, and further tliat this chang© is continuoua 
in each'^ 

" ThiH is ihti prinßiple of the ' identitf of indisc^rniblos ' ; se& 
Introdaction, Part ii. p. 36. Cf, Nmveaux Emai», hk. iL eh. icxvii. 
I 3 (E. s'37 b ; G. v. 214). For Kant's crititiiam CrHique of P^ire 
Reflüftm^ HartenSstGiiit ii. 267; Rosenkranz, 11.339; Meikkjohn's Tr.» 
p. 202. Probably the first atatöment of thö principlü iä fco be found 
in thö writings of Nicholas of Cum (1401-1464), He says ih&t 
' ibere cannot be B^veral things exaetly the eame [aequnHa]j for in 
that cas© thöre would not b« soveral thiugs, but the same thing 
itaalf. Therefore all things both egree wiLL and diflfer from oqö 
anothei"/ {De Veimtione Sa-pi^niias^ 33.) Cf. Be doda ignorantia^ iii, 1 : 
* All things must of neces&ity difier from one another. Among 
ßeveral individuals of tho samo epecie» tliert* is necGSsarily ft 
divorsity of degrees of perfection, There is not hing in the liniverw 
which doefl not önjoy a certain mujularityj which is ta be fotind in 
no other thing.' Hia theories are füll of anggeations of Loibnia, Cf, 
Falckenberg, Histor^ of Modem Philmophy^ Engliüh Tr.j pp, 20 sqq. 
Hefer ence may also be mado to a very intere^ting xirticle by Zi mm er- 
mann ^ Nicolau?i Ctminm ah Viyrläuff^ Leibnit£&fts [ Wim. Akad. Siizungn' 
berichte f vol, 8^ p. 306). Thefö is no mention of Nicholas of Cum in 
any of Leibniz'ö pbilosophical writings ; but in a letter to the Ada 
Erudii^trum (i6g7j Loibniz refors to him aa a mathematician ((jf. 
Dutena^ iii. 345). — Intrimk qnalities are thoae which things have^ 
in themselves, e.g^ figuro, motion, &o-, while earÄriWc quaiities are 
thoae whieh ariae from their relatiooa to other thing«, e.g. their 
b«ing perceivedj de^ired, &c. Gf. P^-Ecyttl Logic, part i, ch. ii. 
(Baynes'a Tr., p^ 37) : * There are some modea which may be called 
iniemaij becauae they aro conceivcd to he in the subbtance, as round^ 
Square ; and othera which may be called exkrmly becaus© they are 
taken from something whieh is not in the substanco^ as hved, seen, 
desirsdy which are names taken from the actio na of an other — and 
thta ifl what islialied in th© aoliools exiemal dmominatim.' 

^* There is constant chang© in created substancea, even thoi:igh 
there may appear to be no ehange. What appears to ns as abaenoe 
of ehange is really a very small degree of ehange. We have her« 
an application of the Law of Continuity. 



THE MONADOLOGY 



223 



II. It foUows from what has just been said, that the 
natural changes of the Monads come from an internal 
principley since an external cause can have no influence 
upon their inner being. (Theod. 396, 400.) 

12^^ But, besides the principle of the change, there 
must be a particular series of changes [un detail de ce gut 
change], which constitutes, so to speak, the specific nature 
and variety of the simple substances. 

13. This particular series of changes should involve a 
multiplicity in the unit [tmite] or in that which is simple. 
For, as every natural change takes place gradually, 
something changes and something remains unchanged '® ; 
and consequently a simple substance must be afifected and 
related in many ways, although it has no parts 

" i. e. other than miraculous changes or than such change as may 
be implied in the creation or annihilation of a Monad. 

" At the beginning of § 12 Leibniz originally wrote : *And gener- 
ally it may be said that force is nothing but the principle of the 
change.* He seems afterwards to have feit that force was not a deep 
enough notion to be an adequate expression of the principle which, 
in §§ 14 and 15, he describes under the names of Perception and 
Appetition. 

" The Law of Continuity. Everything is continually changing, 
and in every part of this change there is both a permanent and a 
varying element. That is to say, at any moment everything both 
'is' and Ms not,' everything is becoming something eise — some- 
thing which is, nevertheles«, not entirely * other.' 

In Illustration of this and the following sections, cf. Iiip<mse avx 
Reflexions de Bayle (170a) (E. 186 b ; G. iv. 56a) : * The State of the 
8oul, as of the atontj is a state of change, a tendency. The atom 
tends to change its place, the soul to change its thought : each 
changes of itself in the simplest and most uniform way, that its 
State allows. Whence comes it, then (I shall be asked), that there 
is so much simplicity in the change of the atom * [which is taken 
as being always motion in a straight line at a uniform speed] ' and 
so much variety in the changes of the soul ? The reason is that the 
atom (as it is supposed to be, for there is no such thing in nature), 
although it has parts, has nothing which causes any variety in its 
tendency, because it is supposed that these parts do not change 
their relations; while on the other band the soul, though it is 
pei*fectly indivisible, has a composite tendency, that is to say, it 
contains a multitude of present though ts, of which each tends to 



224 



THE MONADOLOGT 



14, The passing- condition, wkich involTes and repro- 
sentB a multiplicifey in th© unit [unite] or in th© simple 
substance, is nothing but what is called Pcreeptwn'^^,. 
which is to be distinginabed from Apperception or 
Conscioiisness^ as will afterwards appear. In this matter 
the Cartesian view is extremely defective, for it treats as 
non- existent those perceptions of which we are not 
eonsciously aware^. This haa alsc^ led them to believe 
that minds [csprits] alone are Monade^ and that there are 
no Söuls of animals nor other Entelechies. Thus, like the 
crowd, they have faiied to distinguish between a prolonged 
unconsciousness and absolute death'^j which haa made 

n pflrtieular ch^nge, accorditig to tlie n^ture of its content, iiüd 
which all are present together in the soiil* in vir tue of the muV& 
essen tial relatioB to nll the other things in the world. It ie becaiiae 
they do not have this relation that the atoms of Epicums have no 
esciatence in natura. Per there is no individual thing, which is 
not to be regarded as ©xpressing all others ; snd conBequently the 
Boal^ in regard to the varioty of its modißcatioiw, onght to be likened 
to the univETse^ which it representa according to its poinfc of view, 
and even in a way to God, whose inßnity it representÄ^ftife^, hecau**« 
of its conftised and imperfect perception of the infinite, rather than 
to A m^tterial aiom/ Cf, Appendix F, p. sja. 

* Cf. Epistola üä Des Büsa«s (1706) (E. 438 a; G, iL 3T1): ^Sinc^e 
perception itt nothing eise than the expres^iion of many things in 
*>ne, all Entelechie^ or Monadä munt necessiarily be endowed, with 
perception/ AIbö Lettre ä Amatdd (1687) (G. ii* ris) : 'Beimuae of 
the continuity and divisibiÜty of all matter, the least motion haa 
ita offect npon neighbotiring bodiea, and consequently upon one 
boiäy after an other ad inßnititm^ i n a gradually 1 essen ing degroe ; 
and thuB cur body muet in aome way be affccted by tho changes in 
all other bodiea. Now, to all the motions of our body there corr©- 
spond certain inore or less confn«ed perceptions of our sonl, and 
accordingly o^r soid also will have aome thought of all the motious 
in the universe, sand in jny opinion cvery other soul or «ubötance 
will haYe ßomo perception or expression of them/ See Introdnction, 
Part ii. p. 33. 

''^ Cf, Metkodf Part 5^ and MBditations^ a and 6. See alßö Frtncipfa 
Phüosophifie, i, 48, and cf, Introduction, Part iii, p, ra6. The Car- 
tealan view is that animals and planta Jire purely meohanical 
structures or living antomata, parta of extension, entirely ^parut« 
from thought* 

" * Sleep, which in an ünage of death^ trances, the burying: of 



THE MONADOLOGY 



225 



them fall again into the Scholastic prejudice of souls 
entirely separate [from bodies], and has even confirmed 
ill-balanced'^* minds in the opinion that souls are moiiaP*. 

a silkworm in its cocoon, the resuscitation of drowned flies by 
means of a dry powder sprinkled upon them (when they would 
remain quite dead, if this were not done), the resuscitation of 
swallows "which make their winter quarters among the reeds, 
where they are found without any appearance of life, the cases of 
men frozen to death, drowned, or strangled, who have been brought 
to life again ... all these things serve to confirm my opinion that 
these different conditions differ only in degree, and if we have not 
the means of bringing about resuscitation from death in other 
forms, it is either because we do not know what ought to be done 
or because, though we do know it, our hands, our instruments, and 
our remedies cannot accomplish it, especially when dissolution 
takes place too quick ly and has gone too far. Accordingly we 
must not content ourselves with the notions which the common 
people may have about life and death, when we have both analogies 
and (what is more) solid arguments which prove the contrary. 
Lettre ä Amauld (1687) (G. Ii. 123). 

^* E. reads mal imches ; G. and Boutroux, mal toumes, 

Descartes regards the immortality of the soul as ultimately 
dependent on the will of God. See the Abrige prefixed to the 
Mediiations [Synopsis in Veitch's translation]. Ct Eeponses aux 
Deuxümes Ohjections, 7. Leibniz thus criticizes the viewof Descartes: 
* The immortality of the soul, as it is established by Descartes, is 
of no use and can give us no kind of consolation. For, granting 
that the soul is a substance and that no substance perishes, the 
soul then will not be lost, as, indeed, nothing is lost in nature ; but, 
like matter, the soul will change in appearance and, as the matter 
of which a man is made has at other times belonged to plants and 
animals, in the same way the soul may be immortal, indeed, but 
it will pass through innumerable changes and will have no re- 
collection of its former states. But this immortality without 
recoUection is ethically quite useless ; for it is inconsistent with 
reward and punishment. What good, sir, would it do you to 
become king of China, on condition that you forget what you have 
been ? Would it not be the same as if God, at the moment He 
destroyed you, were to create a king in China ? ' (G. iv. p. 300.) 
From his own point of view, however, Descartes can say : * Al- 
though all the accidents of the mind be changed — although, for 
example, it think certain things, will others, and perceive otliers, 
the mind itself does not vary with these changes ; while, on the 
contrary, the human body is no longer the same if a change take 
place in the form of any of its parts.' Abrege des Meditations, It 



226 



THE MONADOLOGY 



Ig. Tlie aetivity of tho internal prineiple which pro- 
diices changa or passage from one perception to anotlier 
may be called Äj^dition. Ii ia true that desire [VtippSUt] 
cannot alwaya fuUy aitam to the whole perception at 
which it aima, but it always obtains some of it and 
attains to new perceptions "^'l 

r6t We have in oursei ves experience of a multiplicity 
in aimple stabstance^ when we find that the least thought 
of whieh we are conseioos involves variety in its object ^\ 
Thus all those who admit that the soul is a simple 
subötancG should admit this multiplicity in the Monad ; 
and M, Bayl©*^ ought not to have found any difficulty 

seems to me not improbable that in tho laat words of this soction 
Lelbniz: may have in view, among others, the wund« ring Irialiman, 
JohnToland ( 1670 - 1 722) ^ author of Chrisiianihj not M}ßfetious^ who 
Wö9 in Bodin in 170a and had a brief correspondence withLeibniz, 
in whieh the qiieation of tho immortaJity of the soul is referrod to» 
Leibniz writöa to the Princesa Sophia Charlotto with something 
lilto kindly contempt of Toland'fl readiness to take eilher aide of 
a quciition. Sc© G. vi. pp. 508 sqq. Cf, FrinoiplsA qf NcUare and 0/ 
örace^ I 4. 

^ See IntrodudioTif Part iL 33. Cf. Prinrjpks o/Nainre andqf Graee^ 
5 3. In many of hia writinga Leibniz uaea the word * tendencies ' 
(tew^a^w^ff) for appotitioiiö. Force is a form of appetition or 
tendency, hei* it ia not raerely what actually (ippenrs aa raotion^ Äc* 
bnt it ineludt^s aomething pot^al. And it is n^>t reaHy^ hui only 
idmll^^ an influence of one auhstance upon another. Cf. appetition^ 
in respect of ükenesa and diiference, with Öpinoza'a Conahis. 
Cf* Noumatix BssaiSt Lk, ii. ch. 3 {E. 337 a ; G, v. 109)» 

'* Pierre Bayle^ the fion of a ProloBtant clergyman, was born at 
Carlat in Languedoc, in 1647. He waa educated at the University 
of Toulonse, where, nnder the inflnenco of iTosuit toachGra, he 
bocame a Koman Catholic* But bis Roman Catbolicism waa not 
lastingandj haying retnrned to hU original fiiith, lio öToided the 
eenaürea of the Church by goiog to Geneva. After »omo years of 
wandering he beeanie a Professor of Philosfjphy in the Univeraity 
of Sedan (1675), But owing to the ^ free thinking ' of Bayle and 
othors Louia XlTaummarily auppresaed thia Protestant University 
in löSr, and Bayle went^ as Professor of Hisfeory and Philoöophy, to 
a n^wly es^tabliahed Institution at Rotterdam. In 16B4 ho founded 
the Nmitdles üm Republi^ie des Ltifres, a nion thly revicw of now booka« 
kc.j to which tlioro is frequent reference in thö writings of Leibni^ 



THE MONADOLOGY 



227 



in this, as he has done in his Dictionary, article * Kora- 
rius ' 

1 7. Moreover, it must be confessed that pereeption and 
that which depends upon it are inexplicdble on mechanical 

In 1693, ostensibly on political as well as theological grounds, he 
was deprived of his professorship, and he afterwards devoted him- 
self to his IXctionnaire Historique et Critique (1695-96), which was the 
precursor of the Encyclopaedias and the Encyclopaedist movement 
in the following Century. Among other writings he also published 
a tract against religious persecution and a reply to Maimbourg's 
libels upon Calvinism, He died in 1706. The Theodicee of Leibniz 
is to a large extent devoted to answerin g the arguments of Bayle, 
who maintained the impossibility of reconciling faith with reason. 
There is much difference of opinion as to whether Bayle was 
sincere in his combination of philosophical scepticism with an 
appeal to faith in matters of religion. Probably in this regard he 
meant to foUow the example of Descartes. Leibniz seems to have 
believed in the sincerity of Bayle's religious faith. He always 
writes of Bayle with the greatest respect, saying of him {Theod. 
§ 174): * übt hene, nemo melius,* and again, after his death : *We 
must believe that Bayle is now enlightened with that light, which 
is refused to earth, since, according to all appearance, he has 
always been a man of good will.' 

^ Like the greater part of Bayle's Dictionary, the article 
' Rorarius* may be said to consist mostly of foot-notes. Jerome 
Rorarius (1485-1566), an Italian, was Papal Nuncio at the Court 
of Ferdinand of Hungary. He was so great an admirer of the 
Emperor Charles V that, on hearing a leamed man speak of him 
as inferior to Otho and to Ftederick Barbarossa, he was moved to 
write a treatise maintaining that men are less rational than the 
lower animals. This treatise {Q^uod animaXia bruta ratione utantur 
melius homine) was not published until about 100 years after it was 
written, when Descartes's views regarding the souls of animals 
were under di&cussion. Bayle accordingly makes the name of 
Rorarius the occasion of a füll consideration of the question, in the 
course of which he expounds and criticizes the opinions of Leibniz. 
Bayle thinks it a pity that the position of Descartes is so difiicult 
to maintain and so unlikely to be true ; for otherwise it would be 
very helpful to the true faith. That is to say, the Cartesian view 
is regarded as confirming belief in the immortality of the soul by 
making a very great distinction between man and *the brutes 
which perish.' But it seems to Bayle that Leibniz (whom he calls 
* one of the greatest minds in Europe *) has made some suggestions 
(in regard to the Solution of the general problem) which are worthy 
of being developed. These suggestions are contained in the New 

q 2 



228 



THE MONABOIiOGT 



(imunds, that is to say, hy means of figurea and motions. 
And supposing there were a macliine, so coiistructed as to 
tbitik, fed, nnd have perception, it might be conceived as 
increased in aize, while keeping the same proportions, 6o 
that me might go into it as into a mill. That being so, 
we should, on e:samining its interior, find only parts 
which work one ujxjn another, and never anything by 
which to esplain a perception Thus it ia in a eimple 
substancG, and not in a Compound or in a machine^ that 
perception must be sought for^^. Further, nothing but 
this (nameljj perception s and their changes) canbe found 
in a simple suhstance, It is also in this alone that all 

System, wliic^h was published in the Jmmal des Sav^m of June 27, 
1695 (tho year befor© the sBcond voU of Baylo'ss IHctimary appeji!<>d). 
Bayles eriticlsm is direeted mainly agsinstt the pi^-ßst4ibliahed 
harmony and fche spontaneoiia devolüptnent of all their statea by 
Biiupk substances. Cf. Appendix F. p. 272» 

That ia to sAy, even if we had microseopes powerftil ei^ough to 
reye^l to na, i>ii a larg& scale, all the intricaciea of nerve- cell and 
nervo -üb re in the braln, we ahould stiil never get b^syond figiires and 
motions. Cf* Qimmentatio de Anima Bmtomm (17101 E. 463 a j G, yü. 
338"): ' If in that which ia orgünie there if^ nothin^but niechanimi,that 
is, bare matter ^ having difforences* of place, magnitude and figure ; 
itothing cim bß deduced and e^cplained from it, exisept mechanisjn, 
that iEs, except such diflert?nws a^ I have just menlioned. For 
from auything taken hy itself nothing can be deduct^d and ex- 
plained, exeept difPerenoes of the sttributes which conatitute it 
Hence wo may readily conclude that in no mill or clock as such i» 
theie to he found any prineiple whieh per<?eives what takes place 
in it; iind it matters tityt whother the tliings contained in the 
** machine " are solid or fluid or made np of both. Further we know 
that there is no ef^sontial differenee between coarse and fiiie bodie», 
but only Ä differcuee of magnitnde. Whence it follows thatj if it 
is inconceivable how perception urisofe In any ooarse '*maohine," 
whether it be made up of fluida or Äolidj^^ it is equally inconceivable 
how poreoption can arino from a filier "maehine"; for if our 
senses were finer, it would be the same as if we were peroeivlng 
a coarse " m ach ine," äs we do at prosent.' See alao New E$miy»f 
Introductlon, p, 400. (G, v. S9 ; S03 a.) 

" Mccliiinism alwaya me^s jxniL'S extra partes, This is obaracter' 
istic of all componndß, but not of any simple snbstances. Thua it 
can nevor be said that matter thinka. Matter pre-suppoaea a 
tbiüking or at least a * perceiving ' prinoiple. 



THE MONADOLOÖY 



229 



the mternäl activities of simple substances can consist. 
{Theod. Preß [E. 474 ; vi. 37]:) 

18. All simple substances or created Monads might be 
called Entelechies for they have in them a certain per- 
fection (c^ovo-t ro evreAes) ; they have a certain self-suffi(Äency 
(avTdpK€La) which makes them the sources of their internal 
activities and, so to speak, incorporeal automata ^, {TMod, 
87.) 

kvT^Xix^ia is probably derived from Iv riXu tx^iv^ to be complete 
or absolute. Leibniz's use of the term differs considerably from 
^ that of Aristo tle. kvTfX^x^ia in Aristotle is the staU of perfection 

or realization in which kvipyda, as a process, ends. Tovvofjia kvipyua 
\4y€Tai kutSl t6 l^pyov, Kai avvTHVn trphs r^jv fVTfXix^iav, Mefaph. 0, 8, 
1050* 22. But the distinction between kvrtXix^ia and kvkpyna in 
Aristotle is not by any means a sharp one. Thus he defines the soul 
i^^XV) 8.S kvTfXix^^^ ^ vpdyrrj adjfJiaTos <f>v<riKov Sw6,/jl€i (oj^v exovros. De 
Anima, iL i. But elsewhere he calls it ovaia Kai kvipytia cij^rSs 
Tivos. Metaph. H, 3, 1043'* 35. First entelechy is related to second 
entelechy as (marrf/jLrj (implicit) is related to Oeojpeiv (explicit). 
Thus the soul is defined as ßrst or implicit entelechy because it 
exists in sleep as well as awake. The entelechy of Leibniz, how- 
ever, is to be understood as an individual substance or force, 
containing within itself the principle of its own changes. It is 
called entelöchy, not because it is a state of perfect realization, 
but because it contains in germ an infinity of perfections, which 
it tends to develop. It is thus not so much the final developed 
condition of a thing, opposed to its potentiality {Svvafus or vXrj)j but 
it rather implies the tendency or virtuality, of which Leibniz 
speaks as something intermediate between the bare potency (puis- 
sance) and the fully developed activity {acte) of the Scholastics. 
Cf. Introduction, Part iii. pp. 91, 105. * The Forms of the Ancients 
or Entelechies are nothing but forces.' Lettre au Pere Bouvet, E. 146 a. 
Cf. Trendelenburg, De Anima, pp. 295, 320. In the eighth book of 
Aristotle's Metaphysics there is a remark of much interest, when 
considered in relation to Leibniz : 1) oiala oi/tojs, d\\' ovx ojs 
Xiyovai rives oTov fiovds Tis ovaa fj ffiiyiirj^ dAA* kvT^Xix^ia Kai <pvais ris 
(Kdarrj. H, 3, 1044* 7. fiovds is, of course, used here in its original 
sense of a unit. 

That is to say, not merely machines, such as those made by 
man, but entirely self-moving machines or machines which contain 
within themselves the ground or principle of all their states or 
conditions, in as complete independence of all eise as if there were 
nothing in the universe but God and themselves. Monads alone 
are automata in this sense. Corporeal automata, in so far as they 



230 



THE MONADOLOGY 



I If we are to gire the name of Soul to every thiog 
which hm perceptions and desires [ajjpMiis] in ihe general 
eense wbich I have explamed^ then all simple substances 
or created Monads might be called @üu1s i but bb feeling 
lle sentiment] is something more than a bare perception, 
I tbink it rigbt that the general name of Monada or 
Entelecbies should suifiee for simple substances whicb 
liaye perception only, and that the name of SouU should 
be given only to ihose in whicb perception is more 
distinct, and is accompanied by memory^*, 

20, For we experience in oui-selves a conditionin which 
Ave remember nothing and have no distinguishable per- 
ception ; aa when we fall into a swoon or when we are 
üvercome with a profound dreamless sleep. In this state 
the soul does not perceptibly differ from a bare Monad ; 
but as this state is not lasting, and the soul comes out of 
it, the eoul is something more than a bare Monad. 
(Theod. 64.) 

21. And it does not follow that in this state the simpl# 
substance is without any perception. That, indeed, 
cannot be^ for the rtsasons akeady given ; for it cannot 
perish, and it cannot eontitiue to exist without being 
affected in some way^ and this affection is nothing but 

r its perception* But when there is a great multitudo of 
" little perceptions^ in which thera is nothing distinct, one 
is stunned ; as when one tums continuously round in the 

are eorporeal, cannot be mld to have this auTdpstrin, Cf. § 64. 
Spinoza spüaka of the soul &s ' acting according to certain lawä und 
m ]f it were a kind of spiritual automaton.' Ik Intelkäiis Emenda^ 
tione^ 85 ; Bruder'a ed., ii. 34. 

^* Memory is thus the sign of conaciousness as d ist inet frora 
nnconjjcioua perception. Thiy is in hiirmouy with tho vic>w, am* 
ph&siaüd by modern writers, thüt üonscious Sensation pre-siipposes 
memoiy, behause wo can know one Sensation only when !t haa 
bften brought into compiiriaön with othera, Xeibniz in one of his 
early writiings anggestively remarks that body is * momen tary 
jnind, i. e. mind without meniory ' (msm fnomentaneaj carens 
recordatvme). Theoria Mütue Absiradi (1671) (G» iv, 230), 
Leibniz originally wrot© * Variation/ 



THE MONADOLOGY 23 1 

same way several times in succession, whence comes a 
giddiness wliich may make us swoon, and which keeps ' 
US from distinguishing anything Death can for a time 
put animals into this condition 

22. And as every present state of a simple substance is . 
naturally a consequence of its preceding state, in such a i 
way that its present is big with its future ^® ; {Theod, 350.) ' 

23. And as, on waking from stupor, we are conscious of 
our perceptions, we must have had perceptions imme- 
diately before we awoke, although we were not at all 
conscious of them ; for one perception can in a natural . 
way come only from another perception, as a motion 
can in a natural way comö only from a motion ^\ {Theod. 
401-403.) 

24. It thus appears that if we had in our perceptions 
nothing marked and, so to speak, striking and highly- 
flavoured, we should always be in a state of stupor. And 
this is the state in which the bare Monads are. 

25. We See also that nature has given heightened 
perceptions to animals, from the care she has taken to 
provide them with organs, which collect numerous rays 
of light, or numerous undulations of the air, in order, by 
imiting them, to make them have greater effect *^ Some- 

Leibniz*s point is that in such states as these we are still mani- 
festly in certain peculiar relations to the external world, although 
consciousness has, for the time, become so slight as to be imper- 
ceptible. 

Cf. Monadology, § 14, note 23. ^* Cf. §§78 and 79. 

'•^^ In virtue of the principle of sufficient reason, every perception 
must have a cause, which can be nothing but another perception 
(see § 17) ; and if the antecedent perception did not immediatdy 
precede the consequent, there would be a breach of continuity in 
the existence of the soul. Ultimately, of course, motions are them- 
selves perceptions ; but they are confused perceptions, of such a 
kind that their relations to one another can be stated according 
to mechanical laws, which, however, are abstract and pre-suppose, 
for their füll explanation, the system of final causes or the laws of 
perception in generaL 

Cf. Helmhol tz, Poptdar Scientific LectureSj vol. i. p. 186. See also 
Principles qf Nature and qf Qrace, § 4. 



233 THE MONADOLOQY 

tliiiig similar to this takes place in smell, in taste and in 
touchj and p^rhaps in a tmniber of other aenses, which 
are unknowii to us *^ And I will explain presently how 
that whieh takes place in tbe soul represents wlmfc happens 
in th© bodily organs. 

26. Memory providea the soul with a kind of consecti- 
iimness which resembles [imife] reason, but whicli is to 
be distinguished from it. Tlius we see that when an im als 
bave a pereeptioix of sometking whieh strikes tliem and 
öf which they liave fornierly had a similar perception, 
they are led, by means of representation in their memory» 
to expect what was combined with the thing in this prd- 
vioQs perception, and they come to hav© feelings similar 
to those they had on the former occasiom For instance, 
when a stick is shown to dogs, they rememher the pain 
it has eaused them, and bowl and run away**. {Thtbd. 
Discours de la Conformife, See, § 65.) 

27, And the strength of tho mental image w^bich im- 
presses and moves them com es ei t her from the magnitude 
or the number of the preceding perceptions* For often 
a streng impression produces all at once tbe sanie effect 
öS a long'formed habit, or as many and oft-repeated 
ordinary perceptions ^^ 

*^ Cf, Lubboek, Ants;, Bees and Wasps^ ch» 8, es^pedally pp. aao 
and 

** See §1 61 and 62, 

*^ CoM5^«<iiy, fiüncÄtenation or sequence of pereeptioits^. I-eibniz 
is referring to what woi^ld now bo called association of ideaa. 
Cf. Nmveaux EsmifSj bk, ii. ch, li, § 11 (E. 337 b ; G. v. 130), and 
bk* ii. ch, 33 (E 396 a ; G. v. 25^). In the lotter of these ehapter« 

On thß Aaaociation of Itloas ') he ia thinking mainly of a ^ non- 
natural connexion of idea^,' as in the caae of stränge prejudicea or 
superstitionß. 

Does LeibniÄ in thäs neetion^ as Bome crifcies maintaiiij orer« 
look his * Pre-estabiished Harinony ' and unconsclously adopfc thö 
ordinary point of yiew, which implied that aubstanct's do roally 
act upoo otie atiother and aro not caeh the eause of all ita own 
experiencea V 

" Cf. KoUT^iix Essais^ bk. ii, ch. 33 (E, 29Ö a j ö. v. 353!. * And 
&& the reasons * [of the connexion of thiaga] * are often unktiown to 



THE MONADOLOGY 



28. In so far as the concatenation of their perceptions 
is due to the principle of memory alone, men act like the 
lower animals, resembling the empirical physicians 
whose methods are those of mere practice without theory. 
Indeed, in three-fourths of our actions we are nothing 
but empirics. For instance, when we expect that there 
will be daylight to-morrow, we do so empirically, because 
it has always so happened until now, It is only the 
astronomer who thinks it on rational grounds*^ 

29. But it is the knowledge of necessary and eternal 
truths that distinguishes us from the mere animals and 
gives US Beason and the sciences, raising us to the know- 
ledge of Ourselves and of God*^. And it is this in us 
that is called th-e rational soul or mind [esprii]. 

US, we must attend to particular instances in proportion to their 
frequency; for then the expectation or recolleötion of another 
perception, usually connected with the perception we are ex- 
periencing, is reasonable ; especially in cases where we have to 
take precautions. But as the violence [yehemence] of a very powerful 
impression often produces all at once as much -effect as the fre- 
quency and repetition of several moderate impressions could have 
done in the long-run, it happens that this violence engraves in the 
fancy an image as deep and as vivid as long experience could have 
done. Whence it con»es that a chance but violent impression 
Combines in our memory two ideas, which were already together 
there, and gives us the same inclination to connect them and to 
expect the one affcer the other, as if long custem had verified their 
connexion. Thus associatlon produoes the same effect^ though the 
same refison does not exist. Authority and oustom produoe also 
the same effect as experience and reason, and it is not easy to free 
oneself from l^hese inclinations.* Cf. New Essays, Introduction, 
p. 364. 

** Until the time of Galen (circa 150 a.D.), there were various 
sects of physicians. One of these was the sect of the Empirics, 
who laid stress upon Observation of the *visible* antecedents of 
disease, &c. In later times the name of empiric feil into disrepute 
and was given to physicians who despised theoretical study and 
trusted to tradition and to their own individual experience. 

*^ Cf. New Essaysj Introduction, p. 365, note 39. 

*^ The necessary and eternal truths are the first principles of all 
rational knowledge. They are innate in us. They are, in fact, 
the very principles of our nature, as of the universe, because it is 
of our essence to represent the whole universe. Thus conscious- 



»34 



THE MOJ^APOLOGY 



30, It is also through the Imowledge of necessary 
truths, and ihrough their abstract expression^ that we 
rise to acts of reflexirntj which make ua think of wbat is 
called I) and obsei-ve that this or that is witbin us : 
and thua» tbinkmg of ourselves, we think of being, of 
ßubatancGj of the simple and tho Compound, of the 
immatenal, and of God Himselfj conceiving that what is 
limited in us is in Him without limits. And these acta of 
reflexion funiish the chief objects of our reasonings*^ 
(Theod, Pref, [E, 469 j G. yi 27]-) 

ness or knowledge of thöse tniths ii knowledgo of ourselvea, and 
it ia at the samo Urne knowledge of God^ wlio in fcho final roason of 
itll things. Cf. Noiiman^ Essais, bk- i, eh. § 4 (E. 207 b ; G. V. 
7 a). *A pretty gonoral ßgreement among meu is an indioation 
knö not a deinonatration of an innate priticipl© ; biat the exaet and 
decisiv© proof of tho&e princiiples conaista in showing that Iheir 
c^rtainty comes only from what its in uö. . . , Ifc may be said that 
all Arithmetik and all Geatiietry are innat^ and ara in us in a 
Virtual inannerj so that we eoiild ßud thom by attentively con- 
giderLng and arranging what is already in onr mind, without 
nmking n^e of any tnith learnod by esperlfence or by extemal 
traditiön, tin Plafco haa shqwn in a dialogne' [MenOy 8a sqq.] * in 
wlüch ho introduces Socrates leading a ehild to abätraso trutha 
by queationa aloue, without giving him any information/ Cf. 
Frinciples qf Natiire and of Graes, § 5. 

Thua conscionsneg.^ bocomes seif conaciouaneas (rofleotive con- 
scionsness) wboa wo reali^c the eternal tniths aa efcemal, that is 
to sayj as tho innate princjpks of our being and of the whole 
World, Substance is always a soül of soino kind, because it must 
b© something analoge na to what we find in ouraelvos, Cf. Brnveaux 
Essaisj hk, eli. i, | 21 (E. ^21 1 b ; G. 70), * Very often know- 
ledge of the naturo of things ia nothing hui kiiowlodgo of the 
nature of our mlnd [es/jrüf] and of thoso innato ideas, which. tliere 
ia no need to look for outside of it.* Cf. also i 23 (E. srs b ; G. T. 
71) : * Intel lectual ideas or ideaa of roflexion are dcrived from our 
mind ; and 1 should like very much to know how we oould ha^e 
the idea of beingy were it not that we täui^selyes are boings and thus 
find being in ourselves/ Wo see liero (in liowever imperfeet 
a form) the görm of the Kantian transition from * aubstaBce ' ,tü 
* subject * as tho ulfcitnate metaphysical reality. Vt p. 190* 

Boutroux Ends in this passage tlio indication of a succession of 
etages in the progress of self-eonseious reflexion. The nature 
of God is the truth or uUimate reality of our nature. Thus in 
*refleaüoiij that is to say, in the return of the being towarda ita 



THE MONADOLOGY 



31. Our reasonings are grounded upon two greatprinci- 
ples, that of contradictio% in virtue of which we judge 
fdlse that which involves a contradiction, and true that 
which is opposed or contradictory to the false ; {Theod, 
44, 169.) 

32. And that of sufficient reason, in virtue of which 
we hold that there can be no fact real or existing, no 
Statement true, unless there be a sufficient reason, why 
it should be so and not otherwise, although these reasons 
usually cannot be known by us". {Theod. 44, 196.) 

33. There are also two kinds of truths, those of reason- 

source, which is God . . . we firat of all come upon the ego, or the 
being which is in us, in so far as it is limited and distinct from 
other beings, and then upon being, substance and the immaterial, 
Coming ever nearer to the Divine Essence itself. And finally, 
through perception which has thus become reflective and conscious, 
we reach the Infinite Being, whom, from the first, created beings 
are seeking confusedly and unwittingly. Then the circle, so to 
speak, closes upon itself : the created being identifies itself with 
the Creator in so far as He is in it ; the finite has done all that its 
nature allowed in the way of reproducing the infinite/ (Edition 
of La Monadologie^ p. 156.) 

^ Cf. Introduction, Part ii. pp. 58 sqq. Leibniz sometimes 
distinguishes between the principle of contradiction and that of 
identity (A = A). But he recognizes that they are ultimately one. 
Cf. Nouveaux Essais, bk. iv. ch. 2, § i (E. 339 a ; G. v. 343). *The 
principle of contradiction is in general : a proposition is either true or 
false. This contains two true Statements ; (i) that the ti*ue and the 
false are not compatible in the same proposition or (hat a pi oposition 
cannot he true and false at the same time ; (2) that the opposites or 
negations of the true and the false are not compatible, or that 
there is no middle term between the true and the false, or rather 
that it is impossible for a proposition to he neither trus nor fdlse* See 
Aristotle, Metaph, r, 3, 1005'' 19 and 7, loii*' 23. 

^ In his earlier writings Leibniz calls the sufficient reason the 
determining reason, meaning the reason which determines the exis- 
tence of this or that out of a number of possibilities, each of which 
involves no self-contradiction. As synonymous with the * pnnciple 
of sufficient reason,* he also sometimes uses the phrase, * principle 
of fitness [convenance] or of harmony.* He thus suggests that the 
sufficient reason of a thing is always to be found in its relations to 
other things, its place in the general system. We give the sufficient 
reason of anything when we show its * compossibility ' with other 



236 



THE MONÄDOLOQY 



mg and thoae oifact ^\ Truths of reasoning are necessary 
and tlieir opposite is irapossible : trutlis of fact are con- 
tingeDt and their opposite is possibl© *^ Wlien a tnith is 
neceasarjj ita reason can be found ,by aaalysis, reeolving 
it iiito more simple ideas and trat Iis, until we corae to 
those whieh are priiuary'"\ {TMod. 170^ 174^ 1S9, 380- 
28z, 367, Ährcge, OhjecL 3,) 

tlimgs in additioü to its absb'aet ^poasibilifcy/ The principl© of 
gufficient roasoii in thü priticiplo of final cauBeL Löibiiiz's adoption 
o£ thö Word ' aufiicient ' is siipposed to hnTO heeix isuggesttsd by ita 
uste in Matheiii&tks in a sensG sitnilar to thiit in wliich say tbat 
a eertain magnitude ^satisfiea' a parfcieular equaiion. 
" et the Seholastic ratio copiosuejidi and ratio essendL 

Gf. Theosiic^Bj | 174 (E. 557 b ; G, vi. 317). ' It may be said of 
M. Bayle : Ubi hme, nemo mdius^ though it coiild not be said of hinii 
as it was said of Origcn: Ubi male, nemo pejus. • . , Yet M, Bayle adda 
at the end ' [of a pagsage, quoted by Leibniz in tba previona seetion] 
'words wlüch somewhftt spoit what bo bas ao juätly romarlred. 
" Now what contra diction would there have bpen if Spinoza häd 
died at Leyden ? Would natnre have been leas perfect, lesä wise, 
\&m powerftil? " He Lere confotinda wliat ia impoisaiblo, because it 
iiivolvea a oontradiction, with what cannot happen, becaxtse it ia 
not well fitted to be ebosen. It ia tme tbat there would have been 
110 contra diction in the supposition that Spinoj^a bad died at 
Leyden and not at the Hague : it waa perfectly poaäible. Accord- 
inglyj aa regarda the power of God, the matter wa3 indifferent. 
But it muat not be imagincd that any event, howover insigtiificant, 
can be regarded as indiflterent in relation to God*s wi&dom and 
goodneas/ 

^ Leibniz does not give us a very clear idea of the relations of 
tfae two principles to the two kinds of triitliö. ThLs is probably 
due to hia heaitancy regarding the relations of the two principles 
to ono another- In the Appendix: to the ThMkie entltled Betnarqut» 
irtW' h Uwe de M. King, Leibniz saya (E, 641 b; G. vi. 414)* *Both 
principles must apply not only ta neceasary, bnt ako to contingent 
truthSy and, indeed, that which haa no sufücient reason must 
jiecessarily be non*oxistent, For it roaj in a manner bo said that 
these two principlea are fncluded in tho doürution of the trne and 
thö faljie. Novortheleaa when, by analyzing a snggestod truthj wö 
soe that it dependa lipon truths wbose opposite involves a contra- 
diction, we can aay that it is absolutely necessaiy. But when, 
earrying our analyaia as far aa we liko^ %ve can ncvor reach such, 
elenients of the given truth, it muat be ^id to be contingent^ and 
to have its origin in a prevailing reaaon, whieh inclinoii without 
neoesaitating/ But on the other band, at a iater date, Leibnii 



THE MONADOLOGY 



34. It is thus that in Mathematics speculative Theorems 
and practical Canons are reduced by analysis to DefinitionSj 
Axioms and Postulates. 

35. In Short, there are simple ideas, of which no defini- 
tion can be given ^'^ ; there are also axioms and postulates, 
in a Word, primary principUSf which cannot be proved, 
and indeed have no need of proof ; and these are identiccU 
propositions whose opposite involves an express contra- 
diction. {Theod. 36, 37, 44, 45, 49, 52, 121-122, 337, 
340-344.) 

36. But there must also be a sufficient reason for con- 
tingent tmths or truths of fact^'^, that is to say, for the 
sequence or connexion of the things which are dispersed 
thioughout the universe of created böings, in which the 
analyzing into particular reasons might go on into endless 
detail, because of the immense variety of things in nature 
and the infinite division of bodies There is an infinity 

writes to Clarke {11'^'' icrü de Leibniz, E. 748 a; G. vii. 355)- *The 
principle of contradiction is by itself suflBcient for the demon- 
stration of the whole of Arithmetic and Geometry, that is to say, 
of all mathematical principles. But in order to pass from Mathe- 
matics to Physics, another principle also is needed, the principle 
of sufficient reason.* See Introduction, Part ii. pp. 66 sqq. In the 
Monadologyy Leibniz's position is the same as in the earlier of 
the passages quoted. 

** The definition of an idea is, for Leibniz, the statement of the 
elements which a complete analysis reveals in it. Cf. Meditationes 
de Cognitionen Veritate et Ideis {1684) (E. 79 b; G. iv. 423). *When 
everything which is an element in a distinct idea, is in its turn 
distinctly known, or when analysis has been completely made, 
knowledge is adäquate, I know not whether human knowledge 
can supply a perfect instance of this : the knowledge of numbers, 
however, approaches it.* 

^ Leibniz uses the word enonciaiion for enunciatiOj which is the 
usual Latin translation of Aristotle's ä-noipavais, or \6yos diro<pavTiK6s. 

Truths of reasoning have their sufficient reason in the seif- : 
evident, identical truths to which they may be reduced by analysis. ! 
Truths of fact can find a sufficient reason only in God. 

Cf. Lotze, Microcosmusj bk. iii. ch. 5, § i (Eng. Tr., i. 372). 
Leibniz says * infinite division* instead of * infinite divisibility,* 
because bodies are infinitely divisible only as phenomena henefundata 
and not as real beings. A real thing or substance must be indi- 



238 



THE MONADOLOGY 



of present and paat forma and motiona which go to make 
Up the efficient cause of my present wiitmg ; and there is 
an infinity of minute tendencies and dispositiona of my 
soulj whieh go to mak© its final cause ^\ 

37, And as all tliis detail again involves otlier prior or 
more detail ed conti ngent things, each of wliich stül iieeds 
a similar analjsis to yield its reason, we are no further 
forward ; and tlie äulttcient or final reason must be out- 
side of the seq^uence or series of particular contingent 
things, howover infinite this series may be*^ 

38, Thua the final reason of things must be in a neces* 
sary substance, in which the variety of particular changes 
exists only eminently as in its source ; and this sub- 

^ stance we call God. {Tli^od, 7.) 

-tisible: it eannot cöiisist fit faftm exim parfes. And the * infinite 
diyUion ' of bodiea is nierely another way of d^scribing tli© in* 
finite nuniber of partkmiar aubatancea or Monads, 

See Introduction, Part üL p. 107, Cf. § 6r. Here, in anotb^r 
form, ariseB ihn difflculty asto thü rölatioii of Leibüiz'B *pnricipteB' 
t*> on© anothcr. Apjjarently the efficient and the fin&l cause 
combined make up the &uffieienfc reason, neither hj itäelf bemg 
onough. Yet elsewhere Loibniz .repro^seutä efficient eau^es 
uUimat^ly depending on final causes. And efficient caus^s arö by 
Loibniz u^ually identified witli metihanieal cfiuse»^ whosse principle 
13 that of contradiütion. See also Appendix F, p, 372. 

^ Thia iä an argument on ilio same lines that by mcana of 
which Aristo tle infers a ^prime moyer*' It depends on bis prin* 
ciple, dvayKi} arrjvat, i, e« we raust eome to a stop somewhere in the 
regresfl of cauees or condifcions. Cf* PAi/s, H, 6, 337^ 3 ; @, i, 251* 17 ; 
ö, 5, 356* 13, Aläo Kanfc'g Critique 0/ Pure Reas&nj Tmnscmdenial 
maUcikj bk. ii. ch. 3 nnd 3. 

*^ Eminmtly in contrast with formally. The terms are Schola^io 
and they worö adoptt^d by Deacartos. Thomas Aqtiinas expresses 
the differenoe thus : ^ Whatever perfeotion ia in the effeet mtist 
hUq appear in the cau^^e, after the same niann^r if the agenfc aiid 
the effeet are of the same kind {univocal) (thua man begeta man)^ or 
in a n>ore eminmt^ that is to say escellent, way, if the agent ia of 
anotber kind <,eqmc(X:(ä).* Beacartcfl saya : 'By the ofcjechVe rEality 
0/ an idea^ I meßn Üie entity or being of the thing represented by 
the idea, in so far aa this entity is in thö idea j and in the same way 
we may speak of an objective perfection or an objective design, 
For all that we conceiye a$ being in the obj e^^ta of idea» ia objeutively 



THE MONADOLOGY 



39. Now as this substance is a sufficient reason of all 
this variety of particulai*s, which are also connected 
together throughout ; there is only one God, and this God 
is sufficient ^\ 

40. We may also hold that this supreme substance, 
which is unique, universal ®^ and necessary, nothing out- 

or by representation in tlie ideas themselves. The same things are 
Said to be formally in the objects of the ideas, when they exist in 
the objects just as we conceive them to exist ; and they are said 
to be eminently in the objects, when they do not really exist as we 
conceive them, but when they are so great that their excellence 
makes up for this defect.' Repomes atix Beuxiemes Objedions. 
Raisons qui prouvmt Veocistence de DieUy iii. and iv., cf. note on this 
distinction in Veitch's TranslaHon of Descartes, * Formally* as opposed 
to ' objecUvely * is almost equivalent to our * ohjectively * (as opposed to 
^ subjectively *) or *reäUy* (as opposed to Un idea*). As opposed 
to eminently f formally is secundum eandem formam et rationem, while 
eminentüy is" gradu or modo eminentiori, 

®* That is to say, all particular things are connected together 
in one System, which implies one principle, one necessary 
substance, one God. The argument is not merely from the 
existence of order in the world to the existence of an intelligence 
which produces this order, but from the fact that the whole forms 
one System to the existence of one ultimate sufßcient reason of the 
whole. Otherwise there might be various * Orders ' or * disorders ' 
in conflict with one another, each pre-supposing its own first 
principle or * God.' This is Leibniz's form of the Cosmological 
proof of the existence of God. 

* Universal' in the sense of being equally the cause or first 
principle of all things. The whole spirit of Leibniz's philosophy is 
opposed to the supposition of a universal substance or spirit, of 
which all particular substances are merely modes, Thus in the 
Considerations sur la Boctrine d*un Esprit üniversel {i']02) he endeavours 
to refute the view that * there is but one spirit, which is universal 
and which animates the whole universe and all its parts, each 
according to its structure and according to the organs it possesses, 
as the same blast of wind produces a variety of sounds from 
diflferent organ-pipes * or that * the universal spirit is like an ocean 
composed of an infinite number of drops, which are separated from 
it when they animate some particular organic body and which are 
reunited with their ocean after the destruction of the organism.* 
This is * the view of Spinoza and of other similar authors, who will, 
have it that there is only one substance, viz. God, who thinks,. 
believes and wills one thing in me, and who thinks, bolieves and 
wills quite the opposite in some one eise — an opinion the absurdity 



240 



THE MONADOLOGY 



ßide of it böing independent of it, — this substanee, which 
m a pure sequence of possible being, niust he illiniitable 
and niust c 011 tarn as much reality as is possible 

41* Whence it foUowa tbat Ood is absohitely perfect ; 
for perfection is nothing biit amount of positive reality, 
in the strict sense, leaving out of account tho limita or 
boiinds in tbings wbich am limited. And where tbere 
ai'e no boiinds, that is to say in Godj perfection is abso- 
lutely infinifco. {Theotl 22, Preß [K 469 a; G. vi. 

42. It foUowa also that ereated beings derive iheir 
perfections froni the influence of God, but that their 
imperfoetions come from theh- own naturej whieh is 
incapable of being without limits, For it is in thia that 
they diffor from God^\ An instance of this original 
iniperfection of ereated beings may be seen in the natural 
imrtia of bodies^. {Tkmd. 20, 27-30^ 1^3, 167, 377 sqq») 

of which M. Baylo has well shown in several placos in Iiis 
dictionary ' (E, 178 i8r b, i8s a j G. vi, 52^ 535, 537), 

" As Qod is the außicient reason of ftll, nothing iä independent 
of Hirn. Buf; if His possit^ility werö in any way limited, it must 
be hj Rome posbibility outsidß and iiidepondtjnt of Hirn* Con- 
sequently His posaibiüty cannöt be limited. And ntilimited possi- 
bility means ntilimitc'd reality and unlimited esistence, För that 
Tvhich 13 possible musfc be roal, unless there is Eomething eise with 
which it is not com possible, that is to aay, unless thöre if? some otber 
possible thing, whose natur® limita it. Cf, § 54 and Introdijction, 
Part iL p. 63. The argnment in thie and the following sectiona 
will become cle^ir if wc keep La view the idea which Leihniz seeks 
conatantly to omphasizo in every depnrtment of thought, namely 
that possibility or potentiality ia never a moro empty c^pacity, 
a tabula rasa^ a poUniia nuda, but ahvays, in howe^yer amall a degrec, 
a ünd^li to reälization, whioh if^ kept bacik onlj' by other ^imilar 
tendendes. Thi§ ia what is meant by th© ^claims' ajid 'aspirations* 
af the Monads, mentioned in §§51 and 54. 

■* Created beings must be easentiully limited; ötherwise they 
would not be cieated, hnt wonld be identical with God. In tho 
Thiodicie Leibniz (following the Scholastic principlcj hmum habet 
causam ej^kmitem^ malum aufem df*ßdmfem\ nses this as a hypothesis 
hy which to remove from God the respoTisibUity for the exiatenre 
of evil, The orifjin of ctiI js the essen tial im perfection of ereated 
i subÄtanees ; and God is the cause only of the perfection or positive 
realily of ereated things. 

TMa Bentence ia not given by E, It seems to have been added 



THE KONADOLOGY 



241 



43. It is farther tnie that in God there is not only the 
souree of existences bot also that of eaaenees, in so far as 
they are real, that is to say, the souree of what is real in 
the possible*^, For the understanding of God ia the 
region of eternal tratha or of the ideas on whieh they 
depend and without Him there would be nothing real 
in the possibilities of things, and not only would there 
be nothing in existenee, but nothing would even be 
posaible, (Theod. so.) 

by Leibniz in re-vising the firat oopy of thß Monad&lim. Q. give& it 
in a foot-note» The natural iuertia of a body is its passlvity or 
thüt in it which Mmits its activity. So far tli© paaaivity of thö 
body is real (i.e. iiot a mere appeanince to us), it conaists of eonfiised 
perception, But God is actu3 purm^ entirely without pasaivityr and 
His perceptiona are all perfeetly clear and distinci 

^ That 19 to mjy Qod is not only tb© sourc© of all actuAl existextoo, 
but also the aource of all pot^ntial eKistenco, of all that tends to 
eiiat. * Whafc m real in th© possibl© ' ib ita tendency to exist* In 
iL Benae, ^easences^ oj* *possible' tliinga are independeiit of God- 
He does not creat© th^m aa easenc©», Tliey are the objects of His 
undorstanding, and ' He is not the au t hör of His own under- 
standing' {Thmiidee, §380; 614 b j ö. vi. 341^ The nature of 
easencea nr posaibilities is determlned aolely by tlv© prinoipl© of 
oontradiction. And yet^ in another aense, thty may b© said to he 
dependent upon God, inasmuch m they are all expreasions of His 
naturo in on© or another aspect or with particular limitations. 
His freedom, how©ver, extends only to a choice of thoso which 
{»hall actuaily üxiat^ ajid this ehoie^ ig dotermined by His wisdom 
and Hia goodneas, having regard to the nature of the * eaaences ' 
themaelvea. * Without Him there would be nothing m erisieneej* 
for the oiistence of things is the result of Hia will, Hia choico, 
* Without Him nothing would be pQsstitie^' for all that i& possibl© 
is tho object of His understanding, and aa His und© rata nding ia 
perfoct (i,e, entirely free from confusion in ita perceptioua), its 
übject must h© the uJtiraate nature of things, that is, th© v<?ry 
essence of God Himself. Thus in § 44 Löibniz practically identifiea 
^eaaeneea* or *posdbilitiea' with *et©mal trutha/ Cf. Introduction, 
Part ii. p. 66. 

Leibniz connecta thia part of hia aystom with Plato's world 
of ideaa. Ho mentiona aa ono of th© * many moatoicellöntdocjtrinea 
of Plato ' that ^ thcro is in the Bivine mind an intelligible world, 
which I also am wonfc to call the region of Ideas/ Epistola ad 
Hanschium (1707), E, 445 b. 



THE MOXADOLOGY 



44. Por if there is a reality in essences or posaibilities, 
or rather in eternul triiths, thia reality must needs be 
foundod in aomething existing and aetual, and conse- 
quently in tlie existence of tlie neceasary Being, in whom 
essence inTolves existence^ or in wbom to be possible is 
to be actual'^ (Thcod. r 8 4-1 89, 335») 

45. Tbus God alone (or tbe necesaary Being) has this 
prerogative that He mmi necössarily exist, if He 13 pos- 
sible. And as nothing can interfere with the possibility 
of that which involves no Hmits, no negation and conse- 
quently no contradiction, this [His poasibility] is suflBcient 
of itself to make known the existence of Ood a priori 
We have thns proved it, throngh the reality of eternal 
truths» But a littl© while ago '^^ we proTed it also a posie- 
riorij sinee there exist contingent beinga^ whieh can have 
their final or sufficient reason only in the necessary Being, 
which has the reason of its existence in itself, 

46. We must notj however^ imagine, as some doj that 
eternal truths, being dependent on Ood, aro arbitrary 
and depend on His will, as Descartes^j and afterwards 

* G . r^ads car, K üependant. 

See Appendix p. 274, "^^ f § 36-39» 

et Bescart«Sj Lettre au Phre M^^mne (Cousin'a ed., vol. vi. 
p. log). *■ The metaphyaicÄl tmtha which yoii call eternal have heen 
establiBhed bj Ood and ar© tjntirely depöadent upon Hirn, like 
all otlicT croattid ihinga. Indeed, to say that theäe trutiia are 
independent of God to «peak of God aa a Jupiter or a Saturn flJld 
to subject HLm to Styx and the Fatös. ... God haa cstablished 
thes© laws in natare^ just as a king establisheH law3 in his 
kiugdom/ et hc. dt, p. 103, ^ We cannot withoufc blaBphemy say 
that the tnith of anything precedea the knowledge whieh God has 
of it, for in God Willing and knowing are oiie/ Elaewhere he gayEj 
that God was perfoctly free to make it untrue that the three angles 
of a trisDgle should be equäl to two righ t-angloa. Äa ©arlj aa 1671, 
in a letter to Honoratus Fabri^ Leibniz writea : * If trutha and the 
uatnreiä of things are dependent on the ohoitje of God, I do not aee 
how knowledge [scientia] or ©von will can bö attrlbuted to Hirn. 
For will eertflinly presupposes aome understandingj since no one 
can will except in view of aome good [sub ratione iwni]. But undeT' 
atanding preauppos^a ^mettiing that can be underatood, that im 
Iq BBjf Bome nature. But if all natures are the result of will, 



THE MONABOLOGY 



Poiret™, appear to have held. That iß tru© only of 
contingent truthsj of whieh the principle is ßtmss [cm- 
mmnce] or choice of the best, whereas necessary truths 
depend solely on His undei*standmg and ai'e its inner 
übject. {Theod. 180-184, '^Sf 335? 35 'r 380.) 

47, Thus Güd alone is th© piimary unity or original 
simple öubsknce, of which all creat^d or deiiyative 
Monads are producta and have their birth^ so to Sf>eak, 
through eontmual fulgurations " of the Divinity froni 

underiit4inding aUo will be the result of will. How^ thoii, dopa 
will presuppoöe und öiiiftau ding ? ' (G, iv. ^59)* fbe point was 
much discutised bj the Seholastica, with special rGfereace to the 
question whether or not the moral law ia independent of the will 
of God, Dtiäcartes'a view is in hiirmony with thjifc of Du ms Scotua, 
while Leibniz foUowaTiiomaa Aquinaa» For Dtjscartea, tli« Divine 
and iho humari understanding differ in kind : for Laibni^ tboy 
differ merely in degr^e. 

Pierre Poiret (1646-1719), a Calvinist minister, who held 
a Charge in the Duchy of Zweibrüelcen, in the Ebise Palatinate. 
He was at flrst a CartösiHU and published a hoükj CitgUatioJtaB 
rationale» **tf IkOj Anima et Malo, which Bfvyle attackecl. Afterwaa-ds 
he came under the influence of Antoinßtte Bourignon, tho Dutch 
religious enthusjast^ who^ life he wrote and whoso views he 
exponnded at verj great length, This inÜueiice lud him to 
attack Cartesianism with much fervour^ and Jie is now remembered 
aa a mystie rather thaH a philosopher. 

^' By convenance is ineant mutual couformity, of auch a kind that 
thingsf *fit iato' one another in the niost perfect way. Tbua the 
prinetple of cmtvefianct or of tha best is whafc we should now call 
the idea of syetem, With Iroibniz it ia the eame as the principle 
of sn^eient reaaon, which is the principle of cotuütlorndj fta diatinot 
from iinconditiün^d roality or truth. Cf note 85. 

'"^ That is to say, * flaahingB ' or ^aiidden emanations/ * God is the 
primary uentre from which all eise emanatea' (G. iv, 553 '. Cf. the 
Stove T^vüs which Cleanthes ealla a * stroke of fire ' (itAi^t^ ^P^^)t 
Frag. 76. The relation of God to the other Monads i.s the crux of 
Leibniz's philosophy. He wishea tomaiataiii both the individuality 
of tho Monada and their essential unity with God. Thus he aoenis 
to take fulguration as a middlo terui betwoen creation and emana- 
tion, ' Creation ' would mean too ooinplete a aeveraaee befcween God 
and the other Mouads j * emanation ' would mean too completo an 
identity between them. * Fulguration ' nieana that the Monad is 
not absolntely created out of notbing nor^ on tho other band, 
merely a mode or an absolutely neoessaiy product of the Divine 

B 2 



344 



THE MONADOLOGY 



nioment to moment, limited by the receptivity of the 
created being^ of whoee esseuce it iß to have limits. (Theod, 

48. In God there is Power, whieb is tbe source of all, 
also Knouiedge^ whose content is the variety of tbe ideas, 
and finally Will^ wbich malteö changos or producta 
»ccording to the principle of the best"^^, (Theod* 7, 149, 

»ature, hui th&t it is a poBaibiIit7 tending to re^allze itaelf^ jet 
reqtiiriiig the aasiatanc«, ehoio© or will of God to set it free from 
the counteracting influeDce of opposite possibüitiea, Aa a possibility 
it lias »asential limitä (i* it is not entirelj perfecta aäM»purtis); 
hni it is ready to spring or * flaah ' into beding, at the will of G<id, 
If there wer« no choice of God, posaibilitiea would aimply counteract 
one aiiother. Eut Hie choice means no int^ro than the reinoval of 
hindranc«» to dovelopment^ iü the tsase of c^rtain '©loet' possi- 
bilities, Creation adds no new being to the «niversej and yet it 
is not omanation, in tlie sense of a mere modification of tbe oBe 
Eternal Being» Thiia the * confcinual fulgurations ' of Leibniz 
are to be dlatinguished from the * continual creatioa ' of Deacartes^ 
According to Leibiiiz, conservation is not, witb Des^iärteH^ 
ii miraculoua ronewal of tbe exisitence of tbinga from moment 
to monient, an absolut© r©-creation constantly ropeated ; but it ia 
the conti ntianee of the activity, cboioe or will of God, by whieh 
t^rtain posaibte things were set free to exist and throiigb which 
alono tbey can persist. Tb© successive afcat&s of any being are 
ne ither oompletoly independent of one anotber, so that at eaoli 
TOoraent tbere is a new creation (Deseartea), nor are tbey ao 
absolutoly dependent on one anothor that each proceoda from its 
predeceasor by a logical or mathematieal necegsity (Spinoza), but 
they are fionneeted togeiber in a aequence whieh haa ita ground 
in tbe natnre of tbe being, so that eaeb is automatieally unfolded 
from ita predeceaaor aocording to a regulär law, provided that God 
(ibooses to allow tbis unfoldmg. The * continnal fulgurationa * are 
the continual e^erciae of God'a will in allowing the Monads of tbe 
aetual world to unfold or derelop their nattire. Cf. On the %dtijnaiß 
(Jriginatim of Thwgs, p. 344- 

" In the Tiiendicse (S 150 ; 549 a ; O. vi. 199) Leibniz hints at 
a tfonnexion between tbls charaetorization of God's natnre and the 
doctrine of the Trinity* * Some have even tbought that there is in 
tliese three perfcctiona of God a hidden referenee to th© Holy 
Tiinity : that power has referenoe to the Fat her, that is fco say, to 
the Godhead [DivmÜd] ; wisdora to the eternal Word, wbich 
«■alled k6yoi by the most sublime of the evangeliata ; and will or 
love to the Holy Spirit/ 



THE MONADOLOGY 



245 



150.) These characteristics correspond to what in the 
created Monads forms the ground or basis to the faculty 
of Perception and to the faculty of Appetition. But in God 
these attributes are absolutely infinite or perfect ; and in 
the created Monads or the Entelechies (or perfectihäbiae, 
as Hermolaus Barbarus translated the word there are 
only imitations of these attributes, according to the degree 
of perfection of the Monad. (Theod, 87.) 

49. A created thing is said to act outwardly in so far 
as it has perfection, and to suffer [or be passive, pätir] in 
relation to another, in so far as it is imperfect Thus 
activity [actum] is attributed to a Monad, in so far as it has 
distinct perceptions, and passivity [passkm] in so far as its 
perceptions are confused. {Thiod. 32, 66, 386.) 

50. And one created thing is more perfect than another, 
in this, that there is found in the more perfect that which 
serves to explain a priori what takes place in the less 
perfect, and it is on this account that the former is said to 
act upon the latter 

^ Leibniz does not elsewhere discriminate three elements in the 
created Monad, and we must not supx)Ose that the * ground or 
basis' is anything in itself, apart from the two ^faculties.' Leibniz 
wishes to emphasize the view that the Monad, whether created 
or uncreated, is essentially force or activity, manifesting itself in 
perception and appetition. 

PerfectiJiabia (from per/ede arid häbeo) was formed to correspond 
to liTfX^x**** (from €PT€\Sfs and ^x***')* Cf. note 3a. Hermolaus 
Barbarus or Ermolao Barbaro (1454-1493) was an Italian scholar 
who endeavoured, by means< of translations of Aristotle and of the 
Aristotelian commentaries of Themistius, to make known the true 
Aristotelian doctrine as against the degenerate forms which 
Scholasticism had given it. He came of a Venetian family and 
was Professor of Philosophy at Padua, where he lectured on 
Aristotle's Ethics, 

''^ Of course, no Monad really does act outside itself. This is 
merely Leibniz's explanation of what we mean when we speak of 
outward action, just as the Copernican system ezplains what we 
mean when we speak of * sunrise ' and * sunset,' though the sun 
neither * rises ' nor * sets.* 

Thus the explanation or reason of an event is its actual cause. 
This connects itself with Leibniz's view that the existence of 



246 



THE MONADOLOGY 



51. But in simple subatancea th© influence of one 
BTonad upon anather is only id^alj and it can hav© its 
©ffect only through the mediation of Godj in so far as in 
the ideas of God any Monad rightly claima that G-od, in 
i-egulating the others from the beginning of tbinga, should 
have regard to it. For since one created Monad cannot 
have any physical influenee upon the inner beiag of 
another, it is only by this means that the on© can be 
dependent upon the other {Tkeod, 9, 54, 65, 66, 201, 

52. Aocordingly, among created things^ activities and 
passivlties are mutual. For God, eomparing two simple 
substances, finds in each reasons which oblige Him to 
adapt the other to it and eonaequently what m active in 
certain respects is passive from another point of view ^* ; 

a thing arisGS solely from the liberating of its t?3sential activitiea» 
and tliat the Monad s claim üxistötiee La proportioa to tlieir per-' 
fection, that ia to say, to the diatinctuess of their perceptioiw, 
CJause and effeet are relative : overy created Monad is both at 
once. God aloii© is pure cause or reason (iicfys jaiirwji). Causö ^ 
relative activifcy ^ relative distinctneas of perception, This may 
inatruetively be compüred and contrasted witJi the views of 
Berkeley and Hume regard ing cause and *nece3Bary connesilon.' 
Seo Introduction, Part iii, p. 103, Cf. lilso Spinoza, Eihits^ Part iii. 
Def, t and and Prop* s and 3. 

" We hav© herc the principle of the Pre-eatabllähed Harmony 
(faither referred to in S§ 80 and 81), It is a harmony or miitnal 
«ompatibility in the very nature of thingSj anterior to their 
ereation, Its perfection in the actual world is the ground of God's 
ühoice of that world ; and thns it ia not in any sense a created 
harmony. In this respect it differa from every form of Occa- 
«ionalifeim. Seo Introduction, Part ii. pp. 39 äqq. 

No two simple snbstancea are exactly the same, yet all represent 
the same univertäe. Therefore a perception whieh is comparatiTely 
distinct in one must hts compnratively eonfu&ed in anoiher or 
otliersj and whatever changes taJce place in one inu»t be aeoom- 
panied by correeponding changeä In Üie othera. Thufi each flta 
into the others. 

Lt'ibniz's exprossion höre ia point de cütisicU'ratifjTi, But he 
gent^rally uaea the phraae poini de vue^ which he introdii^zed aa 
a regukr term in philoaophical literature. It need hardly be 
remarked that the term has a peeuliar importance in Leibniz'a 
philosophy. 



THE MONADOLOGY 247 

active in so far as what we distinctly know m it serves to 
espkin [rendrc raison de] what takes place iu another, and 
passwe in so far as ihe esplanation [raiso«] of what taJtes 
place in it is to be found in that which ia distinctly known 
in another, (Theod. 66,) 

53. Now, as in the Ideas of Öod there is an infinite 
number of poBsible nniverses, and as only one of them 
can be actual, there muat be a sufficlent reason for the 
choiee of God, which leads Hirn to deeide upon one rather 
than änother**. {Theod. 8, lo^ 44, 173, 196 sqq., 2*5, 
414-416,) 

54. And this reaaon can be found only in the ßtn€S8 
[cmvmance], or in the degrees of perfection, that these 
worlds pösseas*^, since each posaible thing has the right 
to aspire to existenee in proportlon to the amonnt of per- 
fection it contains in germ*"*. (Thmd, 74, 167, 350, 201 ^ 
130» 35s. 345 »qq-, 3540 

** See lutroduotian, Part ii, 65. 

** Sö© Momddogy, note 74, Qod is not compöUed by an absolut«^ 
rmtaphysdcal Jie<ie^ityj but * inelm6d' by a moral neoesaity to creatö 
the World which, && one harmonious System, is tbo best, The 
distinction between moral necessity and abgolute compulaion ia 
Sqholastiti origin, *PaHsible thing5i arö thoae whiclido nöt invplve 
Ä eontmdietion. Actual thhiga are nothing bui theposaiblo things 
whieh, all thinga conaidered, are the best, Tbßrefore things whieh 
ai-e le39 perfect ar© not ou that account imposaibl© ; for we must 
distingtiisli betweon the things -whioh God can do and thosö He 
wüls to do. He can do everything, He wills to do the best/ 
Epistola ad BerfumUium (1699)» {Q. Math* ÜL 574), 

*• This aepiration to eicistenc© is tlitt töndency to pass into 
eadstenoe and to proceed from coufüsed to djstinct perceptiens, 
whieh makes the ^possible' thinga of Leibniz rejü essen ces 
diatinct from punely iDdeterminate capacities, PoBaibilities, aocord- 
ing to Leibniz, are never quite empfey : they ar© always realities in 
germ. Cf, no%^ 64 and 67, ^ From the very fact that there exiats 
something rather than nothingf we must reeogniste that in possible 
tbing$, or in possibility or easenc© itself, there ia a oeriain need of 
öxistenoo [^igentiam extstentias] or (so to ep&ak) a certain aspiration 
to exist, and» in a word, that essence by itself tenda to exiatence, 
Whence it ftu ther followe that all possiblo things^ i, e. thinga 
expre^ing e^eni;;© or posaible reality, tend with equal right to 
existenee iu proportion to the qnantity of essence or reality they 



24» 



TIIE MONADOLOGY 



55* Tb OS the acttml existence the besi tiia£ wisdom 
makes known to God due to this, that His gooduess 
niak€^ Him choose it^ and His power nmkes Him produce 
it*^, (TM>d 8, 78, 80, 84, 119, 204, 306, 20S. Ahre§t, 
Ohj^ I and 8,) 

56. Now l^is eotineiioti or adapiation of all created 
tbingB to each and of eacli to all, means that each simpl« 
substanee hm relations whieh express all tbe others^ and, 
Gonsequently, that it is a perpetual living mirror of the 
universe". (Tkwd, 130, 360.) 

57, And as the same town, looked at from varioiis sides, 
appears quite different and becomes as it were nnmerous 
in aspects \_perspectkmiefit] ; even so^ ais a result of the 
infmite number of simple substancesj it is as if there 
were so many diiFerent universes, whicbj nevertheless are 
nothing but a&pects [perspeäives] of a single universe, 
aeoording to tbe special point of Tiew of each Monad 

contAin or to their degree of perfection ; for perfection ia notbing 
biit quantity of eesence/ TJltimaU Origination of Things, p. 340, 

^ Tili» »ectjoD States briefly the principles of Leibnb's Ö^timism^ 
wUich are fiilly ejtpounded and defended in the TMfdicee. A world 
^ntirfcly free from evil would be indistingiiisbable fi-om Qod 
Himaelf^. The evil of the world ariB«s entirely from the essen tial 
timi tat Jona of created thingb — tboir limitationa as esgeneea or 
poinibilitk's. Consequently evil is not created by God ; but Hv 
ore&tea tho imworse in which tbere ia tbo lea»t amount of evil th^t 
is posdble in any ayatem of thiDgs, 

*" Cf* Kicholas of Cusa, DMogi rfs luäo globi (1454-39^ 1* ^57 a ■ 
' The whole is reflected in all tbe parts ; all ihings keep their own 
relation [haMtudü] and proportion to the universo.* Also Be docta 
igiKraniia (1440), i. 1 1 1 * Visibl© things aro images of the inTiaibl^^ 
and the Creator can be Boen and known by the creatiirea as in 
a mirror darkly [</ya^ in ^recuh d amigtnatey 

** The * point of view * of each Monad is its bodj. But w© must 
not give a spatial meaniiig to tho ©xpression, aa if th© Monad'» 
point of vi©w depended on itg having thia or that position in 
apa«©. For the Monad is abaoluiely non-spatial, und the natura of 
its body dependa on th© degreti of confusedness (or distinctnesa) 
of ita poroeptiona. Thus to eay that tho body ig the point of view 
of the Bonl means aimply thafc the particular way in whieh th© soul 
repreaenta or perceivea the unlYerse is determincd by th© degr«« 



THE MONABOLOGY 



58. And by tliis means there k abtained as great 
Tariety as possiblei along with tbe greatest possible order ; 
that is to say, li in the Tvay to get as much perfeetion as 
poBsible^^ {T}i4oä, 120, 124, 341 sqq., 214, 243, 275.) 

59. Besides, no hypothesis but this (wbich I venture to 
caU proved) fittingly exalts the greatness of God ; and 
this Monsieur Bayle recognized when^ in hia Mdimary 
(article Morarim^% he raised objectiona to it, in which 

of distinctnGss of its perueptiona. Cf. Thkidme, % 357 (E, 607 b ; 
Ö, vi. 337)^ * Th© projectiona of perspective, which^ in the case of 
the circle^ are the äame am the Conic So*tion$, ahow thkt one and 
the eame circle can be represented by an eJlipae, by a parabola 
and hy a hyperbola, and evea by another circlej by a straight line 
and by a point. Nothing seems mom different, not hing more 
imlü©^ thau these figures ; and yet ther© is an e3:aet relation 
between them, point for point. Thus it must be recognized that 
each *oul represents to itaeLf the universe, aecording to itö point of 
View and by a relation peculiar to itself j but in this there always 
continues to be a perfoct harraony.' 

^ For Jjeibniz the higheefc perfecition ia the most complete unity 
or ordor in the greatest Tariety, The Monada have the most 
eomplete nnity^ becanse tlie eäaence of each conaiatä in repreaenting 
the eamo univerjse, whil© they have th© greateat variety, becanae 
the pointfe of Tiew from which they represent it are intinitely 
varieuSk ^ For a World to be poasible, it ia enough that it shontd 
liave intelügibility ; but in order to ekelst it must have a pre- 
eminence \ßrmümi^'\ in intelligibihty ot- order j for there m order in 
Proportion aa thero ia much to diatinguish in a mauifold [mviliititde].^ 
Lettre ä Bourgnet {171a?) (E. 718 b ; (h nu 553). 

See note 3^ Bayle compares Leibniz's theory to the sup- 
Position that a ship might be conatructod of auch a kind that 
entirely by itaelf, without captain or ereWj it could sail from pJaco 
to place for jears on- end, aecommodating itself to varying winde, 
avoiding ahoals^ caating and weighing anchor, aeekiag a havt^n 
whon necosaary and doing all that a normal ahip can. He admlta 
that the omuipotence of Öod eouM give auch a power to a ahip, but 
he maintains that the nature of the ship would mako it impossible 
for it to reeeive auch a power. And 'however infinit© be the 
knowledge and power of God, He cannot^ by meana of a machin© 
which lackfl a cortain part, do that which requirea the help of that 
part.* Tbiia Bayle arguea against the posaibility of complete 
spontaneity in the Monada, and conaequently maintains that the 
Dius ^ machina is involved in Leibniz's Pre-establiahed Harmony 
quite as mueh as in Occasionaliam* 



tHE MONADOIjOGT 



mdeed be wm inclined to IMnk that I wsi^ ftttributiDg tüo 
toticb to God— more than it ia poa&ible ta Attribute. But 
be was uDable lo give any r€«ecm wbkb could sbow tba 
ttnpoflmbüi^ of tliis uniTeisal h&rmony, aiiseordiiig to 
wbicb eveiy sali^DOe exaetly eK^wsam all othera tfaDDtigli 
tbe tiglatioDfi it hafi with tbeni, 

60. Purtber, in wbat I bave just said tber© may be 
aeen tbe reafioos a priori why things eould not be otber- 
wiä^ than tbey are, For God in regnlati ng tbe wbol© bas 
bad tegard to eacb p&rt, and m particular to eacb Monad, 
wboee nature being to represent, notbing can €on£ne it to 
tbe repreeentiiig of oaly ooe p&rt of things ; thougb it is 
true that tbis representation is merely confused as regards 
the variety of particular tbings [Je däail] in tbe wbole 
universe, and can be distüict ouly as regards a small part 
ijf things, namely, tbose which are either nearest or 
greatest ** in relation to each of the Monads ; otberwise 
each Monad would be a deity, It is not as regards tbeir 
übject, but as regards the different ways iu which they 
bave knowiedge of their object, tbat the Monads are 
limited *\ In a confused way they all strive after 
IVQfd ä] tbe infinite, the whole ; but they are limited 
and diÄerentiated tbrough tbe degrees of tbeir distinct 
perceptions. 

61, And Compounds are in tbis respect analogous with 

So G, E. neads * lias & regard * [a «n ^ni]. 

If the MauadH ure non-apatiul^ how can we ^p&ik of anything 
being iiearest or greate»t in rel&tion to a Monad ? Every Monad 
hos a bodj of mme kLad and thiA bod^r ia conftisedlj perc^ived &a 
i^patial in It^lf and in relAti<>n to otlier bodies, thougb restätf ii is 
n^jthing but an aggregate of non-epatial Monade). When therefoi^a 
it Is aaid that certaiü things are near or great in relation to 
Hr Mouadf \vhat is in©ant ia that ilmj are near or great in relation 
to the body of tb© Monad, 

** That la to aay, thoughfc in the widöst sense, conseious or un- 
oonftciuuB» ia limited only by itself ^ ther© can be nofching that 10 
tiot an object of thoughtf more or leas adeqnatet Contraat with 
this tho poaition of Kant» See Introductionj Part iv, pp^ 178 sqq^ 

Cf, Nicboliis of CuBa, IHalogus de Qmesi (1447) 73 b : ' All 
things wek tiie aame^ which is something absoluta' 



THE MONADOLOÖY 



[symholisent avec simple substances. For all is hpkmm 
(and thus all matter is connected together) and in the 
plenum every motion has an eflFect upon distant bodies in 
Proportion to their distance, so that each body not only is 
affected by those which are in contact with it and in some 
way feels the effect of everything that happens to them, 
but also is mediately affected by bodies adjoining those 
with which it itself is in immediate contact, Wherefore 
it foUows that this inter-communication of things extends 
to any distance, however great. And consequently every 
body feels the efPect of all that takes place in the uni- 
verse, so that he who sees all might read in each what is 
happening everywhere, and even what has happened or 
shall happen, observing in the present that which is 
far ofF as well in time as in place : (rvfnrvoLa wdvra, as 
Hippocrates said But a Soul can read in itself only 

^ The expression ' symbolize ' suggests the ' calculus * idea which 
is so continually in Leibniz's mind. As numbers afe symbols of 
the things numbered, and we make accurate calculations without 
referring at every step to the particular things for which our 
Symbols stand, so in general unanalyzed thoughts may be symbols 
of their simple elements« In the same way Compound things are 
Symbols of the simple substances which compose them. What is 
perceived confusedly in Compounds is not a mere illusion but an 
imperfect representation or symbol of the real characteristics of 
simple substances. Thus, in this section, Leibniz would say that 
the spatial or material plenum (which is a confused perception of 
Ours) is a symbol of the infinite (or perfectly complete) series of 
Monads, which has no gaps, since the Monads differ from one 
another by infinltely small degrees. Similarly, the material action 
and re-action throughout the universe, such that a change at any 
one point affects every other, is a symbol of the Pte-established 
Harmony among the Monads. And, again, the fact that every- 
thing that happens, has happened or shall happen in the imiverse 
might be read in any one body is a symbol of the representativo 
character of each Monad as ideally containing the whole within 
itself. It is because they are thus symbolic that the phenomena 
of the material world dre phenomena hene/undata, 

:Svfxirvota (the neun) is probably a corruption from aiixnvoa (the 
adjective), * in agreement,' lit. * breathing together,' c(m8pirantict. 
Leibniz makes the same Quotation in the New Essays^ Introduction, 
p. 373. He there translates the phrase by the words ^Un/U est 



THE MONADOLOGY 



tlmt whicli is there repr^nted distinctiy ; it cannot all at 
once tinroll everything that js enfolded in it^, for its 
complexity h infinite "^ 

cm^fantj The mi stake may b© due to an iiiii>erfiect recoUection 
of the phrase in Hippocraieft : ^vppana fäa^ IvpLirvota ^a, ^v^-waBiii 
nävra. (De Alimenio^ 4^ Littr^^ (Evvrea d'Hijqiocraiej vol. Lk, p, 106). 
Cf. Plutarch, De /a^o, 574 E : to ^pi^^tt Sionetia&ai rMe tAv Ko^rpio^ 
ffi^ptwovVf mi ^vnnaB^t aifT^f öüt^ oi^to, For a later statH^itißnt of th© 
BÄm© Position, eee FieUte, Werke^ iL 178 ^q. * In every moment 
of her duration, Datur© is one connected whole : in every moment 
each pari nxuat be ivhat it ia, becanse all the othera are what they 
are. . * t You cannot con<j«iv© ©ven the position of a grain: of aand 
otVjör thau it is in th© preaent witjvout being compelled to conoeive 
the wbole indefinite past as havltig boen other than it has been, 
und th© whole indefinite future other than it will be. . * . I am 
what I am becaua© in this conjuacttir© of the great whole of nature 
only »uch, and no other, was possible j and a epint who conld look 
through the secrota of natiire would, from knowing one single m^n, 
he abl© distinctiy to declare what men had formerly exi»ted and 
what men wonld exist at any future moment ; in on^ individual ht^ 
would cogQLze all real iodividuaJs. My coimexion, then, with the 
whol© of natura is that whioh determines what I have been, am, 
and ähall b©, and th© sam© spirit w<>uid b© able, from any poasihle 
moment of my existence, to discover infallibly what X had been 
and what 1 was to becom©/ [Trans, by Prof. Adamsön, Fhito&^hy 

"* E, reads s€s rlgks : roadfl ses replis, Th© latter pbrae© ia used 
in thtj Frmciples qf NaPure and qf Gmce, % 13. 

^* et Leihniiiana^ Dutena, voL vi. Part i. p^ 33a. * I admit that 
after deatli we do mt at firet remember what we wer©» for thia is 
n©ith^r naturally right nor in aocordanoe with th© fitneas of thiög» 
[fti proprü ni bimiimrit dans la nature], ^Jevertheleas I believ© that 
whatcver has once happened to the Boul is Gternally imprinted 
üpon it, altliough it doos not at all tinies come back to 11s in 
memory ; juat as we know a number of things which w© do not 
alwaye reeollect^ imless something suggests them and rnjikes ua 
think about tb«>m. For who can r©ra©mb©r all thingä? But ainue 
in nature nothing i& f utile and nothing is lost, but everything 
t©nds to j>erf©ction and maturity, ©ach imag© our soul rticoivea will 
tiltimately becomc on© [tin tovi] with the tlmigs which are to come, 
80 that wo ahali be able to soe all as in a mirror and th©uc© to 
derivo that wbicli we shaJl find to be njore fltted to sati^iiy ua. 
Whence it followa that th© mor© virtuous w© hav© b©en and the 
morf} good deeds wc hav© don©, th© more ahali w© have of joy ftnd 
satiafaction/ 



THE MOKADOLOOY 253 

62. Thiis, althougb each ereated Monad represents the 
whole uniTex^se, it represents more distinctly the body 
which specially pertains to it, and ot which it is the 
entelechy and aa ihis body expressee the whole uni- 
vers© through the connexion of all matter in theptmum, 
the aoulalso represents the whole universe in representing 
this body, which belongs to it in a special way» (Theod, 
400.) 

63. The body belongin^ to a Monad (which is its 
entelechy or its soul) constitutes along with the ente- 
leehy what may be called a limng heinß, and along with 
th© soul what is called an animäl Now this body of 
a ÜYing being or of an animal is alwayB organie ; for, as 
every Monad is^ in its own way, a mirror of the iiniverse, 
and aB the universe is ruled according to a perfect order, 
there must also be order in that which represents it, L e, 
in the pereeptions of the soul, and consequently there 
must he order in the body, through which the univei^ 
is repreeented in the soul (Tkeoä. 403, ) 

^'^ See note 3a, The ©ntelechy or soiü is at onc© the final oause 
of the body and the power which controls it or tho forc© wrhich 
acta through it. As dominant Monad, the aoul has moro cl^arly 
the pereeptions whieh are relatively coöfus^d in the Mona da 
implied hy the body» The soul ia thus rolativeJy the perfeetion of 
the body. And üimilarly, in the sonl is to be read the reason 
(i_ the di stillet pereeption) of what takos place in the body, and 
ife ia therefore the acHvii}/ or force of the body. Cf, Introduotion, 
Part iii. p. iio. 

See § ig. Leibniz iiaes the term Uving bdng not as including 
all beings whicli have life, but speciücally with reference only to 
those whose dominant Monad is uneonscious, white in the animfd 
(as *distinct frora the livin^f häng) th© dominant Monad haa con- 
süionanests and memory. 

1« xhua order and or^niam are conceived by Leibniz under the 
idea of an inflnito aorioa of elementa, each differing from its 
neighbour to an infinitely small extent. The Monad-seriea of the 
iiniverse, ©Jctcnding from Ood to the loweat of Monads, i3 refl©ct©d 
in the Btnictüre of the individual organiam, ©xtending from th© 
dominant Monad downwarda, and that again ia reflected in the 
»erios of pereeptions within ©ach Monad itaolf, ©xtending from 
tlie most distinct perc©ptiona to which it has attatned down to the 
moät obacnre. 



254 



THE MONADOLOGY 



64, Thus the organic body of eaeh living being is a kind 
of divine machine or natural automaton, which infiiiitely 
8ur passes all artificml automata. For a machine made by 
the akill of man is not a machine in each af its parts, 
For instance, the toofch of a brass wheel has parts or 
fragments which for us are not artificial producta, and 
whieh do not have the special characteriatics of the 
machinej for they give no indication of the use for which 
the wheel was intended. But the machines of natura, 
nsmely, living bodies, are still machinea in their smallesi 
parts ad inßnitum It 18 this that constitutes the dif- 

i. ©. not a raaclime macfe hij mun. Fmm anöther point of view, 
as a product of maiure^ M i» (aa thia section aaya) a mach in© iit its 
amalle&t parta, for in reality all faodies Jire living bodies. Thus the 
words * for us ' in tho nfixt sentenc© of tMa s<>ctioii wt^ro fi.ddGd by 
Leibniz in a revisiion of liia original mantiBcript, evidüntly in order 
to auggost that whQo the fragments of tho wheel aro not produet« 
of * human art/ they are yet producta of * divine art/ 

Cf. Lüttre ä de Meaitx (Bossuüt) (1692)^ (Fouoher de 

Careil, i. 277; Dutena, i. 53^)» * The machines of nature are 
machinös throughoüt, howevei* small a part of them we take ; or 
rather the leaat part is itself an infinit© world, which even 
expreas^s in its own way all that ther© is in the reat of the 
univtjriso. Tkat paaaea onr imagioation, yet wo know that it must 
be so i and all that infinitely infinit© variety ia animated in all its 
parta by a constnictive [architeämique] wisdom that is mor© than 
infinite, It may be said that thore is Harmony, Geometry, Meta- 
phyflies, and, so to apeat^ Ethies [mornle} ©verywher©, and (what 
is surprising) in on© sens© ea.eh aubatance actg apontanoously as 
in dopende nt of all other ereated things, whil© in anofcher sense, all 
othors compel it to adapt it^lf to them ; so that it may be sa.id 
that all natiiro ia füll of miracles, but mirades of reason, miraclen 
whieh become miraclea in virtuö of their beiug rational, in a way 
which amazöa ua. For the reasons of things follow one another in 
an injß.nite auceession [s^y pousse ä un pr^gres inßni\ so that onr 
mind whilo it se«a that t hinge must he aoj (^nnot follow so as to 
eomprehend. Fomierly peoplo admired nature without in any 
way Tinderiätündinjsj it, and that was suppoged to be the right 
thing to do. Latterly they have begtin to think nature ao eaay to 
understand that they havo devolofted a contempt for it, and somt* 
of the new philosophers ev©n enwuröge themselves in idlenoss by 
imagining that they know enough about nature already»' See alao 
Introduetion, Part iii» p. toS, 



THE MONADOLOGY 



^55 



ference between natare and art, that ia to say, between the 
divme aii and ours^^*, (TMoä^ 134, 146, 194, 403.) 

65, And the Author of nature has been able to employ 
thia divine and infinitely wonderful power of art, because 
each portion of matter is not only infinitely divisible^ m 
the ancieut^ observed but !a also actually aubdivided 
without end each part into fuiiher parts, of which 

Cf, Nicholas of Ctisa, Täiota^ LibH 2^ta^wor, iii. 8a a. *Mumanm 
ari^ imnginss Divinae nrHs/ 

S«6 Ariatofcle, Phys.^ 9, 239'' 5. Oö 713/1 frvjKHrat 6 xpovoz e* 

398^ 33. S<;e aLso Bfijle*s Di^limuryt article * Zeno^' noteä F and G. 

et H^ponm ä Ja lettre de M. Fw^Aer (1693), '^E. riß b*j O. i, 
416), 'There is no pari of matter which is not, I do not saj 
divisiblo, but actually divided ; and conBoquently th© amallöst 
Partie If« must be eonsidered aa a World ßlled with an infinity of 
different creaturea/ Th© paradox in such atatements aa th^Eie 
arises from the way in which Lüibniz speaks of matter as composed 
of non-spatial elcments. Leibniz rogarda matter as a mere aggregati^ 
and as therefore not itt^slf a r*al substenoe. Bat he never explains 
wh^t he means by an aggregate of Monads, each of which is non- 
quantitative. Again it 10 ay be asked whether a real whole ean 
üODsiBt of an infinite n um bor of real parts ? Doea not infinit*f 
diviaibility mean that it is impossible to bring to an end the 
eniimeration of parts^ because the relation of whole to parts ie so 
indefinite that we have no means of determining what exactiy 
is a part ? Thua the term * infinite ' her© means that tli© proceae 
of divislon ia one which can never be oonapleted* Coßsequently 
it aeems äielf-contradictoi-y to apeak of things as ^aötually sxih- 
divided withfjufc end* er infinitely. {Cf. Kant's OHUgrie of Purt 
JSeoÄöft, First and Second Antinomiea* S00 also Bosanquet's LagiCf 
voL L pp. 17a sqq*) It was Eukr, the mathematician^ who firsfc 
broTight this criticism ngainat Leibniz, saying that the eatisten^e 
of utiits in tho ahape of Monads im pH es the finlte divisibility of 
matter, while Leibniz at the same tim© maintains it^ infinit** 
diviaibility, {Lettr^is ä une Frinc^e d'AUemagne (1761), Bröwster'a 
Trans , voL ii. pp, 30 sqq.) Euler's argument is directed mainly 
against the Wolffian adaptatjon €>f Leibniss'a posifcion. Ijeibjilz 
might rtsply that matt^ir aa infinitely divisible, iß a mere pheno- 
menon, resulting from an actual infinity of real Monads. But 
even in thia esplanation the idea of ' infinite * aeems to b© used in 
two opposite senses (1) aa equivalent to *in<!apable of completion/ 
(a) aa equivalent to * absolutely complet©/ 



256 



THE MONADOLOGY 



each hm mme motion of its own j otherwise it wotJd be 
impossible for eaeh portion of matter to express the whole 
universe {Tldod, Prüim,, Disc, de la Conform, 70, and 

66^ Wlienca it appears that in the smallest particle of 
matter there is a world of cvmtuTBB, liring beings, aniinals, 
entelechiea, souls. 

67. Each portion of matter mity he conceived as like 
a garden füll of plants and like a pond füll of fishes. But 
each branch of every plant, each member of eveiy animal, 
each drop of its liquid parts m also some such garden or 
pond< 

68, And though the earth and the air wliich are between 
the plants of the garden, or the water which m between 
the fish of the pond, be neither plant nor fish ; yet they 
also contain plants and fishes^ büt mostly so minuta as to 
be imperoeptibl© to ua 

The * portions of matter,' of wliich Leibniz here speaks), are 
ultimatüly Monads, each of which must ide&lty coutaiu the whole 
tuiirerBe. The Monads are iafinito in numh^r,. ä.nd ©aoh, as it 
ideally contÄina alJ, must therefore eontain an infinity of * parts,' 
Or the argument which Leibniz implies may be otherwisö put 
tlius : If the ^ portiona of niatt<?r ' are not aetually öubdivided 
witbout end, thero mual be liltimate tmdivided atoms. But such 
Atoma neceasariJy ünply a void ; they are inconaistent wifch npknmn. 
And nnlesa ther© ia a plenum it is impossible for each portion of 
matter to ^estpresa' or be aifccted by all the rest. 

1* Leibniz had a deep intereat in the remarkable developnient 
i>f microscopic investigation, whiüh took place during bis lifetime* 
He frequently refera to thß wort of Leiiwenhoek, tht> discoTerer of 
j^permatoKoa, Swamm^rdam, the ontomologist, and Malpighi, who, 
araong many other worka, made a microscopic stady of the physio- 
lügy of animnls and plants, Ina MediffHim s^nr la votion mmtnuTti dt 

Jmtice (Mollat p. 66), Leibniz says : ^ It is very neeeasary to 
advanije our microgcopieal knowledge. Scaroe ten men in the world 
are eameatly devoted to it ; and though there were a himdred 
thoiisand, they would not ho too many for the digcovi'ry of the 
important wondors of this new World whiüh is the ingide of the 
World we know and which ia capahle of making our knowledge 
a liundred thonsand times as extensive as it is» For this reaiäon 
I haTe often wished that great princes might be led to make 
arrangementa for this and to support people who wonld devot** 



THE MONADOLOGY 



69. Thus thereis nothingfallow, nothing sterile, nothing 
dead in the universe, no chaos, no confusion save in 
appearance somewhat as it might appear to be in a pond 
at a distance, in which one would see a confused move- 
ment and, as it were, a swarming of fish in the pond, 
without separately distingiiishing the fish themselves. 
{Theod. Präf. [E. 475 b ; 477 b ; G. vi. 40, 44].) 

70. Hence it appears that each living body has a domi- 
nant entelechy, which in an animal is the soul ; but the 
members of this living body are füll of other living beings, 
plants, animals, each of which has also its dominant 
entelechy or soul"\ 

themselves to it.* The view of Leibniz also suggests the cell- 
theory of modern physiology ; but the analogy must not be pushed 
too far. However numerous, for instance, may be the cells in any 
portion of an organism, they are not, like Leibniz's 'portions of 
matter,* infinitely subdivided in their tum. In fact, the cell- 
theory has in many ways a closer relation to the mechanical yiew 
of things than to the position of Leibniz. See Sandeman, Problems 
o/Bidogyj pp. 53 sqq. 

Cf. Epistola ad Bemoullium (1699) (G. Math. iii. 565) : *God, out 
of the infinite number of possible things, chooses by His wisdom 
that which is most Atting. But it is evident that if there were 
a vacuum (and similarly if there were atoms) there would remain 
sterile and falle w places, in which, nevertheless, without prejudice 
to any other things, something might have been produced. But 
it is not consistent with wisdom that such places should remain. 
And I think that there is nothing sterile and fallow in nature, 
although many things appear to us to be so.' 

See Introduction, Part iii. p. iii. May not the whole world, 
then, be conceived as one body, whose dominant soul is God, the 
Monad of Monads? 

*A11 are but parts of one stupendous whole, 
Whose body nature is and God the soul.* 

Pope, Essay on Man, Epistle i. 267. 

Yet Leibniz maintains that God has n'o body. Cf. Monadology, § 7a. 
The diflBculty is a fundamental one. Leibniz repeatedly disclaims 
the doctrine of a * world-soul,* if it is understood as in any way 
destroying the independence of individual souls. 'Although a soul 
may have a body composed of parts, each of which has a soul of its 
own, the soul or form of the whole is not composed of the souls 
or forms of the parts.* Lettre ä Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 100). 

S 



THE MONADOLOGY 



71. But it must not be imagined, bb has been done by 
some who have misiinderstood my thotight, that each soul 
Las a quantity er portion of matter belonging exclusively 
to itself or attached to it for ever*^^ and that it coQse* 
quently owns other inferior living beings, which are 
deToted for oTor to its Service. For all bodies are in a 
perpetual flux like rivers and parts are entering int^D 
tliem and passing ont of them continiiallyi 

72, Tbus tbe soul changes its body only by degrees, 
little by little, so that it is never all at onc© deprived of 
all its Organs ; and there is often metamorpbosis in 
animalSj bnt never nietempsychosis or transmigration of 
aouls ^" ; nor are there souls entirely separate [from 

The misunderatanding probably aroee from a confusion of 
ruaieria prima, tLe passive ei erneut in the iitdividtial ereated MoziAd^ 
whicb iä inseparabk from the activo or soul element^ with materia 
secunday ttt* cbauging body of a compoTiiid aubstance, whicJb is 
phenomenal ikixd not porfeotly real, altbough it ia founded Tip<izi 
reality. Cf* Introduetion, Part. iii. pp. 95 sqq. 

The phrase is as old as Hüraclitua, who, aceordiiig to Flato, 
* likened tliinga to thcj flowing of a riv&r' Cratylns^ 40a A. Cf. 
Aristotk^T Metaph.j Aj 6^ 967» 33. See also Btirnet, Early Greek Phüo- 
aophy, ji. 149. 

11* labile aoul Äüd body are quite distinct from one aDotber, 
tbeir union is of the cloaesfc poHsible kind. Changes in th© one 
correspond to changes in th© other. But as the perceptions of the 
fjoul are elesrer and more diatinüt than those of the body, the 
changes in tbö soul cause or explain the changes in the body. 
Transmigration of souls in inconsistent with ihis, because it means 
that the body remaina the sanie, ihough the soul is changed* 
Accordingly, m Lc4bniz*a vieWj the identity of any in di vi dual 
subästance raeans *tbe preservation of the samo soul,' Noureaux 
Essais, bk. ii. ch. 27, § 6. (E. 278 b ; v. ai6,) He argnes ngainat 
Loeke that identity is not üxed by time and place, and that the 
identity of plant j aninial^ and man does not consist in the possess^ion 
of the same oi^anio body* Thua, aceording to Leibniz, every aoul 
or entelochy, whüther conscioua or not, haa what he calla *reäl and 
physical identity ' (L e* not a derivod identity, tut an identity 
belonging to ita own nature, ^vitts)^ and ia, in rirtue of this, im- 
periahable {incessäth^t wbile the self-con^ious soul has in addition 
a * personal' or 'moral' identity^ in virtue of whiuh it is immortaL 
Neither continued fsonacionsnesa nor memory is eaaential to tho 
mftintenance of this ^ moral ' Identity. * If I wef« to forg^et all the 



THE MONÄDOLOGY 



bodies] nor unerabodied apirits [gSnies sam corps]. God 
alone cotnpletely without body {Tfteod. 90, 124,) 

73> It also föHows from this that there never is absolute 
birth [gencration] nor complete death, in the strict sense, 
consiating in the Separation of the soul from the body. 
What we call births [ffenerathm] are developments and 
growths, whüe what we call deaths are envelopments and 
diminutions. 

74. Philosophers have been mnch perplexed about th© 
origin of forma ^'^ entelechiea, or souls; but nowadays 

paat, if I hfid eyen to b© taught aüew my own name find how to- 
read and writ«!, I üöuld always learn from other poople my lifo in 
former timeSj jutst m I sbould still t^thin my rights, m that it would' 
not be necesaary to dirlde me inbo two people and to make me my 
own ieir, more is required to maintain the moral idmUiyf which 
constitutes the same person' (bc. cit^ | 9; E. 280 b ; Q, y, aig). 
^An immateriiil being or a mind [esprit] canjiot be deprired of all 
perception of ita past existence. It refcains impresaioas of all that 
has fornierly hnpponed to it ; but those feelinga ara usually too 
small to be capflble of being diatinguiished and öf beiiig consciously 
perceiycd, although they may perbaps he deyeloj>ed som© day. 
This continning and eonnexion o{ perceptions makes the beingreally 
the sßmo individiiat, but apperc^ticftis — that is to say, when one jk 
qongeious [s'aperg^it] of paat feelingB — provö alüo a moral identifcy 
and make th© real identity apparent ' {hc. ctf,, § 14 ; E. aSt b ; 
y. ssa). Cf, Neto Essay Sj Introduction, p. 373. 

A Sütil withoufc h od y (in the aon&e of materia mounda) would bo 
a soul without any relation to other Monads* For a Compound 
substanoe (i, soul and body) consiats ulfcimately in the relatioa 
of a dominant Monad to subordiuate Monadi3* * Creaturea free or 
freed from matter would at the aame tima bo aeparated from the 
nniveraal eonnexion cif things, and^ as it were^ do8ortora from th© 
göneral order,' Cümideraiions sur ies Frincipes de Vie (1705) (E. 433 b j 
G. vi. 546)» Again, a soul without body (in the sens© o£ materia prima) 
would be a Monad without passiv ity or coufused perception^ i, e. it 
would hti acttispurtis or God, Kl mh mann (Erläuicrungm zu Lübni£ 
Sührifkn) diamiasea Leibniz's statement as ' a mere aasertion, which 
indeed does not ne^easarily foUow from Leibniz's own prindplea/ 
Th© dißiculty ia tho samo as that mentioned in note ni, 

Th© form la the life or vital prmelple in any organic being. 
Cf. Ldlf€ h Ämatdd (16Ö7) (Ö. 116) : ^ I procoed to the question 
of forms or souIs, wMch I hold to bo indivisibl© and indostruetible^ 
Parmenides (of wliom Plato «pcaks with yeneration), as well aa 
Melisaus, maLutained that there is no gouoration nor corruption 

s 2 



26o 



THE MONADOLOGY 



it has become known, through careful studies of plants, 
inset:t8, and animals, that the organic bodies of nature are 
never producta of chaos or putrefaction, but always come 
from seeds, in which there was undoubtedly som© pre- 
formation^^'^ ; and it is beld that not only th© organic 

except in app^arance r Aristotle mpniiona thia {D& Ca^h, bk. iiL 
ch. a). And the autlior of th© De ßiaeta^ bk. i, (which ia attributed 
toHippO(jrat©a),expre0sly says that an animal cannot be engende red 
absolutely [tmU de TtfMteau] nor completely [tout m ßtif\ destroyed, 
Albertus Magnus and John Bacoii s&em to have thoiight that sub- 
stantial forms worö aheady hidden in matt<>r froin the bejEjinnlng 
of timo. Fernel make^s them destcend from heaven^ to &ay iiothing 
qf those who regflrd them as taken ofF from tho soul of the world, 
They have all aeen a part of the truth ; but they have not developed 
it, Several have believed in tranwinigratlon, othere in the traduc- 
tion of Koula ' [i, e. in the of tho off spring boing m it wore 
begotten of the s»oq1 of the parent] * inst^^ad of transniigration and 
the Iransformation of an an i mal already förmed* Othonä^ not 
being able to explain otherwise tho origla of forma, have admitted 
that they bagm in a real creation, but livhile I allow that thia 
creation takoa place in time only in respect of the rational eoul, 
and hold that all forms which do not think were ereated along 
with the World, they believ© that thia creation take» place eveiy 
day when the amalleiät worm ia begotten.' Cf. New S^dem^ notes 
43 and 44. 

* The Ii Ving [animee] and organic seed im as old ab the world/ 
Letire ä la Beine Senkte CharhUe (G, vi, 517). Immediately befor© the 
time of Leibniz, the origin of life in the individual plant, animal, 
ör man was explained eithor by a theory of traduction or by 
a theory of eduction. According to the theory of traducti^n, the 
^form' of the offspring comea from the parental ^form' or * forms' 
in the same way the hody of the offspring comüfj from the parental 
body or bodiea, Aoeording to the theory of eduction, on tho other 
band, life comes from inorganio matter, from ^ chaos or putrefaction.' 
Ediiction thus correaponds to what we now call ' spentaneou» gene- 
ration/ Acüordlng to the theory of preforroation, adopted by 
Leibniz, the germ contaln;^ in mlniature the whole plant or animal, 
point for point, and aecordingly tho *form ' of the plant or animal 
exists in the apermatozoon in a contraeted or ' enveloped' state, and 
it has existed ainco the boginning of time. For^ aa we have aeen 
(§65), there ia no limit to the smaUneäS of things, and ev4*n a Sper- 
matozoon may contain an indefinite number of othcr living beings* 
This theory of proforma tion, which was bßsed on the microseopie 
investigations of Malpighi and Leuwenhoek, haa now been entirely 
abandoned, aa the reault of more thorough obsorvationa» Cf. Sande- 



THE MONADOLOGY 



body was already there before conception, but also a soul 
in this body, and, in Bhort, the animal itself ; and that by 
meana of conception this animal has merely been prepared 
for the great transformation involved in its becoming an 
animal of anotber kind. Something like this 13 indeed 
aeen apart from birth [gmmäim'jj aa when woims become 
flies and caterpillars become butterflies. (TMod. 86, 89, 
Preß [K 475b; G. vi. 40 sqq.]; 90, 187, 188, 403, 86, 397,) 

75. The anim^lSy of whicb some are raised by means of 
conception to tbo rank of larger animals, may be ealled 
Spermatie j but those among them wbich are not so raised 
but remain in their own kind (that is, the majority) ar© 
bom, multiply, and are destroyed like the large animals, 
and it is only a few ehosen ones [6Im] that pass to a great© r 
theatre. 

76. Eni this is only half of the truth ^^^j and accordingly 

mdH, I^^DUems üf Biology, p, 93. Wliilo rejecting traduction in Ha 
ordinär j form^ Leibniz recogivizes itsaflSnity to his own view, which 
he deäcHbes ns kind of traductioii, more satiäfiictory [iraittihJe] 
than tliat which is eommonly tought/ Thmdi^e^ § 397 (E. 618 b ; 
G. Ti. 35a). 

Accjording to L(.(ibiiiZ) thoy ßr© not entirely, but only op- 
parently de^itroyed, The etatement ia made in the form in which 
seientilie obaervers of L©ibniz*s tjme would have put it, and ifc ib 
Bubject to the qnalificatton made in § 76. L^iibniz'ä point is that» 
juat as thore ia a visible "world of largRr organiams, so thero is 
a microscopic workl of spermatozoa, tindorgoing in miniature all 
the changeä which take place in th© larger visibJe World. The 
largur orgtiniama of tho viüible world are certain elect memhers of 
the spermalic world which, ' by mcans of conception,' havo beeit 
enabled feo grow from microscopic minuteTiess to vmbility. 

The sciontiflc obät^rvora have only atated half of the truth j 
but Leibniz think« that they would hnve no objection to the other 
half. '1 think that if this opinion had occurred to them, they 
wonld not have fouud it absurd, and there is nothing moro natural 
than to believe thtit what does not begin doea not periah/ Ldbü ä 
Amauld (1687) (G. ii. 123). Cf, Plato, PM^rus, 245 D : 'Eirti^ 51 
äyivTjTSv loTif äqI oBiatpBopov aöri dvAjKt} elvai. Leibniz elsewhore * 
Bpeaks of the view of Plato Hbat the object of wiadoai ia tA ^vrm 
ovra^ that is, simpJe BubBtances, which are ealled by m© * [Leibni^] 
* Monads, and which once exiating alwaya continue to ex ist, itfiStra 
dffTFiKa TTyr fwijs, that is, God and eeula, and ef theso the chiof are 



2Ö2 



THE MONADOLOGY 



I hold that if an animal never comes int^^ bei ng by natural 
means [^naturellement], no more does it come to an end by 
natural means ; and that not only will there he no hirth 
[g^mration], but also no complete destruction or death in 
the atrict sense And these reasoning^, made a posteriori 
and drawn from exparience are in perfect agreement witb 
my principles deduced a priori, bb abovö^*, {TMod. 90.) 

77* Thus it may be said that not only the soul (mirror 
of an indestructible univei^e) ia indestructible, but also 
the animal itself though its mechanism [machine] may 
ofbn periah in part and take off or put on an organie 
ßlough [des depouilks organiques^^^]^ 

78, These principles hav© given me a way of explaining 
naturally^'* the union or rather the mutual agreement 
{conformite\ of the soul and the organie body, The soul 
foHows ita own laws, and the body likewise follows its 
oym laws ; and they agree mth each other in yirtue of 

ininds, iniage^ of the Doitjf ^ prtxiuced by God.' Epistda ad Han$chium 
(1707) (E. 445 b). Thi3 last paesage involveg a miüüiiderstai\diiig 
of Plato'a IBiai, wLich are universalsj not Monads* Demoijritua 
calU bis Ätoms üv. 

m i There alwayg going on in tli6 animal what goes on in it at 
the present mon^ent ; tbÄt ia^ ita body is in s. eontinual cbange, lik^ 
a river ; and what wg call goneration or death ia only a greater and 
moro rapid chang© tban uaualj gqch aa would b« tbe leap or cataract 
of a riYen But these leApä arö not absolute and auch as I h&ve 
refuaed to admit, as would be that of a body whieh should go from 
oae place to auother without going through intervening placoa 
passer par le milim]/ Lettre ä E^iond (1715) (E, 724 a ; G. iii. 635), 
MoTiad^logijj || 3, 4^ and 5. This ©ndeavour to show the agree- 
i jneut of a pri&ri with a pf>$tenm conclaüions ia fipG<5ialJy characteri&tic 
l of Leibniz. It illustratea hia belief in the harniony of the pliysical 
Iwith tlie metaphysicalj th© mochanicai with the dynandcal or 
' final 

_ ^'^ Eecause th© aoul must alwaya have & body of som« kind, which 
itself ultimately consista of impevishable Monada, Animals, how- 
eTer^ are not immortal Immorfcality belongB only to rational aoula 
or self-conacious Monade, 

* Aa a snake casta ita old akin/ I^ttr» ä laPrincem Svphk (1696) 
(Ö. Tii. 544% 

Tlmt ig» in contrast to th© Occasionaliat theory, which acoürd- 
ing to Leibuiz impliea an endiess seriea of miraclea. 



THE MONADOLOGY 



263 



the pre-established harmony between all substaneeB^ since 
tbey are all representatioDS of one and the same iird- 
ve^Be^^^ {Preß [E, 4^5 a ; a ttL 39] ; Thcod, 340, 35 2, 
353r 358.) 

79. Souls act according to the law9 of final causes 
through appetitionSy ends, and means. Bodies act 

I Äceording to tb© laws of efficient causes or motions. And 
l the two realms, that of efficient causes and that of final 
causes, are in harmony with one anotber 

80, Deaeartes recognized that souls cannot impart any 
force to bodiesj because there is always the same quantiiy 

^ Tixät is to say, the problom of the connexiön between soul and 
hody 13 & EpeciaJ cÄse of th<^ wider problem m to tb© relatlon of 
any one simple substancü Monad to linother, 

^ Tbey B.re in harmony, because ultimately tlie on© is reducible 
to the other. When it ia s^id that * soula act/ what is meant is 
that they pass from one percoption to anotber, i. e. that thoy have 
appetition, Whön it ia aaid that ^ bodiea act>* what is meant is 
that thcy chang© their atato or their relation to other bodiea, L e, 
that they have motion, What we call the * itate ' of a body and its 
*r©lations to other bodioa' ought in strictness to be called tho 
(uaconscious) perceptiona of the Mouads which con>^titut© the body. 
And äimilarly, the * mofcion * of tlie body ia röally th© (unconacioufl) 
appetition of its constituent Monadpi. Thus the dlfferenee between 
©ffleient and final eaus*jSj like that betwoen the ^mconaejoiis and 
the conscious, is merely difference of degree. Cf. Priticipha of 
Natura and 0/ GrcKx^ | 11. From a paychological point of view, 
Leibniz describes the parallelism of mu.1 and body thus : * I have 
cart^iftiiiy eicamijied this matter and I have shown that tljere are 
really in the aoul sorae materials ©f thougbt or objecta of th<^ 
underatandlngf whi^^h the extern al sens«:^^ do not supply^ namely, 
the Boul itaelf and its functions {niltM est in inteUectu quod non fuerÜ in 
serrntj nist ipse intdkäitsi) . * , hnt I find neTertheless, that there 
never an abstract thougbt which ia not accompanicd by some 
material imflges or marka [traces], and I hav© mude out a perfect 
parallelism between what pÄääOä in the aoul and what tükes place 
in matter, having shown that the soul, witli its fnnctiona, ia aome- 
thing distinet from matter but yet is alwaya accomp^auicd by 
material Organs, and also that tho functiona of the soul are alwajö 
accompanied hy functiona of its organs, which must correspond to 
themi and that this ia and always will be reciprocaL* Considerah^^ns 
mr la Dodrim d'un Esprit Umv&rsel unique (170a) (E, 180 a i G. vi. 
53a)- 



264 



THE MONAI>OLOGY 



of foroe in matter. Nevertheless be was of opinion that 
the soul could change the direction of bodies. But that 
m because in bis time it was not known that ther© ia 
a law of natur© which affirms also the conservation of the 
aame total direetion in matter Had Descartes noticed 
this he would have come upon mj System of pre-estab- 
lished harmony {Präf. [E. 477 a j ^ 44 J J Theod 
22, 59, 60, 61, 63, 66, 345, 346 sqq., 354, 3550 

81. According to tliis System bodies act as if (to 
Biippo£5e the impossible) tbere wera no soiüs, and souls 
aet as if there wer© no bodiesj and both act as if each 
infiuenced the otber 

™ Seo Introduetiorjj Furt iü, p. 89. BööCArtes * beüeved be had 
fouad a law of iiatm'e, to the offeet that the same quantity of 
m<ition ia conserv^d in bodies. He did not think it posssible for 
the influence of the &oul to breAk this law of bodiea ; but he thought 
that the fioul Riight neverthelösa have the p<}wer of changing the 
direction of the motions which tak© place in the body ; somewhat 
aa Ii horaemaii, although ho düfiS not give any force to the horiso he 
ridflö^ nevertheless guides it by directing its force in the way that 
he thiiiks right, Aa this ia dono by meaus of bridle, hit^ spurs, 
and other material aids, we seo how it can take place ; but there 
are no insttument^ which tho aoul could employ for thi^ purpua© 
— not hing in soul or in body, that is to asiy, in thought or in mam^ 
which eould @orve to ©iplain this ehange of one by the other/ 
Th4odiceej § 60 (E. 519 b ; G. ti. 135). 

That ia to Siiy, Dcacartea would have seen that noither soul 
nor body has any influonco whatover upon the othtr, and that they 
mußt therefore bo regarded ag acting morely in hurmony, 

^* ' All that ambition or any other paasion bringa to pass in the 
Boul of Oaesar is also represented in hin body, anii all the motions 
of tliest? paäsious como from the impreaaiona of objccts combined 
with intt*rnal motions. And the hody is so constituted that the 
soni never niakeä any reaolution without the motiona of ihn body 
ftgrt*eing with it. This applies even to the most abatract roasouinga, 
heeaUäe of tlie ohar acters which represent them to the imagination. 
In a wordj everything takes place in bodies^ as regarda the par- 
ticulai* aeriea IdetaÜ] of their phenomena, as if the evil doctrino of 
those who, liko Epicurus and Hobbea, believe that the aoul Is 
inaterial, wer© true; or as if man himaelf wore only a body or an 
automaton. , , - TJioee who ahow the Carteaians that their way of 
provlng that the lower animala artf ouly automata amounts to 
justifying him who should say that all meii^ exeept himsLdf, are 



THE MONADOLOGY 265 

82. As regards minds [esptits] or rational souls, thougli 
I find that what I have just been saying is true of all 
living beings and ariimals (namely that animals and souls 
come into being when the world begins and no more 
come to an end than the world does), yet there is this 
peculiarity in rational animals, that their spermatic 
animalcules, so long as they are only speimatic, have 
merely ordinary or sensuous [sensitive] souls ; but when 
those which are chosen [dus], so to speak, attain to human 
nature through an actual conception, their sensuous souls 
ai-e raised to the rank of reason and to the prerogative of 
minds [esprits^^^]. {Theod, 91, 397.) 

also mere automata, have said exactly what I need for that half of 
my hypothesis which concems body. But, apart from the prin- 
ciples which make it certain that there are Monads, of which Com- 
pound subätances are only the results, the Epicurean doctrine is 
refuted by inner experience, by our consciousness of the Ego which 
consciouslyperceives the things which take place in the body ; and 
as perception cannot be explained by figures and motiohs, the other 
half of my hypothesis is established, and we are obliged to recognize 
that there is in us an indimsihle substance, which must be itself the 
source of its phenomena. Consequently, according to this second 
half of my hypothesis, everything takes place in the soul as if there 
were no body ; just as, according to the first half, everything takes 
place in the body as if there were no soul. . . . Whatever of good 
there is in the hypotheses of Epicurus and of Plate, of the greatest 
Materialists and the greatest Idealists, is combined here.* Reponse 
aux Reßexions de Bayle (1702) (E. 185 ; G. iv. 559). 

130 This elevation of the merely sensuous soul to the rank of 
reason might, says Leibniz, * be attiibuted to the extraordinary 
Operation of God.* But he 'prefers to dispense with miracle in the 
generation of man as in that of the other animals,' and says that 
among the great number of souls and animals (or at least living 
organic bodies) which are in the seed, only those souls which are 
destined some day to attain to human nature contain in germ 
[enveloppent] the reason which will some day appear in them, and 
that only the organic bodies of these souls are preformed and pre- 
disposed to take the human form some day, the other animalcules 
or seminal living beings, in which nothing of this kind is pre- 
established, being essentially dififerent from them and containing 
only what is lower.* Thiodicee, § 397 (E. 618 a ; G. vi. 35a). This 
question of the relation of rational to sub-rational souls is treated 
by Leibniz in a very unsatisfactory way. If we foUow out Leibniz's 



266 



THE MOlJfADOLOGY 



83. Ämong other dififerences which exist l>etween 
oiMlinaj-y souls and minds [esprtts], some of which 
differences I haye already noted ther© im also this : 
ihat souls in general are living mirrora or images of the 
imiverse of created things, but that mitids are also inmgm 
of the Deity or Author of natura Himself, capable of 
knowing the System of the universe and to some 
extent of imitating it through arcliitectonic ensample» 
lechüntiUons each mind being like a small divinity in 
it3 own spheiu (Theott 147*) 

84. It is this that enables spirits [or minds— e^pn'is] to 
enter into a kind of fellowship with God, and brings it 
about that in relation to them He is not only what an 
inyentor is to his maeliine (which is the relation of God 
to other created things), but also what a prince ig to his 
Bubjects, and, indeed, what a father is to his chüdren 

main principles, it ougM to be imposaible to di-aw a sharp lijie 
betwoea fchese two classe^ of muh. Yetj whil© not regardi tig r& 
ftbaolute the distinctioo between th© r&tional and the merely sen- 
Buous, Leibniz ia afrflid of minimizing this diatmction and of thua 
putting in joopardy tho pre-eiiiineQce of man and the immortality 
of the souU In the draft of ft lotter to Arnauld (1686) he speaks of 
tbis question aa ' a special point {}in& particulariU] about wliich 
I lia^ye not light enough * (G. iL 73)* Gf. latroduetionj Part iii, 
p. 116. 

isi §§ 19-30. 

*xhü dkfiforence between intelligent siubatancesand thoae which 
ar© not in aa gTeat as the difference there is between a mirror 
and him who lookj thereiu.' Paper withont a title (1686) {G. iv* 

460). 

That subsidiary creations or imitative constructions* Man 
can not mert'Iy exprcjss in himself tliu * machina ' of the universe, 
but he can also make for bimse If smail ' machmes,' eonstmoted on 
similar prinoiplea. Cf. § 64 ; also Principles of Natura atid qf GracB^ 
§ 14, An dpxiTf KTüjy 33 literaily a * master of works.' 

i Concerning the human sonl I dare not asser t anythmg as to 
its origin nor as to its state after dc^ath, because rational or intelli- 
gent soulsj such as oura is, having been so faehioned thattheyhave 
a peculiar relation to the image of God, are governed by very dif- 
ferent laws from thoso to wbich aoula without underatanding are 
subjeet/ Epistola ad BennaulUum (1699) (G. Math. iii. 5Ö5). * Spirits 
lentis] aloae ^re made in His image^ und are, aa it wore, of His 



THE MONADOLOGY 267 

85, Whence it is easy to condude that the totality 
[assemhlag&] of all spirits [^^nY^] must compose tbe City 
of God that m to say, the most perfect State that is 
poasible, under the most perfect of Monarchs, {Theod. 
146 ; Ährege, öhjecL 2,) 

86. Thia City of Grod, thls truly universal monarchy, 
13 a moral world m the natural world, and is the moat 
exalted and moat divine among the worka of Ood ^' ■ ; and 
it ia in it that the glory of God really consists^ for He 
would have no glory were not His greatuesa and His 
goodness knownand iwimired by spirits [es^its^^^]. It is 

race or Jike ehildren of tliö hottse, since they alon© can serve Him 
ir^iy and act wHh knowledgej in Imitation of the Divine natura : 
one aingle spirit [eaprit] is Worth a wholo World j Bince it not only 
expresaea th© world hnt also knows it and governs itaelf in the 
World [s'y gomerm] aft©r the jnanner of God-' Paper without title 
(1686) (G. iv, 461). 

^ The reference is to the ctuiYcw of St, Augusfcin©; but tho 
difference of meaning ia very groai SL Augnatiiie's amias Bei is 
th© Christiaii Church as opposed to the civitas tsrrma or earthly 
at^te» lieibniz's City of God^ on tlie other haiidT is not set in 
Opposition to an earthlj state, but i^ the moral order of the 
nniverse, as diatind; from its natural order. Tlie City of God, 
according to Leibiiii, includea not Christians alone, bat men* 

Cf, Fichte, Dars^eHung der Wissenschnfidehre [Werke, ii. 35) : 
* Thö ground of the universe is . . . apirit itaelf . . . a kingdom of 
spirita and absein tely nothing elae.' Also Werke j v, 188 : * It Is 
in no way doubtf*il, or rather it is the most certain of all tliings, 
änd inde©d the fonndation of all certitude^ the sole absolutely 
indisputable objeetLve reality^ thflt ther© is a moral ordur in tlie 
univerae ; that ©a<;h rational individnal has his dofinite place in 
thia uniTersal order, a place iiidicatod by hifl special work ; that 
each of the accidenU of Ms exi^tenc«, iii ao far m it does not 
reault from his personal conduct, is a consequence of this general 
plan ; that, oxcept in conformity with this plan, not a hair can 
faU fpom his head, any more than a ap^irrow from its roof ; that 
every truly good action sncceeds^ every bad aotion falls ; and 
that all things necessarily work for the greatest good of those who 
only rightly lov© th© good/ See Introduetion, Part iv, p. 180 
not©. 

^^■^ Cf, Nieholas of Cusa, Oribratio Atchomn^ 16 : ' God oroated 
all thinga for the manift^station of Hi» glory ; an unknown king 13 
wanting m honour and in beneücenc©/ Cf. also ExdiaHones ^ 



268 



THE MONADOLOGY 



also in relaüon to this divine City that God specially 
has goodness^^*, while His wisdom and Iiis power are 
mamfasted everywhere, {TMod, 146; Abrege, Ohject 2.) 

87, As we have ehown above that there is a perfeet 
harmony betweefi ihe Uvo rpulms in nature, one of officient, 
and the other of final muses, we should here notice also 
another liarmony between thö plxysieul realm of natura 
and the raoral realm of grace that is to say, between 
Gödj considered as Ärchitect of the meebanisni [machim] 
of the uniyerse and God considered as Monareh of the 
divine City of spirits [esprits]. {Theod. 62, -74^ 118, 248, 
112, 130, 247.) 

Sermimifjmy tL ri^a: * Ood desired fco maDifest the rrches Hjs 
glory, find on thi& accotint Ha i^reated the rational or intf^llectual 
ttreatuire, that Ho might manifest to him tho rieh es of His glöry ; 
for thig creature alone can peroeive th© glory of God with m- 
iGlkctiinl apprcciflfcion [inüllectuali giistu] ; but these richea [of the 
gloiy of God] are et^jmal life/ * God wishsa to b© known, and 
hen(^e on thia acoount all thinga are ' (ioc. cii. , 104 a). Cf. also 
Schiller's ^ Frcimdlos war dor grosse Welt^nmeister/ &c. (JKb 
Fremidschaft), 

Beeauae moral distinctiona and moi-al qualitiesbeJong sp&oialty 
to the moral order, i. e, to the eocietj of rational soulsk 

Th© question of the rehition between the realm of nafcure 
and that of grace is, in one form or anotherj porennial, Xicibniz 
seeks to npply the principles of his philoaophy in a reconeiling 
spirit to tho ^eventeenth -Century disciission of the qneatioTi in ita 
theological form. The harmony, of which Lcibniz speaka, must 
not be taken aa meaning (like the hamiony hetween the Monada) 
that the two realms of natur© and of grace are entirely exclusive 
of one annther, The realm of final cauaea^ for inätanoe^ doea not 
belong entirely to nature t the realm of grace is tho realm of 
Ünal causes in ita highoat form. The relation between nafctire 
and grace is aiialogoua to that between body and soul. Just as 
hody, considered aa an aggregate, is merely phenomena! and there- 
fore qnite distinct from sonl or real aubstance, while yet it ia 
a phenomemn Zwne fundahim and ita reality ia that of ite component 
Monada or Bouk ; bo nature, con&idered aa anbjeet to the law of 
efflcient caiiäos, is qnite distinot from grace j while yefc, ainoe 
eflScient caugesj even in natur«^ ifcself. derive tbelr meaning and 
forc© fram final causes^ nature finds its perfection in grace, 
which ia the higheat expregaion of final cause. §§88 and 8g 
illuBtrate this. Ct Frinciples o/Natttn and qf Gracej | 15. 



THE MONADOLOGY 



269 



88. A result of this harmony is that things lead to 
grace by the very ways of nature, and that this globe, 
for instance, must be destroyed and renewed by natural 
means at the very time when the government of spirits 
requires it, for the punishment of some and the reward of 
others. {Theod, 18 sqq., iio, 244, 245, 340.) 

89. It may also be said that God as Architect satisfies 
in all respects God as Lawgiver and thus that sins 
must bear their penalty with them, through the order of 
nature, and even in virtue of the mechanical structure of 
things ; and similarly that noble actions will attain their 
rewards by ways which, on the bodily side, are mechanical, 
although this cannot and ought not always to happen 
immediately 

90. Finally, under this perfect government no good 
action would be unrewarded and no bad one unpunished, 
and all should issue in the well-being of the good, that is 
to say, of those who are not malcontents in this great 
State, but who trust in Providence, after having done 
their duty, and who love and Imitate, as is meet, the 
Author of all good, finding pleasure in the contemplation 
of His perfections, as is the way of genuine * pure love 

"® That is to say, the world is built on a plan which perfectly 
harmonizes with the moral government of its inhabitants. 

Leibniz regards sin as seeking one's own good in an imperfect, 
unenlightened way, without regard to the moral law or order, 
which is the only way of securing the highest possible good of all 
and of each. Thus sin brings punishment as inevitably as neglect 
or defiance of natural laws brings disease and pain. But owing to 
the harmony (above explained) between spirit and body, the moral 
and the natural worlds, the punishment of sin is not merely 
Spiritual : the bodily or natural has a share in it. Similarly 
virtue has its reward, both spiritual and natural, because it is 
enlightened action in accordance with the ultimate law of the 
whole universe, the principle of the highest good. 

That is to say, disinterested love, as distinct from interested 
or selfish love. One of the great subjects of theological discussion 
in the seventeenth century was the question whether there is such 
a thing as purely disinterested love. About this a long pamphlet 
controversy (lasting from 1694 to 1699) took place between Bossuet 



270 



THE MONADOLOGY 



whieh fcakes pleasure in the liappiness af ih© belovad, 
This it is whieh leads wjbb and virtuous people to devote 
their energies to everytlüng -whieh appears in hamiony 
with the presumptive ar anteeedent will of Ood, and yet 
makes them content with what Grod actually brings to 
pass by His Beeret, consequent and positive [decmve] 
will '^^j recognizing that if we could aufiiciently under- 

and Fönelon, FiSnelon (partly in defence of Mme, Guyon) main- 
tained thö possibility of ä disintereated love of God, that is^ a loT© 
wliich has no regard to rewards and pi^nishments. Ultiraately, 
howe^-er, Pope Innocent XII condemned tli© views of Föneion, at 
the same time censuring the oontroversial m^thoda of Bossuet, 
Tho viow of Loibniz is morö fully given in Iiis Pro face, Ort ihe 
Nütions of Eight and Justice (1693)^ p. 385 ; cf- Butler^ Sermons id, 
lin, and xiv. 

The distinction between tho antec^ident and the oonsequont 
will of God is duö to Thomaö Aquinaa. He says : * Thia di»- 
tinetion is not founded upon tho Divino will itselfj for in it thör© 
is neither befor© nor after i but it ib founded upon tho objects of 
His wilL . . . A thingmaybo considerod eithor in itself, abj^olutoly, 
or with BomB partieular circuni&tance, whieh forms a subseqnent 
consideration. For instance it is good in itjsolf that man slioüld 
livo and bad that he should bo killedj considering the matter 
absolutely ; but if we add, with regard to some particukr man, 
that he ia a murdoror or that his living ia a source of danger to 
a large number of people, in this case it will be good that the man 
«honld be killad^ and bad that he ahould 11 va. Accordingly it may 
be Said that a judge wiils with an antücedont will that every man 
should contimie to live, bnt wills with a conaeqnent will that 
a murderer should be hanged.' ^Bumma TheaL i. Qu, 19, Art^ 6 aä 
primum. Cf, De Veritaief Qu. 23» Art, 2. Leibni^ brings thia into 
rfllation with his own hypothesis regarding the region of posaible 
thingg and the aetnal, eiisting world* ^ In a goneral eense it may 
be Said that will consista in the inclination to do somothing in 
Proportion to the good It oontains» This will is callod antecedent^ 
when it ia separate ldetackif\ and has regard to each gt>od by itaelf, 
in so far as it is good. In thia aenRe it may be aaid that God tonda 
to all good in ao far as it is good, ad per/eäionem simpliciier gimpUcem, 
in Scholastie language, and that by an antecedent will. He has 
an earnest inclination to sanctiiy and savc all men, to do away 
with ain and to provent damnation. It raay even be said that thia 
will ia efficacioua in iiAi^y" {per üe), that is to »ay, so that the effect 
would follow, were there not some atronger reason whieh prevonta 
it ^ for thia wiU äo&a not go to the extreme of effort {ad sumfnum 



THE MONADOLOGY 



271 



stand the order of the universe, we should find that it 
exceeds all the desires of the wisest men, and that it is 
impossible to make it better than it is^**, not only as a 
whole and in general but also for ourselves in particular, 
if we are attached, as we ought to be, to the Author of 
all, not only as to the architect and efficient cause of our 
teing, but as to our master and to the final cause, which 
ought to be the whole aim of our will, and which can 
alone make our happiness. {Th6od. 134, 278. Fr4f, [E. 
469 ; G. vi. 27, 28].) 

conatum), otherwise it would never fail to produce its füll eflfect, 
since God is master of all things. Oomplete and infallible success 
belongs only to consequent vnll, as it is called. It is complete, and 
this rule applies to it, namely, that we never fail to do what we 
will, when we can. Now this consequent, final and decisive will 
results from the conliict of all the antecedent volitions \J wills *], 
both those whicli tend towards good and those which oppose evil, 
and it is from the concurrence of all these particular volitions 
that the total volition comes : as in mechanics the composite 
motion is the result of all the tendencies Vhich concnr in one and 
the same movable body, and equally satisfies each of them so far 
as it is possible to do so at once. ... In this sense it may be said 
that antecedent will [volition] is in a way efficacious and even 
effective and successful. From this it foUows that God wills 
antecedently the good, and consequently the best.' Theodicee, §§ aa and 
23 (E. 510b; G. vi. 115, 116). God antecedenüy wills the absolute 
good of all beings ; but He consequmtly wills the greatest good of 
each that is possiUe, considering the easential limitations of their 
natures and their relations to one another in the System of things. 
This greatest possible good is thus compatible with a certain amount 
of evil. 

This is not to be taken as meaning that it is impossible to 
make the world better than it is at this or any pariicidar moment qf 
time. Leibniz is speaking of the world as a System including all 
time, and accordingly he does not ezclude progress in time. 



272 



THE MONADOLOGY 



APPENDIX F. 

THE DISCUSSIÖN BETWEEN LEIBNIZ AN» BAYLE REGARDlIfG 
THE MULTIPIICITY IN THE MONAD. 

The ^ difliciiUy ' regarding the possibility of a multiplicity in 
the MonatI, to which Leibniz refers in § 16 of the MmmdQlogtf^ 
ia vanously expressed by Bayle in liiä Dktmwiy (article 'Rora- 
rius'). He sajB : 'Ab Leibniz with much reason eupposes that 
all fioula are simple and indivisiblc, it in impoaeible to under- 
Htaiid how thej can be likened to a clock' [see TJiinl explan et ^ 
fimt of the New Sifsfem^ and Introduction, Part ii. p, 45], ^ tbat iö 
to BEy, how bj their original contätitutlon thej can diveräifj 
thdr Operations, by meana of the apontaneous activity they 
receive from their Creator. We concaive clearly that a aimple 
heiug will alwajs act nniformlj, if no ex traue ous cauKe inter- 
feres with it. It' it were composed of eeveral pieces, like 
a mach ine, it would act in divers ways. because the special 
activity of each piece might change at any moment the conr^e 
of the activity of the Sthere ; b^t In an independent simple 
subetance [suhmnce uniqm], where will you find the eanse of 
any variety in ita Operation ? ' Leibnia's anawer to thia appears 
in the E^pwise auJ^ M^ß€:)£^iom de Bat/k ; see Monadohgt/, note 20 ; 
c£ Lettre ä Busnage (1698) (E, 353 a ; iv. 522) : * 1 compared 
the aoul to 3, clock, onlj aa regards the regulato d precision of 
ita change a. TMS ia but imperfect in the best of clocks, but it 
ifl perfect in the works of God. And the aoul may be said to he 
an imniaterial autonmton of the very heat kind, When it is 
said that a simple being will always act uniformly, a dlatinction 
muat be n ade : if adtmj uniformlij means constantly following 
the same law of order or varying sueceasion {conUnuation], aa in 
a certain order or series of nuniber^, I ad mit that of itself every 
äimple being, and even eveiy componnd being, acts uniformly ; 
but if mtifOf-Tnltf means exactly m the same way [scmMahiement], 
I do not admit it. . . . The eoul, thongh it ia perfectly simple, 
has alwaya a feeling [sentiment] compoaed of scveral perceptiöne 
at once ; and this is aa mnch to our pnrpose as if it wcre com- 
posed of piecei, like a machine, Forcach preceding perception 
influencea thoae which follow, according to a law which there 
is in perceptions aa in motiona/ Bayle allowa that Leibni^'a 
viaw ooniains the promifle of a theoty which will iolve all difii- 



APPENDIX F 



culties ; but he still feels dissatisfied as to the power of a simple 
substance, like the soul of man, to develop spontaneously all 
the variety of thought, &c. It has not * the necessary instm- 
ments' for doing this. * Let us freely imagine an animal created 
by God and intended to sing incessantly. It will always sing, that 
is indubitable ; but if God assigns to it a certain piece of music 
to sing [une certaine tahlature\ He must necessarily either place 
this before its eyes, or imprint it on its memory, or give it an 
arrangement of muscles which, in accordance with the laws of 
mechanics, shall make one note f ollow another exactly according 
to their order in the musical score [tahlature], Otherwise it is 
inconceivable that the animal should ever be able to conform 
to the whole succession of notes indicated by God. Let us 
apply this to the soul of man. M. Leibniz thinks that it has 
received not only the faculty of continually supplying itself 
with thoughts, but also the faculty of always foUowing a certain 
Order in its thoughts, corresponding to the continual changes 
of the bodily mechanism. This order of thoughts is like the 
musical score assigned to the animal musician of which we have 
been speaking. In order that the soul may from moment to 
moment change its perceptions or its modifications in accord- 
ance with the score " of thoughts, must not the soul know the 
succession of the notes and actually think of it ? Now expe- 
rience shows us that it does nothing of the kind. And, failing 
this knowledge, must there not at least be in the soul a succession 
of special instruments which might each be a necessary cause 
of this or that particular thought ? Must not these instruments 
be so situated that one acts upon another, in exact accord with 
the pre-estahlished correspondence between the changes of the 
bodily mechanism and the thoughts of the soul? Now it is 
quite certain that no immaterial, simple and indivisible sub- 
stance can be composed of this countless multitude of special 
instruments placed one before another in the order required by 
the ** score " in question. Accordingly it is impossible for the 
human soul to carry out this law.' (This Illustration of Bayle's 
may be compared with Leibniz*s simile of the choirs, see Intro- 
duction, Part ii. p. 47. The letter containing Leibniz's simile 
was written in 1687.) In a paper written in 1702 (G. iv. 
549 s<l<l-) Leibniz makes the following reply to Bayle (referring 
in the first place to Bayle's supposition of an animal created by 
God to sing incessantly) : * It is enough if we suppose a singer 
paid to sing at certain hours in church or at the opera, and 



274 



THE MONADOLOGY 



that he fisdi there & mugic-book^ in which there are the pieces 
of music or the score " he is to sing on the particular da ja and 
honm, The ünger sings with open book [ä Ii vre owrert], bis 
eyea are directed by the bock, and hi& tongue and tbroat are 
directed bj hia eyes^ but hia sonl aings^ ao to speak, bj mempry 
or by something- equivalent memory \ for Huxce the music- 
book, the eyes and the eaj-a cannot act upon tbe sonl, it mnst 
by iteelfj and indeed without trouble or appUcation and withovit 
seeking it, find what hiß brain and Organa find with the belp 
of the book The reaaon ia that the wbole score of the book 
or booka tbat ahall, one after anotherj be followed in einging ii 
potentially [yitimilenmii] graven in his soül from the beginmng 
of itft existence ; m thia score " was in some way graven in ita 
tnaterial causes before the pieces of muaic were composed and 
the book made out of them, But the aoul cannot be conecioua 
of it \ß'en aperctvoir]t for it is enveloped in the confnsed per- 
ceptiona of the soul, which expreaa all the detail of the universe. 
And the aoul ia distinctly conacioua of it onlj at the time when 
ita Organs are markedly aftected by the notea of the score." 
. . , I have already ahown more than once that the soul doea 
manj thingB without knowing how it does them, when it doea 
io by lue ans of confused perceptions and uncon^ious [iftsemihkr»] 
inclinations or appetitions^ of which there ia alwaya a very 
great number, and which it is impossible for the aoul to be con- 
scioua of, or to unravel distinctly. . , , The soul haa all the 
Instruments which M. Bayle thinka nccessary, arranged [plac^] 
as they ought to be, But they are not material instrumenta. 
They are the preccding perceptions themselves, from which 
the aucceeding perceptions arise by the laws of appetitiona 

APPENDIX G, 

PBOOF OF THE EXISTENCE OP ÖOD, 

The view of Leibnia, espreaaed in the M&nadohgp (§5 44 and 
45), muat be carefully distinguisted from the Carteaian argu- 
ment (derived from Anselm) that the idea of God involvea Hia 
exiatence, be cause if He does not exiat, a more perfect Being 
may be conccived, namcly one who doea exiat, It ia alao 
to be diatinguished from the view of Spinoza, which amonnta 
to aaying that the eaaence ofGod inrolvei Hia existeiLce, becauae 



APPENDIX G 



all essence exists, all that is possible is actual. As against 
Descartes*s proof Leibniz argues that it is incomplete, for the 
idea of a most perfect being might perhaps be self-contra- 
dictory, like the idea of the swiftest possible motion or the 
greatest possible number. Thus, affcer stating the Cartesian 
argument, Leibniz says : * But it is to be noted that the only 
logical conclusion is: " If God is possible, it foUows that He 
exists." For we cannot safely use definitions in order to reach 
a conclusion, until we know that these definitions are real or 
that they involve no contradiction. The reason of this is that 
from notions which involve a contradiction opposite conclusions 
may be drawn at the same time, which is absurd. To illustrate 
this I usually take the instance of the swiftest possible motion, 
which involves an absurdity. For, suppose a wheel to revolve 
with the swiftest possible motion, is it not evident, that if any 
spoke of the wheel be made longer ' [producedf in the mathe- 
matical sense] *its extremity will move more swiftly than 
a nail on the circumference of the wheel ; wherefore the 
motion of the circumference is not the swiftest possible, as was 
supposed by the hypothesis. Yet at first sight it may appear 
that we have an idea of the swiftest possible motion ; for we 
seem to understand what we are saying, and nevertheless we 
have no idea of impossible things.* Meditationes de Cognitionen 
Veritate et Ideis (1684), (E. 80 a ; G. iv. 424.) * Therefore there is 
assuredly reason to doubt whether the idea of the greatest of all 
beings is not uncertain, and whether it does not involve some 
contradiction. For I quite understand, for instance, the nature 
of motion and velocity, and what " the greatest " is. But I do 
not understand whether these are compatible, and whether 
it is possible to combine them into the one idea of the greatest 
velocity of which motion is capable. In the same way, although 
I know what being" is, and what the "greatest" and the 
most perfect " are, nevertheless I do not therefore know that 
there is not a hidden contradiction involved in combining these 
together, as there actually is in the instances I have just given 
. . . Yet I admit that God has here a great advantage over 
all other things. For, in order to prove that He exists, it is 
sufficient to prove that He is possible, which is not the case 
with regard to anything eise that I know of. . . . Simple 
forms [i.e. living principles] are the source of things. Now 
I maintain that all simple forms are compatible with one 
another. . . . If this be granted, it foUows that the nature of 



276 THE HONADOLOGY ^IHI 

Grod, which contains all simple foms taken absolütely» ii 
poaaible. Now we have proved above that God is, provided 
He ia posaible, Therefore He eiista/ (G. iv. 294 and 296.) 
Thixs Leibuiz, as he timaelf sajs (G. iv. 405 ), holds a middle 
Position between thoae wbo tegard tbe Cartesian proof as a 
gophism and those who aay that it is a completo demonatra* 
tipn. God'a existencej for Leibniss, foHows immediately from 
pia poasibility, for all real posaibilitj incltides a tendeney to 
existence, and tbere can be notbing to kinder tbis tendency in 
a being snpposed to be perfect. In tbe Biponses aux Deu^ümes 
ObjectionSt Descartes maintains tbe possibility of the idea of 
a moat perfect being-, But be does not mabe tbis a prominent 
or eaaential part of bis proof ^ as Leibniz doea. Cf. Deacarte&t 
MMitation 5 ; Principiü FhHoB&phiw, Part i. 14 sqq. 

In tbe Änimadwrsiones m pariem generaUm Frincipionim 
CaHmanorum (1692) (G, iv. 359) Leibniz auggeata that tbe 
argument might be aimplified bj omitting tbe refereuce to 
*perfection,' and merely aaying neeeaaary Being exists— or 
a Being whose eaaence ia exiatence, or Being in itself [eits m S€\ 
esista— äs h evident from the terms. Now God ia aucli a being 
(from the definition of God), therefore God exists. Tbis argu- 
ment holda if it be granted that a necessary being ia possible 
and doea not involve a contradictiotij or, wHat is the aame 
thing, that tbe esaence from which esistence follows is possible/ 
Elaewhere (E. 177 b ; G. iv. 406) Leibniz points out that Hhoee 
wbo hold that from notions, ideas, definitions or possible 
esaencea alone we can never infer actual exiatence , . . deny the 
poaaibility of being in ätself \em a ä^]. But *if being in itself 
is imposaibleT all beinga through another ' [enfi^ ab eUio] ' are 
also impOBHible, aince indeed they are only through Imng in 
itself : thua not hing can exist/ 

Aa against Spinoza, Leibniz's argument would be that not 
all that ia pof^dble is actual, but only tbe composaible or com- 
patible. There are unrealized *poasiblea,' eisences which do 
not involve existence, and conaequently the neceaaary being, 
whose esse nee involvea existence, ia not the all, but is some- 
thing distinct from tbe world of created things* The essence 
of a created being does not involve its existence, because it b 
limited, and thus its existence dependa upon its *■ fitting into * 
other easencea ao as to constitute, along with them, the best 
possible worM, But the esaence of a neceaaary being involvea 
its existence because it is unlimited. There ia nothing to 



APPENDIX G 



277 



hinder or condition its existence, and accordingly, if it be pos- 
sible, it must exist. The value of Leibniz^s argument depends 
on the Worth of the distinction he inakes between * possible ' 
and * compossible,' that is to say between a metaphysical or 
absolute necessity and a moral or inclining necessity. How 
are these two kinds of necessity related to one another ? It is 
hardly a satisfactory Solution of the Opposition between them 
to refer the one to the understanding and the other to the 
will of God. We have here again the fundamental weakness 
of Leibniz's philosophy, the uncertainty of the relation between 
the principle of contradiction and that of sufficient reason. 

Eant rejects the whole argument as a paralogism, on the 
ground that * existence ' can never be a predicate, that is to 
say, that we are never justified logically in passing from a 
mere idea to the existence of its content. (See Critique of 
Pure Rectsmy Rosenkranz, ii. 462 ; Hartenstein, ii. 456 ; Meikle- 
john's Tr., 364.) It is true that we can never pass from a mere 
idea to the existence of its content ; but to adduce this as an 
argument here is to beg the question. For a mere idea is an 
idea of that which may be non-existent ; while the idea of 
a necessary being is the idea of that which cannot be non- 
existent. Gaunilo in his Ltber pro insipiente, anticipates the 
objection of Kant, and to this Anselm replied in his Liber 
apologeticus contra respondentem pro insipiente, saying, among 
other things : ' Let us assume that the Summum cogitdbile 
need not exist merely because it is thought. Mark the con- 
sequence. That which can be thought without really existing 
would not, if it did exist, be the summum cogitahile ; so that, 
by the hypothesis, the summum cogitdbile is and is not the 
summum cogitdbile, which is in the last degree absurd ' (Rigg's 
St. Anselm of Canterbury, p. 71. See the whole of his chap. v). 
Cf. Introduction, Part iv. p. 173. 



OTHER PHILOSOPHICAL WRITINGS 
OF LEIBNIZ 



ON THE NOTIONS OF KIGHT AND 
JUSTICE. 1693. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

Leibniz was deeply interested in the maintenance of the 
rights of the Empire as against the pretensions of Louis XIV. 
He observed that the French took every opportunity of obtain- 
ing and preserving documents on which they might found 
Claims. And accordingly, on behalf of the Empire, he set 
himself to make a coUection of Treaties and State papers 
(international and national) affecting the European nations. 
His plan was to publish them in three volumes under the title 
Codex Jufis Gentium Diplomatictis, In 1693 the first volume 
appeared, containing papers of date from iioo to 1500 A.D. 
The work was never finished ; but an Appendix {mantissa) to 
the first volume was published in 1700. Writing to the Count 
de Kinsky in 1697, Leibniz remarks that his book * is a little 
less in season than it was at first, for we are assured that 
a general peace is on the point of being concluded * (Klopp, 
vi. 454). 

To this work Leibniz says he * contributed only the title, the 
preface, and the trouble of reading it over' (Klopp, vi. 
441). The preface, however, contains the most convenient 
summary of its author's views in an important department of 
ethics. The whole preface is given by Dutens (iv. 287) and 
by Klopp (vi. 457) ; but Erdmann (118) gives only the para- 
graphs dealing with * the etemal rights [or laws] of a rational 
nature,' and Gerhardt includes no part of it in his edition. 
I have translated the portion given by Erdmann, adding a few 
sentences from the succeeding paragraphs which deal with 
'voluntary' and Mivine' right. In the foot-notes will be 
found translations of a number of illustrative passages from 
the very interesting coUection of papers from the Hanover 



aftz ON THE KOTIOKS OF KIGHT ANB JUSTICE 



MSS- piiblished hj Dr. Georg MöUat under the title, Reehf^- 
philoMOphiäthes aus Leihnizeris ungedruckten Schriften (Leipzig-^ 
RoboUfcy, iSas). 

The following atatfiment of Leibniz raay be uaed as a sum- 
mary of thia pa,rt of the Preface to the C^ex DiplotmHcus i 
^ * In itating the el erneute of natural right there muBt be ex- 
ponndedj ^*is*, tlie common principles of juaticeT the charitj of 
the wiee man ; secondly^ private right or the precepts of com- 
mutative jueticej conceraing what is obsenred among- men in 
so far they are regarded as equal ; thh'dly^ public right, 
coiicerning the dispensing of common good» and evils among 
un equal people for the greateat common good in this life ; 
fi)urthlffj in ward right, concenüng univeraal vir tue and natural 
Obligation towarda God, that we may have regard to perpetual 
happinesfl- To these must be added the elementa of legitimate 
human and divine right : human right both in our own 
Commonwealth and between nations, divine right in the 
universal Church/ (De tHhisjuHs naiurae et gentium gmdibus, 
Mollat, p. 2k) 

The ideaa expreised in thie Freface are to a laiige eitent 
derived from Grotiui, 

Th© doctrine of right, confined by nature within narrow 
limitä, has been immensely exteoded hy the human intel- 
lect \ I am not Biire that, even after so many distinguished 
writers have discussed them, the notions of lUght and 
Justice may be conaidered sufficiently clear. Eight is a 
certain moral power, and obligathn a moral neeossity"- 
New by moral I mean that which is equivalent to 'natural ' 
in a good maa : for as a Roman lawyer admirably says^ 
it is not to be believed that we are capable of doing things 

^ * Medical scienoe is th© acience of th© plßaaant, politii?al seien ce 
ii the Bcieace of th© naeful, etlnc4il science ia the aciü^nce of th& 
just/ Juris ei a^qui eletnenta (MoUat, p, 33)* 

^ * Nothing imposBit>lö ia a duty or^ aä it ia Cömmonly put^ of 
imposaiblü thinga tliere is no Obligation. . . . Everytliing uec^igary 
19 permiseibl© or, aa It eommonly put, necesaity höa no law/ 
Ik d^tiitis «t üliüiti^ [Mollat, p. ga). *K©ceasity is the avoiding of 
miaery/ which is deüned aa * lasting sadnesa * or * that statö in 
which the aggrognte of evils pr^^pouderates ovor the aggregate 
of gooda.' Juris et aequi dßtmnta (MoUat, pp. 32, 33)* 



ON THE NOTIOKS OF EiaHT AJTD JUSTICE 283 



which are contrary to good morala [contra bonos mores] l 
Further, a good man is one who loves all men, so far aa 
reason allows^ Justice \ thm-eforej wbich is the Tirtue* 
governing that digposition of mind [affectus] which the 
Greeks call tfakav^pitima, will, if I miatake notj be most 
fittingly defined as the Charit^ of the tvise man [caritas 
mpientis^]j that ia to say^ charity in obedience to the 

' ^When the ufitiirß of justioo and (as is nccössarily ifiTOlved 
in thiö) the nattire of wisdom and cjiarity h uuder^tood, it 
manifest thab ihüt which to & good man poBäihle, inipoaäible, 
necesaary (if h© wishes to retain the name), is jubt or permiasible, 
tttryiifl^j and final! y, oMigator^ [dßhittirn]. Fot it is not t<y be belieyed 
that we are capable of doiog thinga which are contrsry to good 
morals, and in this e&üsb it may be said that the righi we have 
£>f acting or not aeting ia a certaln power or moral liberty, whilö 
oUiffation is a nec^ssity/ Ik tribus juris naturae d genimm gradibus 
(Mollat, p. 13). 

* * He wkü loves God, that is he who wiae, will love all men, 
but each in proportion as? the tracea of divine virtne in him shine 
out, and in proporfcion aa he hopes to find ia him a tjompanion 
ready and able to promote the common good, or (what comes to 
the aame thing) the glory of God^ the Giver of good thinga,' loc cit 

* The doctrine t>f Right must^ aceord mg lo Leibniz, be deduced 
from definUiona, for the idea, of justice ia et prioH. ^ Since justice 
eonsista in a coriain congruity and proportion, the juat may have 
a meanjng, althongh ther© may neither be any oae who practises 
justice nor any one towards whom it is practised, just ae the ratlos 
of niimbers am true, although there may neither be any one who 
niiml>ers nor anything which iß numbered, and It may be predioted 
of a house that it will be beautiful, of a machine that it will be 
effective, of a Commonwealth that it will b© happy, if it comos into 
ejctsCence, althongli it may never come into existence.* Juris et 
aeqiii d&mmta (Mollat, p. ^24), I have in most place» translated thö 
Word '^jm' by * Right.' Eegarding the ambiguities of those words 
öce E . C . Clark's Fradktü Jurisprudencej ch , 3 and 6. 

* ^ All virtue is the bridling of the desiroa Ic^ccms} so that 
nothing can oppose the commands of right reason/ Juris et aequt 
elemmta (MolUt, p. a6). Cf G, vii. 92 aqq- 

Loibniz givea various loivger definitiona of justice. In a letter 
to Eesner (1709) (Dutens, iv. a6i) h© aays t * Justice is perfeetion 
in accordanco with wisdom, so far as concems a porson's conduct 
in relation to the gooda and illa of other persona/ Again, * Justice 
is nothing but thät which is in conformity with wisdom and 
goodnefifii combined ; the end of goodnösa is the greatsst good, but 



284 ON THE NOTIONS OF BlGHT AND JUSTICE 



dicfÄtes of wisdom Therefore the saying attributed to 
Gameades ^ that justice is supreme folly, becaose it bids us 
attend to the interests of others, neglecting' out own, pro- 
ceedsfrom ignorance of the definition of justice Charity 
m universal benerolence^ and henevolence is the habit of 
loving or esteemmg lamandi swe diUgmäi] ^^ But to lave 

in oi'der to reeoguize it we require wiadom^ which is nothing but 
thü knowlfcdgö of the good. . . . Wisdom is in the xindei:gtandiiig 
and goodtiega in the will. And Justice consequently is in both/ 
Msdiiatim sur la noHon ctmfnuTie dB la justice (Mollat, p. 62). * The 
truö and perfect definition of justice is the habit of loving othor» 
or of taking ploasure in the thought of other people's good, aa often 
aa it comes into consideration/ * Juatico is prudence in bringing 
abotit the good of othera or not bringiüg evil upon tbem for the 
sake of bringmg about oiie*g oivn good (by thus manifesting one'g 
mind), or not bringing eyil npon oneself (that i.Sj for the äa^e of 
galning roward or avoiding piinishmont)/ Juris d aequi elementu 
(Mollat, pp. 33 and 35), Eegarding th© last ^itatement, it shonld. 
be remarked that Leibniz -&aj^ : * God Eimself is the reward,* 

" * , * ,even in those who have not attained to thia wisdom. For, 
setting God apart, the nnyority of thos© who would act in 
accordance with justice in aJl things, even against their own 
intereats, would in fact do what is required by the wise man who 
Ends hiö pleaaur© in the geitoral good, but in eertain casos they 
would not themselTea act aa wise men, not being. sensitive to the 
pleasnre of virtue.' MdäUatitm ^iir la fiotim mnmune d& La Justice 
(MoUat, p, 7S)^ 

* Tho aaying comes from the Epitome of tho Bii^nae Instihitioms 
of LactantiusT *^h, i, Cf, IrLstit v, 14 aad Cicero, De E^p. iii, 33 
(Eitter and Preller, HisL FhiL Grase, 436 and 438). Carneadea 
(about 313^129 B,o.)j a native of Cyrene, was founder of the New 
Academy. In 156 b. c. lie visited Eome aa an ambaaaador from 
Athens and caused mucK astoni&hment by his skill in arguing 
succeasively for and agaiust justice. Cf, Grotius, Be jure heüi et 
pads, Prdegomma^ S 5. 

^° * There eannot be justice without prudenoe, uor can prudence 
be separated from one's own good/ Jurü d c^qui demmta (Mollat, 
p. 26). 

^ 'Thero ar© two ways of deöiring the good of othera, the one 
when we deslre it on aocount of our own good, tlie other when 
w© desire it as il it were our own good, The flrat is the way 
ef him who e&teems, the secoud of him who loves ; the first ia 
the feeliiig of a master to hia servaut, the second that of a falber 
to his Bon'^ the ärat Is th© feeling of a man towarda the tool he 



ON THE NOTIONS OF EIGHT AND JUSTICE 285 



or esteem is to take pleasurö in the happinesa of another, 
or what com es to the same thing, to adopt another's happi- 
ness as oiir own. In tliia way there is solved the difficnlt 
prohlem, wbich is also of great importance in theology^ how 
there can be a disinterested loye [mmr non mercenarius] *S 
a loYe apart from hope and fear and every conBideration 
öf advantage ; the Solution being that the happines-s of 
those iii -wliose happiness we take pleasure beeona.es a part 
of our own happinesa for things which givß us pleasure 
are desired for their own Bäkes And as the very con- 

reqüiröa, the söcond that of friend to friend ; in the firat ease the 
gööd of othors is sought for the salje of somethißg elm, in the 
söcond for ita own sake.* Juris et mqui dem^nta (Müllat, p, 30), 
In thia note the word translated * esteem ' is imtimare, while in 
the test iö düigere, Benevolence ia a efis in the. Aristoteliün 
Bens©j * not an act, but a habit or atrong iuclirtatlon of the raind^ 
which we h&Ye acquired either hy the fortunö of birth, or hy 
a special giffc of God, or by repeated practico/ Ik jutstitia (MoUat, 
37)' 

^ Cf, Mmaddogy^ § 90, not© 143. In the Preface to the second 
part of the Codex Juris Gentium Bi^oiT^atioits, | 10 (Dutöns, iv. 313)1 
Leibniz repUes to those who objected to his Solution on the ground 
that * it is mere perfect to cast onoaelf entirely npon God^ ao a& 
to be moved by Hia will alone und not by one'a own pleasure.' 
This, aaya Jjeibniz, * is contrary to the natura *>f things ; for the 
endeavoiur fco act springB from a tendoney to perfection, the feeling 
of which iö pleasure ; and there is no acfcion or volition otherwise/ 
Cf. a paper on tlie viewa of Föneion (1697) (E. 790 a ; G.n. siB) : 
' We do every thing for our own good^ and it is iniposaible for U3 to 
have other opini^yna^ although we ca.n apeak about othera. But 
ne?erthele»9. we do not yet love quite purely, when we do not 
Beek the good of the loved object for its own aake and because 
it plea^es us in itsel^ bnt because of some adTantage whieU eomea 
to ua from it. But . . , we Beek at once our own good for our own 
sakea and tlio good of the loved object for its own eake, when the 
good of thia object is immediately, finally {tiiiimaio) and by it^If 
Our aim, our pleasure and our good^ as happens with regard to all 
the thinga wliich we deaire because they please ua in themseivea 
and are consequently good in themaelvea without T«gard to conae- 
quences : they are ends, not raeans/ 

^ *The prerogativo of true happineaa is that it iä increaaed by 
the multitude of those who share it.* Dejustitia ;^Mollat, p. 41)- 

" TbU is a convertible etatement. * Everything pleaaant ia 



286 ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT ÄOT> JUSTICE 



templation of beautiful thinga ia pleaeant and a picture. 
bj Eapbael moves him who understands it, although it 
b rings him no gain, so that it beconies dear and delightful 
to him, inspiiing in him something like love ; ao when 
the beautiful thing is al&o capable of happiness, hi8 feeling 
for it passes into real love. But Bimne love^^ excels 
other loves, for God can be loved with the happiest resuit- 
since nothing is happier than Grod and nothing more 
beautiful or more worthy of happiness can he coneeived 
And since Hö possesaes supreme power and wisdom, His 
happiness not only becomes a pai't of ours (if \ve are wiae^ 
that is, if W0 lov© Him) but ©ven constitutea it ^\ Bnt 
since wisdom onght to direet charity^ ^isdom also reqnires 

aought for ita öwn aake, and whatever is sought for ita öwn sake 
\h pleasant. Othor thingE* are gought on account -of what is 
pleasnnt, that they may produco % conlribute to itj or remoT© 
what 19 opposed to it All tnen feel this wLatcvor they may say^ 
or at any rat© thcy do it^ whatever they may feel ' Juris et aeqfui 
t!lemen((i (Mollat, p. 30). 

1* ' We aeek beaatiftil thinga becausö they ar© pleasant, I define 
a beautifnl Ihing as that the contemplation of which is pleaaant,' 
foc, dt (Mollatj p. 3i)< 

^ ' He Tvho finds pleasure in tho oonfccraplation of a beautifiil 
pictnre and wotild Eäuffiör pain if he saw it spoiled, eveti though it 
bolong to another man^ loves it m to gpeak with a dbintereated 
love; but thia m not tbo case with him who thinksi merely of 
making money by Betling dt getting applause by ahowing it, 
without caring whother it is spoilod or not, when it no long&r 
beloDga to him.' Lettre ä Ntcaise (1698) (E* 791 b ; G. ii. 581). Ol Kant, 
Critique q/" Jud^nmt^ Part i. div, i. bk. i. §§ 1-5. 

" i. love for God. 

" 'He Himself is alwaya happy and will never be a cauae of 
grief to U9 through Hia misfortune, nor will He be in need of our 
help. And again, aince He alwaya doea eveiy thing in the tnoat 
roa^onabl© way, w© can act in relation. to Him otherwiae than 
in rolation to thoao who, being earrlod away by tbeir emotiona, 
follow no fixed rnle of conduct and may oven be ofiendod by thosa 
who aro.most auxicjus to honour them. But He is always content 
with a good will and riehly rewards all thinga well don© or 
intended, that ia, all thinga which ar© in harmony with Hla 
preanmptiTe will/ De justitiai 5 (Mollat, p. 38). 

" *Tho happineaa of God oonatitutea . , , the wholö of ours.' 
(E. 790 a 1 G, ii* 57ß.) 



ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 287 



to he delined. Äud I think that the notion men have of 
ii will best be salisfied, if w© say that wisdom is nothing 
but the veiy ecience of happiness So we ar© brought 
back again to the notion of Jia^imsSf which this is not 
the place to explain^. 

Now from this source flows natural Bighi [jm naturm] 
of whieb tbere are tkree degrecs : lÜght in the narrow sense 
\jus stridum] in commutative justice, equitf/ {or cbarity 
in the nai^Tower senae of the word) in distributive Justice % 
"and laatly, pieii^ (or uprigbtness) in universal justice 

" * Wiadom is the seience of tlie bestj as pradenee the scißtiee 
of the gooä/ Specim^ d^smofistrafi^mm polUicarum (1669), p^^p* 38 
(Dutens, iv. 559). 

^Happitiess ig a iai^tiiig state of joy/ Iniiium insHtuHünum juris 
perpetui (Mollafc, p. 4). * Nothing contributes more fco happiness 
than the enlightenmenfc of the understanding and the iiioJination 
of th& will alwaya to act aceording to reason^ and such an enlighten- 
ment is eapecially to b© eought in the knowledge of thos© thijiga 
which can lead our underatanding evor onward to a higlier Jlght ; 
because from this there arisea a eontinual progress in Tviadom and 
Virtue, and consequently in perfeotion and joy, tho fniit of which 
remains with thö soul sveJi after tliia üfe,* Fem rfer Glücksetigkeü 
(E. 672 b ; G, vii. 88> Cf, E, 792 a ; Q. ii. 581. 

These correspond respectively to Aristotle'e §p toT^ trvPoKXay- 
ptaiTt Sikatoi^ or BUaiov Stop&mTutop and hif^ diaytpLTiriKdy BtKawv or Eifcattiv 
Tats Piard^äif. Ethic% 11 30 ''30; v. 4, 1131^27 and 33. Cf. 

P^L iii» 9* * Commutative juetie© has to do with private right, 
distributive with public right/ Zte iribus juHs naiuTite ei gentium 
gradibm (Mollat,, p. 14). Cf, loc, cit.^ p. 17, where they are called 
* right of property, and right of society/ But Aristo tle recognizes 
a ^ catalinctic * or commutative * justice (rä dvrtirfjTovB^-i) distmct; 
(at least aceording to what seenis the best intei-pretation of Eth. v. 
5) both from * oorrective ' juatico (rä ^opSa/riHüv) and * distributiv© * 
justice {to SiajfturjTi/cov)} ' coi rectivö ' and * distributive * justice 
pre-aupposing the e^iFitence of a sfcate (ir(5X(*), while ' eatallaetic ' 
justice is pre-supposed by the stat©. See Prof. Eitcliie *On Ariatotle'a 
äubdivisions of Partieular Justice/ Claasical RevieiPy yHL p. 185, 

^ ^ Wbüe justice is only a partieular virtue, when w© make 
abatraction from God or from a government which imitates f hat 
of Oed j and while this virtu^j thus limited, includes only what la 
caUed commutative and distributive juistice, we may aiiy that m 
aoon &s it is founded upon God or upon the imitatiou of God, It be- 
comes universell jttsiicß and contains all the virtues/ Meäitiitiim aur la 
noHm ctmmuTm de la justice (MoUatj p. 75)- Cf, ir^frOj not© 4a, 



288 ON THE NOTIONS OF EIGHT AND JUSTICE 



Hence come ihe precepta that we should do injury to no 
an©j that we should give each bis own^ that we aboiild 
live viituoiLsly (or rather piously), the universal and 
commonly accepted precepta of Eight [jus] ^* ; as I 
suggeated, when a youth, in my little book Be Methoda 
Juris The preeept of bare Right or MigM in ihe namm 
semc [jus stri€tum\ ia that wo is to he injured^ lest if 
it he within the state, the person should have ground for 
an actio n at law, or if it be without the state^ he should 
haye the right to make war From this there comes 
the justice whicb tbe philosophera call commutaiwe and 
the right whicb Grotius calls right proper [facultas] 

^ The precopts aro given by Ulpian. See JusUyiiani In^UuiiofWSt 
Lib, i. Tit. L 3 (Moyle's ed*, toI. i. p. loo). lü. his J)e iribm JuHs 
naiurae ai genHum gradibus (Mo IIa p, 14), Leibtiiz says that th© fliree 
precepta flow from ^ tlie öuprtjme rule of Riglit,* which is ' to direct 
all thinga to the greater general good/ 

** Methodm mm discendae dix^fffidaeque JuriSprudmiia^ (1667 , || 74-^76 
(DutenSt it. 313), Thia was tho work through which Leibniz 
obtained an introduction to tli© Elector of Mainz. See latroductioni 
Part i. p, 4. 

Grotius diatingui^hes betweon ^ striäum and jm laxiuSt the 
latter heilig moral right. Beptre belli äpams^ ht. i. ch. § 9, 1 and a. 
Cf. pTiMgamena^ § 10. Leibniz holds, m against Hobbea^ that ^ there 
is a right and even a jus stricium before the foundation of the State. 
He who produces li iiüw thing or puts himself in po^s^ssion of an 
alrea^dy ei^isting thing, which no on© "hm alneadj talton posaession 
of, and who cultivates it and fita it for his uae, cannot aa a rule be 
deprived of it without injustice.' MedMim sur la twüm commune de 
la justice (Mollat, p. 78). 

' Against him who knowingly inj u res without necsäsity, there 
la a right of war/ Juris et aequi ekmmta (Mollat, p. The objeet 

of thiö first degreo of Eigbt is the pre&eryation of peace, which does 
not necesaarily aecure happiness biit is an easential condition of 
happineas. * It is an ©vil to a man that there is anothtfr man who 
wishes him ill^ and it ia a good to a man that there is anathor man 
who wishes him well.' Äximnss mprinc^s de droit (Mollat, p. 54). 

^ De juTe belli 6t pacis, bk. L ch. i , § § 5 sqq. Facultas is Jus proprie 
aut stricte dictum. It include« power {poteäas) whether over one's 
aelf (whioh ia liherty), or over another (which ia authority), also 
üwnerahip {dominium), whether füll (as of property), or lesa fall 
(aa of compact, pledgo, ci^dit, to whicb oorresponds debt on the 
other side). Whewell irünü&t^a fctc^tiUas 'jural daim ' in oontrast 



ON THE WOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 28g 

The higher degree I call t^Uy^^ or if you prefer it, 
charity (that is^ in the narrower sense), which I extend 
beyond the ngour of bare Rigbt to those obligatioixe also 
on account of which those to whom we are obliged have 
no ground of action to compel ua to perform thenij such 
as gratitude, pity^ and the things which are said by Grotius 
to Iiave imperfect rtglii [or fitness^ aptiludo] not right 
proper [faeuUas]. And as theprecept of the lowest degree 
was to do injury to no one, 90 that of th© middle degree 
is to do good to everybody ; hui that so far as befits 
each person or so far as each deserves, since we cannot 
equally befriend all men ^\ Therefore to thia place belong 
diMrihutive justice^* and that preeept of Kight [jus] 
which bida us gim to eaeh Ms otou And to this political 
laws in the state are related, laws which hav© to do with 
the happiness of sobjecta and which uBually bring it about 
that those who had only moral claim [aptitudo] acquire 
a jural claim [famlfas]^'^^ that is to say, that thay are 



with 'moral claim' (op^t^«^fo), * Coimmxitative jtiatice * [jüMUia er- 
pkirix) concerna facuttaSf wMlo ' distributive justice ' {jusUHa attri- 
biitrijc) concerna upiit^ido. 

^ Thifl degr©ö of Right preaupposes aome »ort of ^öociety* or 
social Arrangement among men» There maybe such a * !M>cieity' in 
whicli the first degree of Right is alone recognized, but it cannot 
be a happy state, for there mnst be ^ perpetual quarr eis' in itj and 
thus the higher degree of Right comeg to bo recognized* De tribtts 
juris nattirae ei g^tmm gradihm (Mollat^ pp, 17 aqq.). 

" * Do not do to ot]i*?rs wEat you do not wish to be done to your- 
»elf, and do net dmij to othera whatyou wißh to be don© to yourself 
It ia the rule of reason, and it ia our LoTd'ö rule. Put yourself in 
the place of others and you will bo at the trae point of view for 
judging what ia just or not.' MidiMion mr la miion mnmum <fe ia 
justice {Molbii, p. 70). 
See not« 4. 

^ *In whieh I include contributiiie justice/ that is, not merely 
the giving to each hia due, btit the promoting of the common good 
»nd the averting of the common evil. De tribw juris nai\era$ et geräium 
gradibus (Mollat, p. 16), 

" The diffcrent degr&es of Right are mercly degrees^ not absolute 
djTisions, and thus on© pasaea into another, Thua to reftise to give 
a man Mb dae ig to injure him, for *■ the abäenc© of good ia an ©vil 

n 




2gO ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AND JUSTICE 



enabled to demand wbat it is fair that others should give, 
But while in the lowest degree of Eight no regard was 
paid to the differences among men (except to tbose whidi 
arise from the particular matter in band), and all men 
were regarded as equal, now in this higher degree merits 
ar© weighed, and hence privileges^ rewards and punish- 
ments appear Xenophon has cleverly represented thb 
difference in the degrees of Kight by the case of theyoung 
boy Cyrus who was chosen to decide between two boys 
the strenger of whom had forcibly exehauged elotbea with 
the otber, because he bad found that the other boy's gown. 
fitted liim better, while his own fitted tbe otber boy 
better. Cyrus decided in favour of the robber; but bis 
tutor pointed out to bim that the question here was not 
whom tbe gown fitted but wbose it was, and that some 
day he would more rightly make uaa of tbia way of judg- 
ing wben he himself had gowns to distribute. For ©quity 

and the abaenoo of efvil is a good.' (Mollat, p, 70*) Thus * Öiegover' 
nqrs of societie^ and oertain magistrates ar© obliged not only to 
prevent evil but aLsö to promote good/ (Mol lat, p. 68,) * TJie acience 
of the just and that of the usoful, that is, th& s<iienc& of public and 
that of privatö good are mufcually involvedi and it Is not Qmy for 
imy one to b© happy in the midst of tho miflorabl©.* Juris et &Bgui 
dmtenia (Mollat, p. 23). 

" Regarding the lowest degreo of right, Leibniz saya : * Thia is 
that equality which is commonly call^d arithm&Hcal^ that all are so 
far 3*iegai*ded as having the same merit, and, no aceount of pem^ns 
beSng taken, ©ach receivea juat as muqh a?t he gave iip/ De trüms 
juris 7iaturae et gentium gradtbus (Mollat, p* 15). * The distHbution of 
goods aud evila is often made in proportion to people's virtuos and 
inei-its, or vices and faults, and this 10 callod geotnetrical equality, 
because in this very inoquality an equality of ratios is observed, 30 
that unequal fchings rtq given to unequal porsons, the same pro- 
portion being Icept betweon the fchmga given as there is between 
the persons/ loc. dL, p, 16. Tl>e distinction and the namos ai-e due 
to Ariatotle, ülthough LeibniZ'S application of them is somewhat 
different» Cf. Ethics^ v. 3, 1131*^ 1^ sqq. and v. 4, 35 sqq. See 

also Plato, Latcs, bk, vi. 757 a sqq., and Grotitia, Jk jure heUi üt pftcts^ 
bk» i, eh. § 8» a. 

C^opaedia, bk, i. ch- 3, 17. The storj is quoted by Qrotiit& 
bk. i. ch. I; I 3. 



ON THE KOTIONS OF RIGHT AITD JUSTICE 29! 



itself leads us in busmess to act upon Eight in the narrow 
sense [ju^ stridum], that is, the equality of menj unless 
when a weighty reason of greater good requires us to 
epart from it^. Moreover, what is called respeet of 
persons has place, not in the exchanging of gooda with 
others, but in the distributing of our own goods or those 
of the public, 

I hav6 called the highest degree of Rigbt by the name 
of uprightness or itither pktp^'^. For what has been aaid 
so far may be understood in such a way as to be limited 
to the relations of a moital lifa And indeed bare Eight 
or Bight in the narrow aense {jus strictum] has its aource 
iji the need of keeping the peac© ; equity or charity 

^ * It i& not allowflbl© to tak© from the rieh their gooda in order 
to aupply the poor with. them- , , , Beeatig© th© disordor whieh 
would SLtim from thia woiild cau»6 more ©vil and inconTenieace in 
general than tho special inconvenience the prefieiit sitato of 
thinga. . , . Thua the atatc should maintam individusla in iheiv 
poa&i^siong, Yet it may make a tolerable breaeh in them for tUe 
iM>inmon sdcurity, and eveii for a great common goo<l* Meditaiion 
mir it}, notlüti commune de lajmtke (Mollat^ 81). 

^The third principle of Right the will nf a F^uperior. . . . But 
the super lor ia ei the r auperior hy nflture, aa God ia : and His will 
again ia eithtr natural, henöe pidy^ or law, henc© positive Divine 
Eight ; or the superior i^ superior by agreement [jJticiHm], aa a man 
is ; hence civil Right. Piety therefore is the Ihird degree of natural 
Kightt and it gives porfcetion and effect to the others, For God, 
since He Ig oroniacient and wiae, confimia bare right and ©quity ■ 
and^ aince He is omnipotimt» He carrii^s them out* Heuee the 
advantage of the human raeCj and indeed the heauty and harmony 
of tho World, comcido with tho Divine will/ ^fäHüdus Nitva, kf^. 
(1667), § 76 (Dutens, iv, 214), Elsewhere Leibniz argues that 
there must be a higher degree of right than mere equity, for 
* God ia snpremely just and supremely good,* and ihn juatic© of 
God differs not in kind but in degree from the justice of man. 
' But it ia not for hia ease nor in order to keep the peace with us, 
that Ood öhows us so much goodneas ; for we coulii not make war 
upon Hirn* What, theo, will be the principle of Hia justice and 
what will be its rule ? It will not b© that ©quity or that ©quality, 
which has place among men* * , . We cannot regard God as having 
any other motiv© than p©rfection/ MediüUim sur la notion commune 
d6 laju^e tMollat, p. 7a). 

U 3 



2g2 ON THE NOTIONS OF HIGHT ÄND JUSTICE 

strives after something more, to wii that wM© each to 
other does as niuch good as possible, ©ach may increase 
his own happiiiess through that of otbers ■ and, to put it 
in a wordj Eight in the narrow sense [jus sirkimn] avoids 
miöery, Righi in the higher sense [jus mperius] tends to 
happiness^ bnt of such a kind as falls to Our mortal lot. 
But that we ought to subordinate life itself and whatever 
makes life desirable to the great good of others so that it 
behovea ns to bear patiently the greatest paina for the sak« 
of others ^\ this is beautifully inculeated hy philoaophers 
rather than thoroughly proved hy them, For the moral 
dignity and glory and our mnVs feoling of joy on account 
of virtue, to which phüosophers appeal under the name 
of rectitude, are certainly good things of th ought or of the 
mind, and are indeed great goods, hut not such aa to pre- 
vail with all men nor to overcome all the sharpness of 
evilsj si nee all men are not equaUy moved hy imagination ; 
especially those who have not heeome accustomed to th« 
th ought of honoui' or to the appreciation of the good 
thingg of the soul, either through a liberal education, or 
a noble way of livingj or the discipline of life or of method. 
But in Order that it may be eoncluded hy a universal 
demonstration that everything honourable is beneficial 
[ömm honestum utik] and that everything base is hurtful 
[omne tufpe damnosum]^°f we must asaume the immor- 

^ *Tlie principles of charifcy are abnegation of seif, esteem of 
othem' TabiUa^ duae dist^inae ßjtrisj (MolUt, p. * Love fiaels 
not the wounda which it auffersj but thoso which it makes/ he. eiL 
p, 12. *Amöng true frienda all thing^ are common, eren to 
raiaery/ Juris et aegui elemenia (Mollat^ p. 33)» 

^ ' If you had listened vory attentively to Cicero declaiming on 
behalf of rectitude as again^t pleasuro, 70U would have heaj^ Mm 
magnificently perorat« about the beauty of virtue, th© deformity 
of base things, about a conscience at peAce with itself in fche depth 
of a rejoieiag soul, about the good of an nntamished reputation^ 
about an immortal name and the ezultation of glory/ Juris ?r 
aegui elementa (Mollat, p. 30), 

In hia Initium insHtiäimvm Juris perpdui (Moilat^ p. 4) Leibtiiz, 
iising a äimilar expreaaion, adda : ^ And moral qualitiea &re tumed 
into naturaL' Cf. MomditJcg^j §5 88-90. 



ON THE NOTIONS OF RIGHT AXD JUSTICE 293 



taHty of th© soiü*^ and the Euler of the univerae, Göd 
Thus it is that wö thmk of all men as living in the most 
perfect City [cwitüs] *^ linder a Monarch who on account 
of His wiadom canoot be deceived [falH] and on account 
of His power caunot he avoided ** ; and a Monarch who ia 
also so loveable that it is happiness to serve such a mastor, 
Therefore he who spends his soul for Hini gains it^ as^ 
Christ teaches *'\ By His power and providence it comes 
to pasa that every right passes into fact [omne jus in 
factum tmmeat] *\ that no one is injured except by him- 

*^ If the mul wer© not immortAl, Leibniz thinkjä it would be im* 
poä&lble for even a wise man to havö a eufficient regard for hm 
own Perfektion. (Mollat, p, ar.) To a aimiJar offet^t ht) writeB 
against tlie yiew of Puffendorf, of whom he had a very poor 
opmian. H© ia not tnueh of a lawyer and very Iifctle of a 
philosopher/ Butens, iv. 261.) Piiffeudorf limited natural riglit 
tu externa] lawa and rtgardcd all virtuea or moral qualitiea a« 
basüd on principlüs not of reason but of mvölation, See Montta 
quaedam ad Samu^Us Pußs:ndßrßi prindpia (Duteua^ iw. 375 sqq., and 

*- Grotiua held that ' there would be aeertain natural Obligation » 
even it it were granted (which it caunot bo) that tlierö La no God." 
Jk jure bdli ci pam, Proiegomsnaj | 1 1 , ^ It ia tme that Aristotle 
T«cognized tliis universal justice, although he did not näfer it to 
Grod, and I think it admirable in him to have had, nev^rthelessj 
HO high an idea of it. But thia ia duc to the fact that for him 
a well-constituted gOTornment or ätate takes tlie place of God aa 
regards earthly thiuga^ and auch a government wiil do what it can 
to Gompel man to be virtuous.* Meditation jwr kt noHon commune de 
Ja just ice (MoUatj 76). 

^Findingj as I do, the prineiple of juatice in thegood, Aristotle 
takea as the rule of expediency iDonvename} the best, that is to aay, 
what would be espedient for the best govemment {quod (jptmiae 
reipuMica^ cmvenirei)^ so that, according to this autbor, natural 
right is that which i:^ most e^ipedient for order/ loc. cü. i^Mollat, 
pt 80). et Mo/iadoiö^f § 85. 

* So that the honourable and the advantageoua are the Barne, 
and no sin is without punishment^ no noble deed is in vain or 
goes without rewardj ^Mollat. p, 96,) Cf. Monadology, § 90, 

*^ Bt Luke^ Ix. 24 ; xvü. 33 ; St. John, xii. 25. 

" When j>ower is coBabLned with wisdom and goodneijks *it 
makea right toecome fact^ so that what ought to be really eiista, in 
so far as the nature of thinga allowg. And thia Is what God doea 



294 ™^ NOTIONS OF EIGHT AND JUSTICE 



seif", that nothing done rightly is without a reward and no 
I sin witbout a punishment. Foi\ as Christ diTinely taughti 
all our haira ar€ numbered, and not even a draught of 
water is given in yain to one who thirsts^ and thus nothing' 
is disregarded in the Commonwealth of the universe ^^ 
It is on this aceonnt that justice is called unwcrsal and 
comprehends all other virtues for things which other- 
wise do not seem to concern any on© eise, as for instance 
whether we abnse onr own body or our own property, and 
which are beyond the ränge of human laws^ are neTerthe- 
less forbidden by the law of nature [jus naturale] ^% that 
isj by the etemal laws of the Divine Monarch y, sine© w© 
owe ourselves and all that is ours to God For as it is 
of importance to a conunonwealth so much more is it 
to the universe, that no one should make a bad uee of 
that which is bis own Accordingly from this is derived 

[ in the World,' Meditation sttr la notion commune de Ja Justiz (Mol tat, 

6]3). Cf, Monadd^u, I 55' 

^ The immortal bouI, espotied to no injuriee escept from it&elf, 
IS aiwaya in the hand and koeping of God^ and Christ has divinely 
bidden US not to fear thos© who can kill the bodj but caunot harm 
th© souL' Deju^tia (MoUat, p* 40), 

*^ ^ If a draught of cold water haa ifcs reward^ what will those 
receive^ who have don© somöthing great in human affairs for tht^ 
glory of God and the common good, aeeing that those who bring 
many to righteougness [^ustüia] shall shin© aa tlie Btarst/ De tribm 
Juris naUtrae d gentium gradibtis (Mollat, p, ao). Cf* G. iv. 463, 463. 

" Cf, Aristotle, FAhks, i, i i30» 8. 

^ Right [jus] c^nnot be unjust t that would be a eontradiction. 
But law [ier] may be. For it is power that ordains and upholds 
law ; and if this power is lackiug in wisdom or goodwUlj it may 
ordain and uphold very wicked laws. But happily for the universe, 
the lawB of God are always just^ and Ho is in a position to uphold 
them, as He undouhtedlydoes, although He does not al ways visihly 
and immediately do so, for which He haa doubtless escellent 
reasons*' Medüatiön mr la noiicfn tommum de lajustiEe (MoUat, p. 61), 

*i * were not bom merely for oursei vea, hufc others claim for 
them Balves a part of us, aud God the whole/ Mmita ad Pafendorßi 
prindpia, § 5 (Dutena^ iv. aSi)* ' Qtiiequid sumus Dei mmus * (Mollat, 

* Salus publica suprema fejc e$i * (MoUat, p. 3). 
^ *ror when we are Ticiou% we not ouly injure onrselTea, but 



ON THE NOTIONS OF EIGHT AND JUSTICE 295 



tlie forc6 of that highest preeept of Eight, which bids us 
live virtuomli/ (that piously). And in this Sönse learned 
men have rightly put it down among tlnngs to be desired, 
that natural law and the law of nations [jus natume et 
gefitmm] should be formulated in ac^3o^dance wiüi the 
doctrines of Christianity^ that is (according to the teach- 
ing of Christ) ra dt^tyrc/ja ^\ the sublime things^ the divine 
things of the wisö. Thus I think I have very fitly 
©splained the three precepts of Bight or three degrees of 
justice, and have pointed out the sources of natural law. 

Besidea the eternal rights of a rational nature which 
flow from th© Divine Source, there is also observed a 
voluntary Mi^ht, derived from customs or made by a 
superior. And indeed in the Commonwealth civil Right 
receives its force from him who has the supreme power ; 

w€ alao flimLaiahl in so f^r aa it depends upon ua, th« perf^otiort 
of the gr&at common wöalth, of which God is the Monarch.' 
Mdditatim sur la mticn commune d& laJmtiG$ (MoUat, p. 76). 

** Po&gibly Leibniz is tMnking of 17 Sj/ßiütv atf^a (St. Jamoä^ iiL 
iSj 17). Ijeibniz seems himseJf to have intended to siipplj the 
want to w]iich he here refers, for ho akotched the outline of 
a book on the auhject, which ia printed Mollat(pp, Bsqq,), under 
the title Tabulae dme disdptime juris naturae et gentium Eecundum 
dücipHnam Chrvitian&mm. In this he rofors to St, James as ^ ealling 
charity vöjuos ßaiTiAiic6sj the royal law (oh* ü 8)^ inaamiich a& it 
Cornea from the supremo King (St. Paul, Romans^ i, 3a, ^SiwatV^a toü 
Öf&ü),' ^MoUat, p. XI.) 

^ While admitfcingr a right of this kind aa distinct from natural 
right, Leibniz maintains that tho two ought always to be in 
harmony. He thua condemns the view of Hobbes, that th© baaiB 
of right ia power, which he identifies with the viewof Thrasymaohna 
in Plato'a B^Uit, bk, t (a«e Mollat, p. 57 sqq.). Cf. Portrait 
du Prince (Klopp, iv. 461) : * As the order of Statoa is established 
on the authority of thoae who govern them and on the dependonce 
of their peopl69, natura which dost in 09 men for civil life endows 
thom at birth with diffoi-ent qualitiea, some for commanding, 
othera for obeying, in order that the power of tho aovoreign in 
a roonarchy and tho inequality between thoae who coramand and 
thoae who ohey in a republic, be no leaa founded on nature than 
on law, on Tirtue than on fortune. So princea oiight to be above 
their subjecta by their virtue and their natural qnalities, they 
are above them by the authority which the Iäwb giv© them, in 



296 ON THE NOTIONS OF RIÖHT AND JUSTICE 

outside of the commonwaaJth or among those wlio are 
sharers in supreme power (of "whom there are sometimes 
several even in the same Commonwealth) there is the 
sphere of the voluniar^ law of nations, aceepted by the 
tacit consent of the peoplea , » , 

But ChrxBtians have also another common bond^ namely 
the positive Bivim law [p^s] whieh is contained in the sacred 
booka To which are to be added the sacred e^nona 
received by the whole Chui-ch and afterwarde in the West 
the Papal law [^res\ to which kings and peoples submit 
themselves. And in general (and certainly not against 
reason) it seems for a long time to have been aecepted, 
before the schism of last Century, that there should be 
understood to be a certain general Commonwealth of the 
Christian nationa, the heads of which were in öacred 
things the Pope [Foniifex Maximus] and in temporal 
things the Emperor of the Romans^ who also seemed to 
retain so much of the law of the old Eoman monarchy 
aö was needed for the common good of Christendom, 
without prejudiee to tho Kight of kings and the liberty 
of princes. 

Order to r&ign both by natural light and hy ciyil right, like the 
iirgt kings in the wodd, wbo haying been raised to the govenment 
of tbeir pöoplea by their vMue Jind their inUllectual giffcs, com- 
maaded much by nature as by law^ by merit by fortun«,' 



NEW SYSTEM OF THE NÄTUEE OF SUB- 
STANCES AND OF THE COMMUNIGATION » 
BETWEEN THEM, AS WELL AS OF THE 
UNION THEBE IS BETWEEN SOUL AND 
BODY K 1Ö95. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

In this paper, whicli appeared anonym ously in fehe Journal 
des Samnts of June, 1695, we have Leibniz's first public State- 
ment of kiB New System (aee Introduction, Part i. p. 12). In 
chamcter it ia mnch more tentative than bis later writinga^ 
and it is onlj towards tbe end of tbe paper (§ 17} tbat he 
ventures to speak of bis view as 'more than a hypothesia/ 
Thia is vety cbaracteriBtic of Leibniz i be likes to advance by 
Suggestion and hypotbeais. But he regards bjpotbeais as 
merely a steppin g-stone : he will not rest there if it ia possible 
to go farther. * In matters where certainty can be obtained, 
I will not uae bypotheaes,' he says to Bernouilli (G. Matb. iii. 
575). And nearly twenty yeara after he pnblisbed the New 
System^ Leibnia writea of * tbia byijothesisj wbich I venture to 
call proved ^ (MQuadology, § 59). Tbua the peeuliar intereat of 
the New System ia tbat it lets us aee something of Leibniz's 
philosopby in the making, For in tbia work be writea biatari- 
cally, indicatiug to m tbe cour^e which bis thought tüok. 

Tbe New System may be divided into two main parts, in tbe 
firat of which (§§ i-n inclusive) Leibniz abows us how he was 

^ i. ©. inter-relation or interact jon. 

' The titla in the First Dmft Is New spätem for capbtmng the fuxture 
0/ sfubstam^ and thmr comm»mo»^on with on& uTiöther^ as udi as the unmi 
&/ SMcI with body. 



298 



NEW SYSTEM 



led to re-introduce into pMlofiophy the * stibatantial fomis' 
of the Seholasties^ and in what senae tiese forms, bouIi, aimple 
aubstances or real Mniin are to be understood ; while in the 
second (§§ i2-iS) he appliea his theory of substance to the 
question of the relation betweeii bouI and body, mind and 
matter^ and finds tbat the problem can be satisfactorily solved 
only throiigh the hypotbesis of a pre-establiahed harmonj 
between all simple eubstances. Änalyaing the title of the 
paperj we may eay that the first part deals with the natut^e 
of substances and the second with their communimtion. 

Erdmann (E. 124 sqq.) gives the New Stfstem it wag origin- 
ally publitshed. Gerhardt (0, iv. 477 aqq,) gives it as it was 
afterwar ds revised and alte red by Leibniz, and he also prints 
an interestiag^ Firsfc Draft of it. 1 have translated from 
Gerhardt 's text, indicating ita differonces from Erdmann'' a ; 
and in the notes will be found some passages from the First 
Draft. The paragrapbs are numbered in E. ; bat not in 

I, Several years ago I eonceived this syatem and had 
Communications ab out it with leamed men, especially 
with one of the great^st theologiana and philosophers of 
our time^, who, having been informed of some of my 
opinions by & parson of the highest rank*, had found 
them yeiy paradoxical % But having received explana- 
tions from me, he withdrew what he had said in the 

^ * Mona, Arnauld,* Note by Leibniz^ who töila tia also ih&t witli 
regard to his A^e«? Systsm he ^foUowed the mle of Horace : mnumque 
prBmatur in annum ' (G, iv. 490). Thero iä an infctäresting aocount 
of AxujLiild and hin frienda in Sbepheji's Essays in EcclBsiasti&ü 
Biograpkt/f rol. if Essay yJj The Pürt-Royalüta. 

' liandgraf Erneat of Hessse-Rheinfels (1623^1693)^ who in 165a, 
ahortly after thö close of the ThLrfcy Years' War^ becam© a Roman 
Catholic and published a justlfication of the cours« he bftd taiien, 
A eopy of thia work ho ^ni to tho Duke of Brunswick, and he 
thus eame into communication with Leibniz. They kept up 
a oorreapondence on thoological and ©eelosiastical aubjects nntil 
the death of the Landgraf in 1693, 

^ ArnanM writes to the Landgraf : — ^ I find in these thoiightst 
«o many thinga whioh alarm me and at whic;h almost all men, 
if I am not miatakenf will bo so shocked^ that I do not see 
what u&e there could be in a writing which apparently will be 
rejected by eveiybody * (Ö. il. 15), Leibnie feit this very keenly ; 
but Arnauld made ample oxplanations and apologies in a letter tQ 
Leibniz himself, (6. ii. 35. J 



WEW SYSTEM 



most ganemuB and exemplary way ; and having approved 
a number of my propositionSj he praatermitied bis cen- 
BUTG as regarda the others, to whicb he was BtiU unable 
to agree. Since that time I have eontinued my medi- 
tationSj m I had opportunity, in order that I might give 
to the public only well-tested opinions, and I have also 
endeavoured to meet the objections raised agamst my 
essays on Dynamics, which bave some connexion with 
tbis*. And in short^ as some people of conaideration 
have desired to see my opinions ' more elucidated, I have 
ventured upon thes6 meditations, although Üiey are by no 
meanö populär nor such as to be relished by every kind 
of mind* I have been led to this mainly m order that 
I may proiit by the judgment of those who are m- 
lightened in these matters j since it would be too trouble- 
some a task to seek out and call to my aid individually 
those who might be disposed to givo m© suggestions, 
wbich I shall always be glad to receive, provided they 
are marked by a love of truth rather than by a passion for 
pre<ionceived opinions ^ 

2, Although I am one of those who have worked niuch 
at mathomatics, I have none tbe less meditated upon 
philogophy from my youth up ; for it always seemed to 
me that there was a possibüity [mo^ew] of establishing 
something solid in philosophy by clear demonstrations, 
I had penetrated far into the country of the Sebolasties, 
wben mathematics and modern autbors brougbt me out 
ögam, wbüe I was still quite young. The beauty of 
their mechanical explanations of nature cbarmed me, 

* Leibniz's principal ee&ay on Dynamioa ia the Spedrfien I>^na~ 
•micurn^ publialied in th© Acta Eruditontm for April, 1695. (G, Math, 
vi- ^234.) 

' The Firat Draft has in addition the worda ; 'Which they 
thihk may hö uaeful in harmonbsing faith with reason as r&gards 
mattere of importanoe,* 

* *I deaire objections to be made agaijiBt me, which oblij^e me 
to gü beyoiid what I have ali^ady aaid. Objectiona of this kind 
are insitructive and I like them becau^e I may profit by them 
and make others profit by them ; but it ia not easy to uiake thein.' 
lettre ä Masson (17 16) (G. ri, 6ag). 



300 



NEW SYSTEM 



and I rightly contemned the method of those who make 
use only of forme and faculties^ from which we learn 
nothing^ But afterwards, bavmg tried to go deeply 
into meckanical principleB themselves, in order to find 
a reaeon for the laws of natura which esperience makes 
known, I perceived that the mere consideration of an 
mtmded mass is not sufficient and that um must also b© 
made of the notion of forcey which is vei*y intelligible, 
though it belongs to the spbere of metaphysies It 
appeared to me also that the view of thoae who trans- 
form or degrade the lower animals iiito mere niachines, 
although it seems possible, ia improbable and indeed ia 
contrary to the order of thinga, 

3. At firat, when I bad freed myself from the yoke 
of Aiistotle, I took to the void and the atoms^ for that 
is the view which best satisfies the imagination, But 
ha Ving got over this, I perceived, after miich meditor 
tion, that it is impossible to find the princijp'les of a real 
unity in matter alone, or in that which is only passive, 
since it is nothing but a eollection or aggregation of parts 
ad infinHum^^. Now a multiplicity [muliitude] can derive 
tts reality only from genuine units [unites] which come 
from elsewhere and are quite other than the mathematical 
püints which üxe only extremities of the extended and 

^ See Introduction, Part i* p. 3i and Part iv. p. 156. 

The meauiag in that, although fotvö is not anythiiig that 
can bö pictured or r^presented in iraaginatioitj it can nevertheless 
be quite weU ander&tood. The notion of force ia *■ metaphyaical/ 
because force is not merely a phydeal thing that can be perceived 
in the same way iia other phyeicai things» For insitance, 
can und erstand, but we CÄnnot perceive, th© potontial Goergy 
of a nia!^. In the First Draft, LelbnJz aays ; * By force or power 
[pui^7ice] I do not mean the power [pomoir] or mere faculty, 
which iB nothing but a nt^ar po&sibility of acting and whicbj being 
aa it wene dead, nevar produjces an action without beiug stimulated 
from without j but I mean aoinething between power to act [pttuvoir] 
and action, somothing which includes an effort, an actnal working 
[acfe], an entelechy, for force passe» of itself into actieUj in ao far 
im nothing hindere it. Whereforö I rcgard force as conatltutive 
of subätance, since it ia tbe aource [principe] of action, which is 
the characteristic of substance^ (G. iv. 473). 

Cf. Intreduction^ Part ii, p, 23, 



NEW SYSTEM 



301 



madifications^^ of which it ia certain that the conttnuom 
[cQniinuuni] cannot be composed Accordingly^ in order 
to find these real units [unites] I was constraiiied to have 
recourse to a real and animated point^ so to apeak^ or to an 
atom of substance whicb must contain iome kind of form 
or active prlnciplo, so as to makö a completo being It 
wm, then^ necessary to recall and^ as it were, to rehabili- 
tate the mhstantlal forms which are so mach decried 
now-a-days, but in a way whieh renders them intelligible 
and separates the use to which they should be put froni 
th© abuse which they have stiifered, I found, tben, 
that the nature of the subatantial forma consista in forc«, 
and that from thia follows something analogous to feeling 
[sentiment] and deeire [aj^etit] ; and that thns they must 
be conceived after the manner of the notion we have of 
Söuls ^\ Eut as the soul ought not to be uaed to eJtplain 
in detail the stmcture of the animaJ'B body, I held that 
similarly theae forma must not be uaed to solve the par- 
ticular problems of nature, although they are neeea-sary 
for establiahing tnie generai principles Aristotle calls 
them first mklechm. I call them (in a way that may 

Thftfc ia, not indopondent beinga, but proper ties or relationa, 
lÜt© the two enda of a stick. 

E. reads : * quit© other than the pointB of which it ia cer- 
tain / &o. See Prefatory Note. 

** E, reada: *I was constmned to liaTö roiKitifse to a fomial 
atom^ since a material being cannot be at once mat^rial and 
perfectly indiviaible or posssesaed of a genuine unity/ 

^* SuhstantM forras m distinct from accidentid forma, thct former 
being used io explßin subatances^ the latter to explain tbeir 
accidents, 

The transition from point to poinfc is here rather rapid. The 
analogy between dc«ir6 and forc© ie manifest, but that between 
feoling and foroe ia more ot^curep The easenco of feeling, accord- 
ing to Leibnii, i& not consciousness but the representation er 
eoneentration of many in one ; and aimilarly fche manifold actione 
of any subatance are * enveloped * or potentijjUy contained in its 
force or vit&l principl©. Ct MonafI(^kigyy §§ 13 sgqq, 

"In the First Draft^ Leibniz saya t * In my opinion everythlng 
in naturo takes place mechanieally, and to giv© an exact and 
complete eicplanation of any particular phenomenon (auch, for 
instanee^ a:9 weight or elasticity), netMng but figur© and motion 
need be used * (G. iv. 47a.) 



302 



IffEW SYSTEM 



perhaps be more easily anders tood) primaT^ fürc€S^\ 
whieh contain not only aduality {Vacte] or the comple- 
ment of possibility^ but also an original miiüity, 

4< I saw thai those formis and iliose bouIb, aa well as 
onr mind [<?spri^], ougbt to be indiviaible, and in fmi 
1 remembei^ that tbis was tbe opinion of St, Thomas 
with regard to tbe soulä of tbe lower animals^** But 
this truth renewed tbe great difficulty about the origin 
and the duration of aoiila and forms. For, as ©very 
smple^^ mibstame which has a genuin© unity can have 
a beginn! ng and an ©nd only by miracle, it followss that 
tbey can com© into being only by creation and com© to 
an end only by annibilation ^. Thus I was obliged to 
recognize that {with tbe exception of the souls which 
God still intends specially to create) the constitutive 
forma of substances must have been ereated with the 
World and must always continue to exist®^. So aome of 
tbe Scbolastiesy like Albertus Magnus and John Bacon, 
had an inkling of part of the truth regarding the origin 
of these forms^*. And all this ought not to appear ex- 

^To distinguish it from tbe aecandary, wLicli is called movmg 
force, and whicli m an ai^cidental Umitation or Variation of pritnary 
force/ Fiist Draft {Q. iv. 473). 

PoBsibly Leibniz refers to tho passage in which Aquinaa 
saya; *The aubstantial form, which reqiiires diversity in th© 
pa^ti^ for instante tbe soui and öapöciftlly the sotil of complete 
animals, dooa not stand in exaetly the samo relation to tho wholö 
and to the parta. And henee it is not divided p^r (icddsns^ that 
is to say, by a quantitative division/ Summa TheaL i. qu* 76, 
arfc, 8. Elsewhere, however^ Äquinas says : ' Tho sensitive sonl 
in tbe lower animalB ia eorniptible ; bnt in man, since it is th© 
same in aubatance as th© rational aoul, it ia incorruptible/ IM 
Animaj art, 14 ad primum. 

^ Janet roadö cetk muveatädf ' this new viow,' instefld of cdt^ terite^ 
■^^ E. omita * simple/ 

" The First Draft has an addition the words : * br ought &bout 
flxpresaly by the aupreme power of God ^ {Q. iv» 474)» 

^ Cf, Frinciples &/ Nahtre and 0/ Ürace, | 6 ; Monadolomt §5 4? 5» 6, 
and 76. The First DrafI haa t * genuine unity is absolutoly in- 
diaaoluhle ' (G. iv, 474). 

Ot Monadohcfyj note ri6. Tho atatöment of Leibniz is so 
vague that on© can hardly fix the pasaage in Alber iua Magnus 
of whieh he ia thinking. In hm Summa rfe Creaiwi^ (part ii. qu, 16, 
art. 3), Albertus Magnus says ; * We hold that th© souIh of the 



KEW SYSTEM 



traordinaryj for wa are only attributing to forms the 
duration which the GassendistB ^ aceord to their atoms. 

5. Keverthelesö I held that we must not include 
among theae, without distinction {or confoimd with 
other forma or souls^*)^ minds [e^rits] or rational aouls, 
■wMch are of a higher rardt and have incomparahly more 
perfection thau those forms which ar© suiik in matter, 
which in my opinion are to be foiind everywhere and 

lower ammala and planti are eduo^d from the matter of the aoed 
through generation. Bat; if it be asked whether thöy are in the 
sBiid or Dotj we my that they are there in one way, and in an other 
way they are not. , . . They are not there actually [actu], but thoy 
are there in th© pofcßncy [poteniia] of the efficient cause and the 
matter [eßicimtts $i materiae]. And if it be aaked : What tbia 
efficient cause ? la it the sonl or not? We say , . . that it is not 
the sotil, . 4 J üf. De AnMcdibus (xvi, 1 1) ; • The principle of life 
ia in the seed in the way in which the act iö in the instrumentfi 
üf the act. . . . And in this way alao the aoul ia in tbo scod like an 
act and not like the ontölechy of an organio body. , . * That which 
is in the seed ia sonietbing of the bouI [cdiqiäd ani^nae] and not the 
i^ouL* See al&o De Animc^ bk. i- Tract, 2^ cap. 15: *The sonl ia 
indiviaibleT and nothing can be cut off from it/ John Bacon or 
Baehoj m better known aa John Baconthorp, from the place in 
Norfolk where he was hom towarda the close of the thirteenth 
eentuiy. He was a Carmelite monk and a achoolmanj and in 1339 
he became Provincial of the En gl iah Carmelitea. He lived nmch 
in Oxford and Paria^ where he obtained a great repntafcion for 
learning. Ho was called the Eesolute Doctor, He died in 1346. 
Eeaides a book on the rule of hia order, bis chief work is the 
Ommmiaria seu quaestmus in qmtuoT ftferu^ Sffnt&niiarvm. Leibniz 
probably refera to a passage in thls hook. In 86cundumf Dist xii, 
Qu. I, Art, 3, 5 3, 

^ Pierre Gaasendi (1592^1655), a French priest and a diaciple of 
Baoonv expoiinded the doctrinea of Epicurua and endeavoured to 
adapt them to the conditions of modern tbought Hia attitude 
was both anti-Seholastic and anti-Carteaian. He severely criticized 
Deseartes'a Mediiaiiöna and thus began a long controvergy with 
Descartea regarding the origin of knowledgCj öasaendi taiting 
H purely experiential atandpoint aa againat Deacartea's belief in 
innate ideas. S^e Deacartea^ Meditaimmf Cinquiemes Objßditms (by 
Gaasendi). Gaaaendi himself does not attribute eternity to hia 
atoma, which he regarda as created by God. Tlie apirit of hia 
thinklng ig well expressed in his own worda: ^The ahadow of 
truth which I everywhore pnraue auffices to fiU me with joy. I aay 
*^the shadow," for, as to truth ätsel^ God alene csan know it/ 
lettre ä GöUus. 

^* Thia clauae within bracketa is given by G*, but not by 
" * Which in tn j opinion are to he found evorywhere' ia ^Ten 
by G.j but not by Cf Monadolog^y §§ 65 »qq. 



NEW SYSTEM 



in comparxson with which minds or rational souls are 
like little gods, made in the imag© of God and baving 
within them some ray of the Divine enlightenment 
[lumi^res]. For this reason Gbd gOTems minds [e^its] 
m a prinee go Veras his aubjecte, and indeed as a father 
looks after his children ; while, od the other handj He 
deals with other substances as an engineer works with his 
maehines. Thus minds [e^pn-fo] have special laws which 
put them above the revolutiotts of matter through th© 
very order which God has put in tbem^- ; and it may be 
aaid that evörytbing eise is made only for them, these 
revoluÜons themselves being arranged for the felicity of 
the good and the pimishment of the wicked 

6. However, to retnrn to ordinary forma or matsrial 
souls^^j the duration which must be attributed to them 
{in place of that which used to be attributed to atoma) 
might lead to a doubt wbether they do not go from body 
to body ; which would be Tuefemps^chomSf sometlimg 
almost analogous to the transmission of motion and th© 
tranjamission of species which certain philosophei-s bave 
maintained, But this fancy is very far from the tiatiir© 
of things, There ia no such pasaing^^. And here th© 
transfonnatiom noted by MM. Swamraerdam, Malpigbi, 
and Leuwenhoek who are among the moat excellent 

^ ' Through the very order which God has put in them * ia giyen 
by ö., but not by E, 

Cf. MonaMogy, S§ 83, 84, 8g. 

^ E. has ämes maisrkäea while G. haa dmes fortstes, Leibniz prob- 
&hlj wi*ote brutes in Order t<i avoid the ambiguity of the other 
expree^sioiit which eeems to sugg^at that öome soula ar© ' material/ 
while Leibuiz, of courae, holdfl that all are MmmateriaL* By 
material or bmte soul» ' h© meana th© bouIs which are * mmk 
in mAtter' (| 5^ i.e. unconacioua aoula^ in which maibe^ üi a 
phmofnenöft ia bem fund^itum. 

" Le. transferenee of quality from on© body to an other, aa 
when th© quality of tho leavon ia imparted to the wbqle lunap 
or th© red colour of a drop of wine w diffused through out water. 
Cf. Momäologift noie ro, 

^ The Firöt Dri^ft aaya : * Thia transtuigration of souls ia aq 
abflurdity. The priuciplea of 8ub3taD.ce do not fluttar outaide of 
subatanees ' (G. iv. 474J* 

^ Th© r^fermm is to rach change» aa that from caterpillar to 



TTEW SYSTEM 



observers of our time, bav© eome to my aid and have 
led me the more readily to adniit that no animal nor any 
other organic s ubstance com es iiito existenee at th e tim© 
at wliich we think it doesj and that ita apparent genera- 
tlon is only a dövalopment and a kind of growth [aug- 
mefdation]. I bave noticed also that the author of the 
EGCherche de la VmU^\ Regia M. Hartsoeker 

bufcterfly. *God hfi£i prefoi-med things, so that new organisms are 
tiothing but ft mechanicfll tons^quönce of a preceding organic 
üonatitution ; wben butterflies com© from fiiJkworms^ whick 
M. Swamiuerdam liaa shown to be merely a procea« of d^velop- 
ment.' Theodicee, Preface (E. 476 a ; vi. 41) ; cf. Mmadok>(/^f 
5 74. Joho Swammerdam { 1637-1680), of Amsterdam, is fumoua 
an observer of ioseot life. MarcüUo Malpigbi (i 628-1694), of 
Bologna, the famous anatomist, ia probably mentloned by lisibniz 
lieeiiuä« of hia work on the process of incubation. Anton van 
Leuwetilioek (1633-1723), of Delftf did much to support Harvey'a 
theoiy of the cireulption of the Wood. Leibniz refers to Lim on 
aecount of Iiis inveKtigfi^tiona regarding ispermatozoa, in Konnexion 
witli which he may be regarded as one of tlie founders of tlie 
scieneo of enibryology* 

^* Nicolaa Malebianche (1638^1715) publiahed Iiis Be la Becherdm 
de la VirUi in 1674. Descaries had already given a sjrailar title 
to one of his writinga. Whilo dififering greatly from Malebranche'a 
general theory, Leibnjz endeavoun* to haj-monize Malebranehe's 
\riew witli hia own ou inany particular points* See Foucher de 
Careil, IMtres et ^puscules inediis de Leihniz^ Introduction. Leäbiiiz 
corrcsponded iiitormitteiitly with Malebranche nporv philosophlcal 
and other queationa bttween 1674 and 1711. In hia Eecherche de 
la Verf% bk. ii. ch. 7» I 3 {(EutreSj Jules Siinoii'& ed*j \6L iii. 
pp. 199 sqq.) j Malobrancho uü^a espressjions which indicato a belief 
in the theory of preformation. 

^ Pierrö Sylvain R6giß or Leroy (Petrus Silvanua Begius) 
(1633-1707) waa an exponent of tlie philofiophy of Descartea, which, 
in Opposition to the idealism of Malebmnche, he developed in an 
empirical direction. Dcseartea, however, disowned fch© viowe of 
R^gis. See (Eut^res de Bescaries (ed. Cousin), yol. x, p. 70. Cf. 
Veitch, Mßfhüd *tc. of Deecartes, note vL on hmaie Jde^is. Cf. Kuno 
Fischer ( JMsc^irtes and his Schoolj bk. iii. eh. a. Eegia, whose philo 
sophical echool at Paris whb in 1Ö75 cloeed hj Archbiahop Ilarlay 
on account of ita Cartesian tcaching, wrote a violent attack upon 
Leibniz, eharging him with injustice towaida Descartes. Thie 
attack, anotiytnouöiy pHbllHhed, will be found, along with LBibniz'a 
reply, in E. 140 ; G. iv, 333. 

Nicola« Martsoeker (1656-1735) was a Duteh physidst, whoa© 
earlier work liad maiiily to do with the making ef microacopea 
and telescopef^. Leibniz, writing to Des Bosseb in 1709, calla htm 
vir dariasimuA in Bhpiriäs (E. 461 a ; ii. 377). In 1694 Hartsoeker 
publifihed an atomiat philosophy of nature^ hased oa the sup^ 



X 



«od olilcr Me mm hxre uoi becn nerr ^ £n>m this 

7. Bot tliere immmd tbe greater «intfUmi- whmt 
bm>m€« 0f tii^^ mils ^ fonns a4 tlie desth c»f the 

4>T|pok sub«lftneß ? Tliis is a mosi perplexiug qn^toii, 
tnaimueh m thera secios Hltle reason ia thinkliig thal 
mmhi mmmn mmlemdj in a chaos of coniused matter^. 
Accordingiy I ^ane the eoEielastoji tbat theiB oaJy 
um view ihat c&n reasonablf be taben^ nämelr, tliat 
whieh affimis the cofUtervati&n not only of the soul tut 
aIho of the animal itaelf and its organic mechankm ; 
although the destruetion of it3 grosser parts has reduced 
it lo a minutenesa whjch makea it as little percepüble 
to our mnmä aa it was before its birtJi ^. Thus no one 
vMn ^ita<itJy note th© real time of death. which for a time 
niay be takeo for a mere Suspension of perceptible 
aetivitie» and wkieh at bottom is never anythiiig eise 
tbün ihm in the case of mere animals : witness tbe re- 
mscitaihn of flies which have been diowned and then 
burit'd in powd*fred clialk^ and several siniilar instancea 
which are sufficient to inform us tbat there might be 
other resu^citations, even when the destruction of the 
orgwnic ftubstane© had gone much faither^ if men were 
in II Position to reeonstnict the [animal] mechanism ^. 
And ai^parently it was about something like this that 
tlie grt'at Dctnocritus spoke (thorongh atomist as he 
mm)f ihoiigli PlLiiy laughs at what he said *\ Äccord- 

(M»Hition of pc^rfoctly hard atom« in a perfect fluid. In 1704 he 
jaoüntiiii l*i'(>ri*8Hf>r o£ Muthematies and Physjea at Dügseldorfi and 
fruin J706 to i^ia be dia^ius^ed hi« philo2?opby of imture yviih 
Loibiil/. iti Ii eorr^Äpondence to which Leibniz freqiiently refers 
in hia Jett er» to Des Bosses . The correapondenee is giveti by 
ü«i'biirdt, iii* 463. Cf* Third Explanatim qf the Neio S^aieta, p. 334. 

That »Fl, matUr whi(;li ia (compflratively) iiiorgan]€. 

Ct. MmufidtMjijj 1$ 73 and 77. 

üt Montitiotf}^^ l 14, note ^23 und $ ; Frinciples 0/ Naiure and 
f^OracOf 6 jind la. 

Cf, lettre ä des iftii'^iKi«^ (1711) (E. 676 b ; O. viL 535) : 'Plalo 
beliövud that material things are in & perpetiial flux^ but that 



NEW SYSTEM 



ingly it is natural that au animal, bavmg alwaya heen 
living and organic (as some people of great penetratioii 
ar© beginning to recognize), ahould likewise always re- 
main so. And thus^ aince an ammal lias no first birth 
or entirely new begettiiig [fftmeratwn]^ it foUowa that it 
will have no final extinction or complete death^ in the 
atriet nietaphysical sense, and that consequently, in 
place of the (ransmtgrQilon of souls, there is nothing but 
a iramformation of one and the same animal, according 
as its Organa are differently enfolded [ßäes] and inore or 
leBs developed 

8, Kevertheless rational souls foUow tiiuch higher 
laws and are exempt from everything which could make 
them lose the mnk \la quallU^ of Citizens of the sooiety 
of spirits [_e^it&\ \ God having provided for this so care- 
fully that all the changes of matter cannot make them 
loäs© th© moral qualities of their x^ersonality. And it may 
be Said that everythiug tendü to the perfection, not onlj 
of the universe in gfsneral, but also of these created 

genuin© äubstanees eontinue to ejEist. " geniaine substant-ea 

he appeara to have msfint only aoula. But perhaps Democ?itus^ 
thorough stomist aa he was, believed in the conservation of the 
animftl also. For h© t^ught that ther© ia resuscitation [m'ii'Sscswcfl^ 
as Pliny aaya of him : revixisiiendi ptmni&m BemocritQ vanüas^ qui ipse 
nütt rem^iTÜ * [the fnlse opiniom of a coming to life again^ put forth 
by Dciiiocritiia, wbo hiinsolf dkl not come to life agaia]» ' \Ve 
hardly inow anjthing abont this great man^ exoept 'wbat haa 
beeil bonowed from liim by Epicurus, who was not capabla of 
always takiiig bis beat tbings/ Th© words quoted from Pliny 
OOCUT in hiB Misioria NaturaliSj bk. vii. eap. 5S- (Sillig*s od-^ voL ii. 
p. 60.^ 

" Moftadotogy, 5 § 73 and 73, In the First Draft {G. iv. 474) 
Leibiilz writes: ^ An ih*^ minutonesa of organic bodies may be 
itiflnite [which may be soen from tho faet tbat their seeds, enclosed 
in one another^ contain enfoided a oontinual succeasioii of orgajxized 
and aiiimate bodicsjj U is eüsily aeen that eveu firo> which in 
the most pooetratinp and vioknt agent, will not destroy an 
animalt Esiiico it will at moat reduee it to auch a smalhiess that 
fire can no longer üet upon it/ In the correspondenco witb 
Arnauldj to which Leibniz refera in § i of tb© A'eM? System^ Arnauld 
bftd asked (as an cibjet^tion to Leibniz "a theory of th© indc^ttruc- 
tibility of an i mala) wbat becamiä of the ram whlcli Abraham 
aacFiHced in place of Isaake, The foregoiüg paäsage coataina in 
brief Lüibniz'a answer. 



X 3 



3o8 



NEW SYSTEM 



beings in parliciilar, whieh are deslined to euch a degree 
of bappiness that the universe is eoncerned in it, in 
virtue of the Divin e goodness which is impaiied to eacli, 
so fac as supreme wisdom can allow, 

9. As to the ordinary body*^ of ammala and other 
corporeal substances, whieh hav© hitherto been supposed 
to suffer total extinction and whose changes are de- 
pendent rather upon mechanical ndes than iipon moral 
laws, I observed witb pleasure thafc the au t hör of the 
book De Bimta (which is attributed to Hippo erstes 
had some inkling of the truth, when he expressly said 
that animals are not born and do not die and that 
the things which we suppose to come into bßtng and 
perish merely appear and disappear. This was also the 
opinion of Parmenidea and of Malissus according to 
Aristo tle ; for these men of old had mor© worth thao 
we suppose. 

10. I am aB r^ady as man can be to do justice to the 
moderns^ yet I think they have carried reform too far j 
among otiier tbings^ in eonfounding natural with arti- 

G, h&s GG/rps ordinaire. E. readsi coum ordinaire nm&l hiatory 
Hippofirates, Hhe father of mediciDe/ ia nci longer regarded 
as the ftuthor of the De Dheta {w^pl !itatrfjs). Tlie piissage to which 
Leibniz refers is moat probiibly th& following : 6.ir6kAvT€u fiif yvv 
ovStv diravTwv x^'jM™^? ^^^^ yiyftai S ti fxif Km TfpuaOfv jjv . . . Kul 

ovTf fiT} jfvftrßttr TtuBfP jap tsrm ; dAX' üu^frac nStifTti. ^c^nt/rai 
Kul fr rd piTiKtiTTüif xai [4? tA] Ixdxtt^^ovj rary 7* dvi^arcivj i. 4. ' Now 
none nmong all things is dostroyed. and there does not come intO 
being that which was not in existence before* , . . Aiid neither ia it 
poasible for an an i mal to die, execspt along with all thingg (for 
how shall it die?); nor can that which is not come into being 
ffor when<je shall it be?) ; bnt all things grow and diminish to 
the greatest and to the least that ia posaible.' See Bywater, 
Heradüi Ephesii EeUqviae, Appendix ii. 

" i>e (*ae% T i, 398^ 14 : a! ftlv yäp air^ o\ms dvit^^ov jfvf (rtv jtai 

fiiivm* ^0Ktl\f ^piv fyJfiP dI Tttpl Mikiff^rov Kai Uaf}i€i4SijVf ovs^ fl xal 
T^Xha. Xijovffi ÄttAÄfj dhX* ov ipvfTiKüif yt Äfi fo^/ifjat Xiyfiy, Cf. 
Mnmdülügy, § 74, note 116. Bnt the views i>f Parmenidea and 
Melisaua, who deny the rcality of ehang© or of becoming, are very 
far remoTod from the position of I^ibniz, They deny chatige or 
becoming of ra tvj not of ea*jh of ti plnrality of subBtancea, 



NEW SYSTEM 



ficial things, througli not having gi-eal; enougb ideas of 
the majesty af nature, Thay think that the diJference 
between nature^s niachines and ours is only a difference 
of BizB. This hm ktely led a veiy able man*'^ (tb© 
autbor of tbe Entrdiens mr la plumliU des Mmdes*^} to 
say tbat^ when we look closely at nature^ w© find iht less 
wonderful [admirable] than we bad thought, it hmng 
irierely a kind of Workshop. It seems to me that tbis 
k io give an idea of nature whicb is not quite just nor 
worthy of it*'"', and tliat it is only our System wbicb 
shows bow real and immense after all is the distance 
between the least productions and mecbanisma that are 
made by the Divine wisdom and the gi-eatest artistie 
masterpieces of a limited mind [esj/rit]— the difference 
being not merely one of degree^ but even one of kind. 
Äccordingly it is to be observod that the niaeliines of 
nature bave a really infinite niunber of organs *^ and are 
so well equipped and ao proof against all aceidenta that it 
is not posBible to destroy them, Ä natural machine still 
remains a machine in its smallest parta, and moreover 

Eernard le Bovior dtö Fönten olle (x657-i757\ a nephew of 
Pierre CorneiDe, was Beeret ai-y of the Acad^fftie des Boifincm nt Paris 
llmm ißgg lo 1741* One of his dvities secretary was to prepa.re 
evei'y yejir ^loges or tiibutes to the memory of thoae member^ of 
tlie acjidemy who had djed during the year, and among the ablest 
of theae papera ia his £loge de Leibnis^ publiiähL^d in thts Hisioire de 
l'Acad&fnie Eom^e des Science de FartSj amiee 1716. He Tvrote a groat 
deal of indifferent verae ; biit bist main work eonaiated in the 
popniarizing of scientific ideus. There is a saying of hia (which 
Sounds likt) a parody of Leibni^;) that *evoiything is possible, and 
eveijbody is riglit.' 

*' * ConYersations on the Plurality of Worlda/ Thia book (puh- 
liahed i6ß6) was intended to popnlarize the Jistronomical theories 
of Copemicug. It has been several timea translated into English. 

*^ E, Im^ morely ' w Ii ich itj not worthy of it,' 

*^ A maehine inadf: by man has a finite number of ^Organa' or 
parta having eat:h a definite funetion in relaiion to the whole. 
Th© tooth of a whool is an ' organ ' of the wheel and of the whola 
mach ine. Eut the material particles whieh make up this tooth 
are not ^organa' of the wheel or the machlne, Ifature, on the 
otlier band, is organic tiiiouyhout : no part of it is not an 'orgsn " 
of the whole, Thua a natnral macliine has *a really infinite 
immber of organs.' Ct Monaddogy, § 64. 



NEW SYSTEM 



H always remains the same machine it originally was, 
hmng merely tmiisformed tlirougK different foldings 
[plis] it receiveSj and sometinies expanded^ sometimes 
contracted and, as it were^ concentmted, when Tfve think 
that it is lost 

II. Fürthen by means of the soul or form, ther« le a 
real unity wliicli corresponds to vvliat in us is called the 
E^o ; bnt this cantiot be tho case in regard to themachines 
of art or to mere material mass, however well organized 
it may be, whieh ean be eonsidered only as tin army or 
a flock, or as a XDond füll of fish or as a watch com- 
posed of Springs and wheels, Nevertheless if ther«? wem 
no real substantial units \tmlti's\ there would be nothing 
Sübstantial or real in the eoUection. It was this that 
compeOed M. Cordemoi**' to give np Descaiies and to 
adopt Demociitus's doctrine of atonis in order to find 
a real unit [unifeK But atoms of matter are cantraiy to 
reason, besides being still composed of paii^s, sinee the 
invincible attachment of one part *to another (even if 
it cotild rationally be eonceived or supposed) would not 

** *Wheij I say I speak of one substance only j but an 

iirmy, a flock, a pond fuU of fish, even thougk it wer© frozeji and 
liacl böcome solid with all the fish in it, will alwaysi b© ft fiollection 
of soveral mibstances/ First Draft (G. iv. 4'33). Cf, Introdncfcion, 
Part iii. pp. 96-98, 

™ G^raud da Cordemoi (born ©aiijr in the seventeenth c^JntuTy, 
died 1684% a French Cartesian, arrived independently at An 
Occa&ion allst position, about the same iime üoulincx doveloped 
his more famous aystem. See Kuno Fisieher, lkscartes and Iiis ScAool, 
bk. ÜL ch. 2. Hb most important philoaophical work ia Le discerne- 
ment du mr}ts et de Vdme (1666), and it wau in thi^ä book that he so far 
g&Te up Dosen rtes as to adopt a theory of atoma. Cf. Leibniz's 
Lettre ä la Frincesse Sophie (1703) (G. vii, 561) : * M. Cordemoi, tieeing 
that Compound thJngs must be tho rosult of shnplu thitigs^ was 
forced, Carteaian though he was, to Lava recourse to atoms, 
ahaadoning hia master. , . Also Lettre ä Armtdä (1686) (G. ii. 78) : 
' M. Cordemoi . * . in order to atMJount for the substantial unity in 
bodiesT feit obliged to ad mit atoma or indivisible exten ded bodiea 
ia Order to ftnd iäomcthing fixed to Konstitute a simple being, . , , 
He appears to have recogniaed aomething of the truth, but he had 
not yet seen in what the real notion of a »ubatance (iun^ista.* 
Corde moi, however^ was morä devot ed to hiatory than to philo^ 
sophy* 



NEW SYSTEM 



3" 



make one pari any the lese different froni auotlier^", 
Only aimts qf mhstance, that ia to say real units [unii^s] 
absolufcely devoid of parts, are the sourees of actioiis. and 
the absolute iirafc priiicipks of the composition of things 
and, as it were, the iiltimate elements in the analysis of 
substatitial things '^'^ They might be calied miiaphißskal 
poinis ; they have something of the nature qf Ufe and 
they have a Icind of perccptiofif and mafhematical poinis 
are their points of new^^ for expressing the nniverse. 
Bat ^ben a corporea) substance is contracted^ all its 
Organs together make but one phydml jmnt for ns*^** 
Thus physical points are only apparently iudivisible, 
Mathe matical points are indivisible [ exacts], bnt they are 
only modalities. Kone but metaphysieal or substantial 
points (consisting of for ms or souls) are mdivisible [exact] 
and real ; and without tbem notbing would be real, since 
without genüine unita [t*wii(^] tbere would be no niulti- 
plicity *\ 

12. Having settled these things, I tbought I had 
gained my liaven, but when I set mysdf to meditate 
upon the union of soul and body I was as it wero driven 
back into the deep sea, For I found no way of explaining 
how the body transmits anything to the soul ur i)ke i*€rsa, 
nor how one substance can communicate witb another 
created substance. So far as can be gathered from Iiis 
writings, M. Descartes gave this up ^'^ j but bis diaeiples, 

Set* Introductioti, Paii ii. p, 30. 

^ E. read» ' subManceR.' In the Pirst Draftj Leibui^ aaya : 
*What constitutea corpore* 1 substance inuf+t b© something wh ich 
correBpondit to what is calied ego in uhj which ia indivl^iible and 
nevertholess active [agi$mnt\ ibr being indiviaible and without 
parta, it will no longer bo a being Tuy aggregation, hui beiag ft<;tive 
\agismnl] it will he something subgjtjintiar {O. iv. 473). 

^ E. reads *point of view.' Mathcmatical points are merel^^ 
Position^ in space, and when wo spoak of positions in apace, wo 
iii e desoriblng in a confused way tho essential diffeiences between 
Monads. Gf. Monixdolagy^ |§ 60-62, 
Cf- Monadditgy, 68 and 69, 
Cf. Introduetion^ Part ii, pp. 28 sqq* 

^' *Th© human mind is not capuble of dietinctly concoiving the 
differenc« of ©fläsi&nce between boqI and body and, at the aame time, 



312 NEW SYvSTEM 

seeing that the common opinion is inconceiTablej held 
that we are awaro of the qimlities of bodies, beeause God 
makes thoughts arise in the soul on occasion of the 
motions of matter ; and, on the other handj Avhen our 
soul wishes to move the body, they hold that it is God 
wha moTes the body for it And as communication of 
motions also appeared to ihem inconceivable^ they were 
of opinion that God gives motion to a body on occasion 
of the motion of another body. Thh is what is called 
the s^stcfii of occasional causesj whieh has heen brought 
into Wide repute by the excellent reflexions of tlie author 
of the Recherche de la Verite^\ 

13, It mnst be admitted that they have gone far into 
the diificulty in telling tis what cannot take place ; but 
they do not appear to have removed it by tbeir explana- 
tion of what actually does happen, It is quite tnie that 
one crsated subatanca has, in the strict metaphyslcal 
sense, no real influence lipon another, and that all things 
and all their reülity are conti nnally produced by the 
power [rer^w] of God. But to solve problema it is not 
enough to make uae of a general cause and to introdnce 
what is called Dens ex machma. For to do this, without 
offering any other explanation which can be derived from 
the Order of secondary causes, is just to have reeourse to 
miracle. In philosophy we most endeavour to give a 
reason for things by showing how they are carried out 
by the Divine wisdom in conformity with the notion of 
the matter we are dealing with'^ 

1 4, Accordingly, being obliged to admit that it is im- 

theii' Union, for it would ihen he necesaary to conceive both as 
a bingle being and ai the aame time as two diiferent things^ ^hi^sh 
ifl A contrfldictiüii/ (Emre.^ {^d. Cousin)» voL ik. p. 133. 

Arnold Öanlincs: (1625-1669) was tlie real founder of Ocea- 
sionaliäm, TI10 ürat part of Ii 13 Etkica appeai^d in 16Ö5, while 
Malebranüho's great work was publisbed in 1674, See Introdiietion, 
Part iL pp. 43 sqq. Cf. Kuno Figeliurj Ikscartes €tnä his School^ bk. iii* 
ch. 3, 

We muat not make a vague referenc© to the Divino wiadonii 
but niust ftkow how it is preaent in particular departmenta of 
exporiencCp 



NEW SYSTEM 313 

possiblö the aoul or any other real substance should receiTe 
aiiytliing from outside, iinless throngh the Divine omni- 
potence, I was insensibly led to an opinion wliich 
surprised me, but which seems inevitable and which, in 
fact, bas very great advantagea and Yery considemble 
beauties. It is this, that God at first so createrl the soul, 
or any other real unity, that everythmg mnst arise ^" in 
it from its own inner nature [fonds] witb a ]>erfect 
spontaneiit/ as regards xtself and yet with a perfect eon- 
forrmty to things outside of it* And thua our inner 
feelings [sentments] (that is to aay, those which are in 
the Söul itself and not in the brain or in the finer parts 
of the body), being only connected phenomena of extern al 
things or rather genuine appearances and^ as it were, 
well-ordered dreams^", these internal perceptiona in the 
soul itself muat come to it from ita original Constitution, 
that 19 to aay from the repreaentative nature (capable of 
expressin g beings outaide of it in relation to its organs 
which waa given to it at ci^ation and which constitutes 
its individual character. And accordingly, since each of 
these substanees accurately representa the whole universe 
in its Qwn way and from a certain point of view^ and 
the perceptions or expresaiona of external things come 
into tbe soul at their appropriate time, in virtue of its 
own lawSj as in a world by itself and as if there exiated 
nothing but God and the soul (to adopt the phrase of 
a certain person of high intellectual power, renowned 
for his piety*^*), there will be a perfect agreement between 
all these aubstances^ which will bave the same result aa 
would be ohserved if* they had communication with one 

S. has ^tiHses.' Aa to the * apontaneity ' of th© aoul and its* 
^ creation/ see Monaddügy^ § 47^ note 75. 

** ^ And (!0 gonuiöö that iliey can be BucceaBfuUj foresoen/ Fi rat 
Draft (G, iv, 477). See Introduction, Part iii. p. 9B sqq, 

" Thftt isj aceording to tho nature and dispoaition tif its oi-gans. 

^ E. haa Hhe woi M/ 

^ Kirch mann snggests that this niay perhapsi refer to Foucher. 
But L^ibniz: u&e» the phiaBO. without any speüial roferernje or 
aoknowledgnient^ in a lefcter to Fouchör, written in 1686. (G. L 3822.} 



3^4 



NEW SYSTEM 



another by a transmission of Speeles or of qualities, 6uch 
as tlie mass of ordinary philosophers siippoae*^ Farth^r, 
as the oTganized niass, in which is the point of view of 
tho öüulj is mai'6 nearly expressed by the souP'^ und, 
conversely, is readj of it&elf to actj ac cor ding to the laws 
üf the eorporeal mechanismj at the Dioment the soiil 
desij^es it, without either of them interfering with the 
]awa of the other — the animal spirits [les esimfs] ^- and 
the blood haying exactly at that moment the light 
iTiotions to correspond to the pasaions and perceptions af 
the soul— this niutiial relationship, preamn ged in each 
substaiice in the universe, produces what we eall their 
comnmmcation and alone constitutes the un 'mi of soul and 
feorfy. And in this vvuy we can und erstand how the sonl 
has its seat in the body through an immediate presencej 
which is as near aa possible, since the soul is in the 
body aa the nnit [tinite] is in the miiläplicity which in 
the resultant of units [unUds]'^\ 

^ Sße Monadoioffyj § 7, note 10. 

^* E, oirxits * by thö soul ' (par dk). 

^ ^Animal spirits ' wi^s the nnme gh'en by Descartesi to ceitain 
* x^rj fine padiicleH öf the blood/ by meanij of wJiich he ©xplained 
muscular moTeraent. The namt was derived froui the Stojc 
irviv^f through ihn early medical philosopliura, such aaGaleii, who 
:$pe^kä üf * natural BpirUs ' and * vital spirit^^ ^ ; hui Descartea^ö use 
wf the term is oHginah *Whftt I heie cäU '*Bph-its^* are ouly 
bodies, and they have no othör property eatcept that they are very 
«mal[ bodiefi whieh moTc very quiekJy» like the particlos of flame 
whiuh cojno from a lighted torch ; m that they do not stay in any 
place^ and aa soon as sürno of them enter the cavitios of tha brain, 
otbera go ovit again through the porea in its aubatance, which pores 
lead them to the nerves and thence to the musdes, by means of 
which they naove the body in all the different waya it can be 
moved.' Les Pa^Awm de i'Ämej part i. art, 10, See also articles 
ß,TidMdhfid^ part V, where he says that th© ^animal spiritsi' are *like 
a very aubtle wmd, or rather a very pui© and vivid liatne.' The 
name survives in common language., and the hypothesis was only 
8©t aside by thö results of miijroscopic study in anatomy, Ct Kuno 
Fischer, Bescartes and Äis SchOiA^ bk. ii. ch. 9^ § a, 

DescaHea also held that the soul niust b© present to Üie wbole 
organiam, Eut he maintained that ^ neverthelesa there ia ia the 
bf^y a part in which the soul exercises its funotions more apeeiaJly 
thau ii\ auy other part,^ this special 'seat of the soul ' being the 
pineal gland in the brain, (Les Fiimim^i, part i, articlea 30-33,) 



NEW SYSTEM 



15, This hj^othesia is very possibk-, For why might 
not God in the begiiining give to suVistanco an inner 
natura or force wbich could regularly produce m it 
— aa in an automatan that is spirttual or cndowed tiith 
u limng principle bui free m the case of a aubstance 
whieb partakes of reason — every tbing that will bappen 
to it, tbat is to say, all tbe appeamnces or expresaions it 
will bave, and that witbout tbe belp of any created 
thing ? Tbis is tbe more likely since tbe nature of sub- 
stance necessarily requires and essentially involyes a 
progress or cbange, witbout wliicb it would bave no 
fon^e to aet^"* And as tbe iiature of tbe soul is to 
repreaent tbe universe in a very exaet way (tbough with 
greater or less distinctness), the succession of representa- 
tions whieh the soul prodüt;ea for itself wüU correspond 
naturally to tbe siicceasion of cbauges in tbe unirerse itself ; 
while, on tbe other hand^ the body has also been adapted 
to tbe soul to fit tbe eircumstances in which tbe soul is 
coneeived as acting outwardly. This adaptation of the 
body to the soul is the more reasonable xuasmucb as 
bodies are made only for spirits [espnis] wbicb alone 
are capable of entering into fellowship with Cod and 
celebrating His g3ory. Tbus as soon as we see tbat tbis 
hypothma 0/ agreemmts [accordsY^ is possible, we see 

Xieibniz se^ka to ahow tlmt, oa his hypotheais, the conivexion 
Lelw&en eonl and body is mucb closer. Tlje soul m * immediately ' 
pi'esötit to tlio body and thtis no special seat but is in every 
pai-t (indep«ndently of the partes position) as th© unifc ia in ©very 
part of the whole. 

" Tho French is : un autümaiB spirihtel qu fürmth Fonwfi conveys 
th© idoa of the form or individual unity ai the tliing, lis in the 
phrase 'subBtantial form.' 

^ Every subiatanc© apmtctndtyj inasmuoh it produces from 
with in itself tJie ßeriea of its sttitea or phenomena ; bufe rational 
fjoula aloDti have ft&^Hy^ for liberty is action under the guidance of 
right l ea&oii* 

No sub3tane& can Act npon anything outside of it. Tbus its 
aotion must appear in aomc internal ohange. 

" That iä to &ay, bodioa are entirely subordinate to spirits, m the 
realtu of efQcient €aus,ca is to ihat of final oauseB. See Mm^nlogy^ 
eoncluding $f. 

'=■111 the First Drafl, Leibniz aaya : ^ I eall thie tb© flystem of 



3i6 



NEW SYSTEM 



also that it is the most reasonable hypotbesis and that 
it gives a woiiderful idea of the harmony of the uni versa 
and the perfeetion of the works of God, 

16, There is also this great advantage in our hypo- 
tbesis, that. instead of snying that we are fi-ee only 
apparentlj and enoiigh for practical purposes, as sevei-al 
elever people have hekl^ we must rather say that we are 
only apparently constrained, and that, to nse strict meta- 
physical language^ we possesa a perfeet independence as 
regards the inflaeiicö of all other ereated thinga This 
also throws a wonderful light upon the immortality of 
our soul and the ever unbroken preservation of our 
individaality, which is perfeetly well-ordered by its own 
nature and independent of all external contingencies, 
\\'^hatevör appearance there may he to the contrary- 
Fever has any system moro completely shown our high 
Galling. Every spiiit [e^rlt] being like a world apart, 
sufBcient to itselfj independent of every other created 
thing, involving the Infinite, e.tpressing the universö, is 
as lasting^ as continuous in its existence and as absolute 
as the very univorse of creat^^d things. Thm we should 
bold that each spirit should always play its part [faire 
ßgui^ I in tlie universe in the way that is most fitted to 
contrihute to the perfeetion of the society of all spxritSj 
which constitntes tlieir moral union in the City of God, 
There is also bere a new and surprisingly elear proof of 
the existenco of God, For tbis perfeet agreement of ao 
many suhstances which 'have no eommunieation with 
one another ean come only f rom tbeir common eause 

17. In addition to alt these advantages whieli thiö 

correspondence ' (G* iv. +76}. He is still feeling for the name 
' Pre-etitablished Harmony,' which he usea for the first time in 
th© First ExpJancttüm o/ the jYew? S^fm (1696)» 
See Iiitröductioii, Fiirt iit pp. 141 üiqq* 

In the First Draft, Leibni^ aayä : * It ia tme that thia is oaly 
by a participation, tliough limited, in the Divine perfeetiona ; for 
the agreement among tLo eflfecta ariö<*s frotn their e^xprössing the 
cgmmtjn cause * {ik iy* Cf, Prindples 0/ Nature and qf Qracgf 

$ II, note 4g. 



NEW SYSTEM 



hypothesis has in its favour, it may be said that it ig 
someihing more than a hypothesia, sinca it hardly 
appears possible io explaiii things in any other intelli- 
gible way, and sioce several great difficulties, whicli 
haTe hifeherto perplexed men's minda [le^ es^prUsjj seem 
to disappear of themselves wh^n we rightly comprehend 
this hypothesis. The expressions of ordinary language 
oiay also b© qiiite well adapted to it. For we niay say 
that the substance whose condition [di^x>sitioft] explains 
a chang© in an intelligible way (so that we niay hold 
that it is this substance to which the others have on this 
point b^en adapted from the beginn ing» according to the 
Order of the decrees of God) is the substanee which, in 
respect of this change, we should consequently eonceive 
m acting upon the others Tiius the action of one 
substanee upon another is not an emission nor a trana- 
plantation of an entity as is commonly aupposed» and it 
cao be rationally nnderstood only in the way I have 
just mentioned, It is true that we quite well conceive 
in matter both the emission and the receiving of parts 
throagh which we are entitled to explain mechanically 
all the phenomena of physics ; but as material mass is 
not a substanee it is evident that action as regards 
substanee itself can only be what I have just said that 
it is. 

18. These considei-ationaj however metaphysical they 
may appear, are also of remar kable eervice in physics 
for establishing the laws of motion, as our I)i/namics will 
be able to show. For it may be sj^d that in the impact 
of bodles each sufiFers only through its own elasticity, 
caused by"^^ the motion which is already in it"^ And 

See In trod action, Pjirt iii* pp,. 105 sqq. 
" See Intmduction, Part üi. p. rio, 

^ E. haa cmse riw, ^ft (or the) cause of tKe/ G. has cmise du^ 
* cauaed by ihe.' The First Draft has t * wliiclv eomes from a motion 
all^ady oaüsting in it ' (G, iv. 476)» 

'^^ Le^bniz opposos the idea thiit there ia a fixed quantity of 
motion tli^jperaüd tlirouglioufc the uuiverso and passiiig indifferently 



3i8 



NEW SYSTEM 



ag to absolute motion, nothing can determine it nmthe- 
matically, since all ends [se iermine] in relationf^, with 
the resiilt that there is always a perfect eqidvalence of 
hypotheses as in astronomy ; so that, whatever number 
of bodiea take, \ye may arbitrarily assign rest or auch 
and such a degree of velocity to whichever wo like, with- 
out it boing possible for us to be refuted by the pheno- 
mena of motion ^ whether it be in a straight Hne, in 
a eirclfi, or composite, Yet it ia reaso nable to attribut© 
to bodies real motions, accordi ng to the supposition 
wbich explaijis the phenomena in the mosfc intelligible 
way, for this is in harmony with the notion of activity 
[adjö/tj whicb we have here maintained^, 

froni one body to anothpr. Each body, he would say, has a forcßj 
whiüh ia the cause of it» aetuai motion,^, and whtm two bodies 
eollid^j there is not a tranaference of motion from one to the other, 
but a tertfiin rebase of the pent-np force m eaeh, and thia release 
shows itself in the elasticity of tköir riibound* Se« Introductiun, 
Part iii. pp* 89 sqq. 

* Absohl t<ä motion ' would be motion that is not in any degree 
resfc. Eilt motion miist alwaya be determined thron gh r«latiou. 
One body bas motion only in reference to another, and, ac^cordingly^, 
if wo winh to dötormiiio which of the two recitfy (i.e. absolufeoly) 
moveSj we must refer thetn both to some third body and so od 
w/iriitum, The * eqiaivalenee of liypofchesea in aatronomy ' probflbJy 
refc'rs to tlie fact that fhe hypothtfsis of Copernicns C1473-1543), 
accordiJig to which all tbe planeta move round the sun, and thö 
hypothes^is of Tycho Brahe (1546^1601), according to whiüh the sun 
moves round the earth and tho othor planets move ronad the 31111, 
equally AVell e^plained the phenomena as observed at that time* 
Cf* iv. 369^ and Doscartes, Principia^ Furt üi, 15- 18. 
** See Appendix C, p. 304, 



t 



EXPLAN ATION OF THE NEW SYSTEM OF THE 



COMMUNICATION BETWEEN SUBSTANCES, 
BY WAY OF REPLY TO WHAT IS SAID 
ABOUT IT IN THE JOURNAL OF SEPTEM- 
BER 12, 1695 ^ 1696. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

In the Journal des Savants for September, 1695, there 
appeared a letter to Leibniz from Foucher in which various 
objections to the New System were stated. Simon Foucher 
(1644- 1696) was a Canon of Dijon, who professed philosophical 
scepticism and endeavoured to restore tbe teaching of the later 
Academics, somewhat as Gassendi sought to interpret anew 
the doctrines of Epicurus. Between 1676 and 1695 Leibniz 
corresponded with Foucher, discussing in the earlier letters 
questions regarding the theory of knowledge and in the later 
letters questions of Physics. Foucher's comparatively early 
death was to some extent due to overwork. In 1697 Leibniz 
writes to Nicaise (G. ii. 566) : * I am grieved at the death of 
M. Foucher. His curiosity was limited, and was directed only 
to certain somewhat dry matters, and even these he did not 
treat with the accuracy they required. Perhaps his aim was 
merely to be the resuscitator of the Academics, as M. Gassendi 
has resuscitated the Sect of Epicurus. But he ought not to 
have confined himself to generalities. Plato, Cicero, Sextus 
Empiricus and others might have enabled him to make a real 
advance. And under pretext of doubting, he might have 
established good and useful truths. 1 took the liberty of giving 

* The reference is of course to the letter of Foucher in the Journal 
des Savants, 



320 



rmST EXPLÄNÄTION 



him my opinion to ihm ; but he Lad perhapa other views of 
which I did not know cnough* Yet lie litui niuch clevemesa 
and subtletj and he was a mo&t virtnoua man^ and hence 
I lament him/ (C£ i 565.) Leibniz repKed to the objectioua 
of Foucber in an Ej^plunation of the New Si/stem^ which appeared 
in the Jon mal des Saiants for April j 1696. A further Ej^pi^znm- 
tfon (called hj Erdmann tke Tiy}isieme Eduireiissemenl) was 
published in the Jon mal for November, 1696. I have tranalated 
theae two Explamitioris, omitting that which Datens and 
Erdmann call Second Edahcissement (E. 133, J, Feb. 1696, 
cf, G, iv. 498), ae the Tromhne ^dairdssem^nt containa practi- 
callj the whole of it. 

In Foucher's letter of objections tbere appeara the simile of 
the clocks, whicli Leibnia passea over in bis immediate replj 
but takee up and develops in the Second and Third Explana- 
tiöHs. Foucher writeß : ' It will he graute d jou that God, 
the great Artificer of the univerae^ can ao perfectlj adju&t all 
the organic parts of a man 's bodj, that they may be capable 
of producing all the mptions which the soul combined with 
this body will deaire to produce in the coui^e of bis life» with- 
out the ftonl having the power to change these motiona or to 
modify them in any way, and that on the other band God can 
make a eonstruction in the soul (be it a mechanism of a new 
kind or not), bj means of which all the thoughts and modifi- 
catioßs which correspond to these motions miglit ßucccasively 
arise at the aame nioment in which the body perform a ita 
correaponding functions, and it will alyo be granted you that 
thia is no more irapossible than to make two clocka keep time 
[g'accot^der] so well and go ao uniformly that at the monaent 
clock A strikes twelve, clock B will strike twelve also, so that 
we iniagine the two clock s to be kept going by the same 
weigbt or the n&tne spring' (E, 129b ; G. iv, 48S). The 
simile was originally applied in thia way by Geulincr, See 
Introduction, Part ü. p. 43 note ; cf, Third Explanation cf the 
I^ew System, p. 33 1 note. 

In the tranalation of the Explamtiotis I foUow G/a reviaed 
text (G- iv, 493, 500 sqq.). E, gives them as they were origin- 
ally publiehed (K 131, 134 sqq.)* 

I recoUect, Sir^ that in compliance with what I under- 
stood to be your desire^ I communicated to you my 
hypothesis in philosophy aeveral years ago, although at 



OF THE KEW SYSTEM 



331 



the same time I indicated to yon that I had not yet ■ 
resolved to make it known, I asked your opinion of it 
in exchange; hui I do not reeoHect having received 
objoctions from yon : otherwise, teachable [i^ocf?^] as 
I am, I should not bare caus«d you to offer the same 
objections twic© over, Weyer theless they still come in 
time, although they come after I have published, For 
I am not of those witb whom the committing of them- 
selves to an opinion takeö the place of reaaon, as yon will 
find when you are able to say that you have brouglit 
forward ^ any precise and urgent reason against niy 
opinions ; which apparently has not been your purpos6^ 
Your inten tion was to speak as an able Äeademie \ and 
thus to give an opportunity for a thorough investigation 
of tbings. 

I ^ I intended to explain here, not th© principles of 
extension [Vetmduß\ but the principles of that which 
is actually extended [retmdu eßectif] or of bodily mass ; 
and these principles, in my opinion, are real unities, that 
is to say, eubstances possessing a genuine unity *. 

2. The unity of a clock^ wbich you mention, is in my 
view quite otber tban that of an animal ; for an animal 
may be a substance possessing a genuine unity, like what 
is called ego [moi] 'm us ; whiie a clock is not hing but an 
Äggregate [assemUagc]. 

3. I do not find the principle of the animal's conacious^ 
ness [le principe sensitif] in the arrangemont [disposition] 
of its Organs ; and I agree that this arrangement concerDS 
only the bodily mass ^ 

" E. has ' when you ai'ö ahle to bring forward.' 
■ E. adds * ün this occasion/ 

* In reference to Fouchor's pliilo&opliieal position. See Prefatory 
Note, 

* In O/s tcxt the p&ragrapli& are ntimbered. In E.'h text they 
are not numberedj and the pamgraphs are differently divided. 

* Poucher had maintained that *the esaential principles of ex- 
tension cannot really exiat.' i,e, that extenision has no ultimate ' 
real elementa. (E. 129 a ; 6. iv. 4S7.) Cf. Appendix p. 339. 

' Foucher had said : ' Whatever an-angement [diitpmtivn] the 
Organa of an animal mighfc hare, that ia jiot ©nough to make it 

T 



322 



FIBST EXPLANÄTION 



4. I notiee these tliktgs in order to prevent misunder- 
Standings, and to show that what you mj on this point 
is by no means conti-ary to whai I have brought fonvard ^ 
Tb US it appears that yon do not make me out to be 
wiong in i-equiring genuine unitiea, aud in consequentiy 
rehabOitating the substantial fornis. But when you 
api^ear to 8ay that tbe soul of tlie iower aniraals must 
have reason, if we attribute feelLng [senthnent] to it % that 
is an inferenco of wbich I do not see tbe proof 

5, Witb laudable candour you recognize that my 
hypothesis of harmony or coucomitance is possible, But 
you still have a certain repugnance to it ; doubtless 
becaiisc you think that it is purely arbitrary, througli 
not being aware that it followa from my view regarding 
unitiea; for ever>^hing in my theory is connected to- 
gether, 

6- Accordingly you ask, Sir, of what use is all thia 
elaborate contrivance which I attribute to the Author of 
nature^^ ? As if one could attribute too mueh contrivance 
to Hirn, and as if this exact mutual correspondence of 

Gonscfous [jiensife?e] ; for in ah ort this h^s to do with nothmg but 
the orgamo and mechjinical strueturo, and I do not se© that you 
are right iJi attributixkg tothe Iower aiiimals a pnnciple of con&cious- 
nessi, &ub3tantialJv difTfereiit from that of men 129 b j iv. 48Sj. 
" E. doea not have thia muteucfs. 

* Foucher wrote : ^ After all^ it is not with<>ut gi-ound that thö 
Cartesian^ afiknowledge that if we all(>w to tho auimala a pnnoiplo 
of conacioiisnesiij capabl© of distiti^ishing good from evil^ we must 
also, as a consequence^ allow to them r^aeon, ditfcriminatioii and 
judgment ' (E. 129 b ; G- iv. 4&8). In tlie liG?narques sur k$ Ohjcchons de 
M. Foucher Leibniz replies ; ' I do this ' [attribute to the aniinala 
a principle of consciomness, suhgtantially different from that of 
meti] * because we do not find that the animala make tlie reflt xioiia 
which conatitute reaaon and which, producing the^ knowledg© of 
ttecesaai-y truths or science^ make the soul t-apablö of persona lity. 
Tli© lower anLmalsj having ptTception, diatinguish good and evil ; 
hut they are not capable of moral good and evil, which presuppose 
reason and conscienee* (G. iv. 49a). Cf* Mmaddog^^ |^ 35-30. 
E. rcada * you make use of an inferenca/ 

" reads* 'force/ 

" Foutsher'a queation ia : * Of what u&e is all this gr^at elabnirate 
contrivimce among »ubBt^ncoa^ tinlesa to make ua beliere that thejr 
a«t npon one another^ although this m not the oase 130 & ; 



OF THE NEW SYSTEM 



substances, tlirough the special laws whkh each has at 
the beginning received, were not a thiiig most admirable 
in Itself and worthy of its Autiior ! You ask also wbat 
advantage I find in it. 

7. I might refer to wbat I have already said ; but 
I reply, firstj that when a tbing cannot but be^^ there 
is no need to ask of wbat use it is^ before %ve admit it. 
Of wbat use is the incommensurability of the side witb 
the diagonal ? 

8. I reply In the second place^ tbat tbis correspondence 
ia of uöo in explaining the communicatjon of substancea 
and the union of the soul witb tbe body, thron gh the 
lawa of nature which bave been established from the 
first [par avance], witbout baving recourse either to 
a transmission of speciea^* [quaÜtieslj which is incon- 
ceivable, or to a new Intervention of God, whioh seems 
ont of accord with the fitness of things. For it is to be 
observed that aa there are laws of nature in matter, so 
tbere are also lawa of natura in souls or forms ; and tbe 
meaning of tbese laws is tbat which I have just indicated. 

9. Ägainj I am asked whence it comes tbat God doea 
not think it enougb to produce all tbe tboughts and 
müdißcathm of the soul^ witb out tbese useless bodies, 
which tbe soul, it is said^ can neitber mot^e nor Jcmw. 
The anawer is eaay. It was God 's will that tbere ahould 

" Haa Leibniz sliown tliüt his pre-esfcflblished harmoiiy * caimot 
but b« ' ? In tbe Re^mrqws alr^ady quf>te<i, he says : 'Tkis elaborute 
ISontHvflncö, wMch makös mch subatanee correapond to all otbers, 
is neceasary becauae all äubat^Dces are the eflect of a supreiiie 
wisdom ; and it waa not otherwiae posslble (at any rato in the 
Order of Uätui^ and without miraclea) fco bring about theh- mter- 
dependen(^e and the changing of one by anc>ther or in. Gonsequenee 
of another* It nererthekss remains truc that tbey act upon one 
another, provided TVe give a right senae to tb^se worda, , , , Qod is 
not obliged to make a hjst'tm, about which wo are not liable fco 
make mistake& ; aa He was not obliged fco nvoid the System of the 
earth's motion^ in order to save ua from the error into which 
ftlmost all aatronomers feil nnfcil Gopernicua ' (G, iv. 492;). 

" Se© Monadology, § 7, note 10, 

" E, haa ' I shall be asked/ The ^piostioii waa put by Foucher 
in Ms letter of objeefciona. 



T 2 



3^4 



FEBST EXPLAXATION 



be more substaDCes rather tlmii fewer, and He thoaght 
it right tlmt these modifications of the soul ahould eorre- 
apond to somethitig outaide ^\ 

10, No eubstance m usdess ; they are all roade to 
ci>operate ^' towards fulfiiling the plan of GckL 

11, I am also far from admitting that the soul does not 
know bodieSf although this knowledge arises wlthout any 
influence of the one upon the other, 

1 2, I will not eveo ährink from saying that the soul 
moves the body ; and as a Copemican speaks truly of the 
ming of the sun, a Piatonist of the reality of matter, and 
& Cartesian of the reality of sensible qualities ^\ provided 
we rightly understand them, in the same way I hold 
that it is most tiu© to say that substances act lipon one 
another, provided we nnderstand that one is the cause of 
changes in the other in consequence of the laws of the 
harmony* 

i3p The objection which is based on the suppoeed 
Idhurgy of bodies, which would be without aetiTity 
[acüon] while the soul believas them to be in motion, 
caimot hold because of this very unfailing con-espondence, 
which the Divine wisdom has established 

In tli© Eemar^m Leibniz say» : * Bodiea were necesaaj-y so that 
theTe might be produced not ojily out miities and souls hnt also 
thos© of tho other corpor^al subatances, animalä and plants. which 
»je in OUT bodles and in those which Surround us* (G. iv. 493 \ 
This last sentenc© indkates Leibniz's real anawer to th© difficalty 
(the answor he would havo ^iven in later y(?Ärs\ rix. that ulti- 
matflly all bodiea are souls or Manads, so thst to asJc why ther© 
&m bodieä is to &»k whj thera are other &011I& Ib the auswar 
«ufficient ? 

" E. haa * ihey all co-operat«.' 

E* h&s * I will evon raiae no objection against afty?ng/ 

" L e. the qualities of bodies, as they are percewed by our aeuses« 
Aa sensationa, facta of consciousnessj theso arö real^ according to 
Descartea * but as qualities of bodiea they are eoufused and tbera* 
fore UDreal. See Frinäpia^ Part |§ 66-70* 

^ Foucher saya that, en Leibnii's hypothesia, ' even although no 
motioD took place in bodies * [In harmony with the action of the 
fioul], * the soul would neTeiiholesa always think that such a motion 
doea take place ; in the ^me way aa aleeping people thiuk they arö 
ntovlng their limbs and Walking^ while neyertlieless their llmba 



OF THE NEW SYSTEM 



14, I have no knowledge of these idU^ uselesSf and 
inaciive masscs, to which refereBce is made» There ia 
activity [action] everywhere, and I mamtain it even 
more fully thao does th© reeeived philosophy ; because 
I hold that there is no body without motion, no sub- 
stance without fovce [eßortyK 

15- I do not und erstand the nature of the objection 
that is contained in tho words ; — In iruth, Sh\ it not 
evident that these opinions tvere formed with a special purpose^ 
in vietv, miä that th^e sifsiemSj apjKanng hij tvu^j of aßer- 
thought \venant apres coup\ were constntcted merel^ to safe- 
guard certain principles? All hypotbeses are müde ivlth 
a special purpose in meiv^ and all Systems appear fei/ tcay of 
aßerthought [vienneni apt^s cottp]^ in order to safoguard 
phenomena or appearancea ; but I do not se© what ar© the 
principles in favour of which I am said to be prejudiced 
and which I wisli to safeguard, 

16, If it is raeant that I am led to my hypotheais also 
by reasons a priori or by fixed principles, as is aetually 
the ease j this is rather a commendation of the hypo- 
thesis than an objection to it* It m uaually ©nough that 
a hypotheBis be proved a posteriori^ by being adequate to 
the phenomena ; but when there are in addition other 
reasons for it^ and these a priori^ it is so much the better. 

1 7, But perhapa what is meant ia that, having invented 
a new opinion, I have delighted to make use of it, rather 
to give myself airs because of ita novelty than beeauöe 
I have found any usefulness in it. I am not sure, Sir^ 
that you have so bad an opinion of me as to attribute to 
me these thouglits. For you know that I love truth^ and 
that, if I were so fond of novelties, I should have more 

at Test and not more at all. So, whon wido awako, aoula 
wotiM always continiiei to bö persuAdcd that fciieir bodiea move in 
obedience to tlieir volitiona, tbough neverthelesa these idlö And 
uaeleaa mftsaes would be inactii/e and would remain in ji contimial 
lethargy (E. 130 a ^ G. iv» 489), 

That isj force whieh ia not necesaarily observed, but includes 
tendency or the actiTe potentiality of obaery&d foree. 



326 



FIEST EXPLANATION 



eagerness to produce them — especially those whaso sound- 
üess is recognized, But, lest ihose who know me less 
should give to your words a meaning which we should 
not like*^^, it ynll bt* enough to say, that in my opmion 
it is impossible otherwise to explaiii tramcunt acÜvttif 
\fadhn emanente] in conforniity wiih the laws of nature, 
and that I thougiit that the use of my hypothesia would 
be evident, owing to the diffieuHy which tbe most able 
philosophera of our time havo found as to the inter- 
relafcion [commummtmi] of minds iesprits] and bodies, 
and eTOn of bodily substances with one another: and 
I do not know but that you y ourseif have found some 
difficülty in thia. 

18, It is true that, iii my view, there are forces [efforts^ 
in all substanees ; but tJie^ forcea [effofis] are, rightly 
speaking, only in the substance itself, and wliat followa 
ft'oni them in other substances takeg p3ace only in virtue 
of a harmon^ pre-estühlislied^* {if I may use the word), and 
in no wiae by a real influence or by the transmission of 
some spedes ov quality^^ As I have explained what 
aetivity [adio?*] and passivity [pasdon] are^ the nature 
of force [e#or^] and of resistance may be inferred. 

19. You say, Sir, that pou know tJiere are still mamf 
questions to hepiit^ Itefore tJiose which huvebeen discussing 
can he äccided. But perhaps you will find that I have 
already put these questions ; and I am not sure that your 
Aeademics have applied vvhat is good in their method 
more rigorously and effectively than I^. I strongly 

" reads * contmry to my intontiona/ 

* That iJ^, aetivity which apparontiy passes boyond the ffuhstanee 
iteelf and hijs effects in other substanöcsa. It ia the aarue thmg 
thö Mntiuenee ' of onö siibatauco upoa anotlier. Soe De ipsa Natura 
(1698), § 10 (E. 157 h ; iv. 510), where LeibniK iisoa the expreasion 
iranseunies creaturarum acUom», 

^* This 13 the first use of the term by Leibniz. 

^ See Mmadot^^ § 7» note 10. 

FoTicher wrot© : * We 011 ght to observe the lawa of thö 
Acadeniice, the Becood of whiüh forbida ns to put in queation 
matter 4 which we dearly see cannot be aettled^ as bj© almoat all 
tbofie of which Wö have beeu speaking ; not that thßä& quöstions 



OF THE NEW SYSTEM 



approve of seeking to demonstrate truths from first 
principles; it is more useful than people think, and 
I have often put this precept in practice. Thus I com- 
mend what you say on this point, and I would that your 
example may lead our philosophers to think of it as they 
ought. 

20. I will add a further reflexion, which seems to me 
helpful in making the reality and use of my System better 
understood. You know that M. Descartes believed in 
the conservation of the same quantity of motion in bodies. 
It has been shown that he was wrong in this ; but I have 
shown that it is still true that there is conservation of 
the same moving force, instead of which he put quantity 
of motion. Nevertheless, he was perplexed by the 
changes which take place in the body in consequence 
of modifications of the soul, because they seemed to 
break this law. But he thought he had found a way 
out of it (which is certainly ingenious) in saying that 
we must distinguish between motion and direction ; and 
that the soul cannot increase nor diminish the moving 
force, but that it changes the direction or determination 
of the course of the animal spirits, and that it is in this 
way that voluntary motions take place It is true that 
he made no attempt to explain how the soul acts so as to 
change the course of bodies, for there seems as much 
difl&culty in this as there is in saying that the soul gives 
motion to bodies, unless with me you have recourse to 
the pre-established harmony ; but it is to be observed 
that there is another law of nature, which I have discovered 
and proved, and which M. Descartes was unaware of, 
namely, that there is conservation not only of the same 
quantity of moving force, but also of the same quantity 

are absolutely insoluble, but because they are soluble only in 
a certain order, which requires that philosophers should begin by 
Coming to an agreement as to the infallible mark of truth, and 
should confine themselves to demonstrations from first principles * 
(E. 130 b ; G. iv. 490). 

^ E. omits * often.* Cf. Introduction, Part ii. p. 59. 

* See Monadölogyj ( 80, note 127, and Introduction, Part iii. p. 89. 



328 MRST EXPLANATION 

ofämctkm in whatever Hne [de quelque cöte] ^" we take it in 
the wQticL Tliat is to say, dmwing ariy atraight line you 
please, and takiiig also such bodies and so many of them 
as you please, you will find that, considering all these 
bodies together, without oniifcting any of those which aet 
upon any one of thoae which you have taken, there 
will always be the same amount [quantiU] of progression 
in the same direction \du meme cöte] in all lines parallel 
to the straight line you have taken — ^ohserving that the 
total amount o£ progression is to be calculated by sub- 
tracting from the amount of progression of the bodies 
whieh go in the given direction, the amount of progi-ession 
of thoije which go in the opposite direction This law, 
being aa good and a^ general as the otber, deserved as 

^ E. reads vera gtidque mU^ 

See Pi inciples of Nuhire and of Grac^, § it, note 48. Cl Epistola ad 
JSuj'nüWftuw» (1696) (G, Matli. iü. S43 j E, loB not©) : * In the next 
place it is to b© <>bs«i'Y©d that I mak© & distinetion between ab^ctlutä 
force and directiDg forcßi although I c&n deduee a.nd demonatmte 
directing foroe from the solo consideration of absolute power. And 
indeed I pi*öV(j tliat tbere is conEervation not only of th© aamö 
absohlte force or quantity of actlon in the ivorldj hut al'SO of the 
aamö direeting fore© and th© sani© qnantity of direction in the 
j^ame linea [ad easdem partss]j i. e» the eame quantity of progression ^ 
its direction lietng talsen into aecoiint and th© quautity of pro- 
gression being counted equal to the masH multiplied by thö 
velocity, and nnt by the square of the velocity" [tnv^ not mo^j. 
* Ne Verth ©less this qnantity of progreasion diJfora from quantity 
gf motlon in tliis way, that wh©n two bodiea are moving in 
opposite directiona their total qnantity of motion (in the Cartesian 
flenae) is to b© got by adding together the quantity of motion of 
each (calculated aä the inass into the velocity) j hut the qnantity 
of progression is to be got liy suhtracting the on© from the other ; 
for in sach a eas© the dilforenc© b©tweeii the quantitiea of motiotL 
will be the qnantity of progression. Therefore when Descartes 
thüught that h© conM safeguard the qouVh power of actin g on the 
body in thia way, thafc wliil© the &oul eannot increase or dinjinish 
tli© quantifcy of motion in the world, it can nev©rth©l©93 increaae 
or diminish th© qnantity of dir©etioTi of the [animal] spirits, he 
erred throiigli not knowing this new law of ours regarding tlie 
cen&ei*Tatioji of the qnantity of direction, wbi«h is no lese beautiful 
and inviolable than the law of the conat^rvatlon of absolute force 
[orfui] DT power of aetion.' The * qnantity of progression ' would 
now b© calLed a projection of the qnantity of motion. A füll 
explanation, with diagramsr will be found in the appendix ta 
Boutroux'a edition of the Motiaddiigü. 



APPENDIX H 



little to be broken, and this is so, according to my 
System'**, in which there is conservation of force and 
direction, and none of the natural laws of bodies are 
broken, notwithstanding the changes which take place 
in body in consequence of changes in the soul. 



APPENDIX H. 

ON THE ELEMENTS OF EXTENSION. 

One of Foucher's objections to the New System was based on 
the contention that extension has no ultimate real Clements 
(E. 129 a ; G. iv. 487). In some Remarques sur les Objections de 
M, Foucher (G. iv. 490) Leibniz replies : * The author of the 
objection does not seem to have rightly understood my view. 
Extension or space, and the surfaces, lines and points that can 
be coneeived in it, are nothing but relations of order or Orders 
of co-existence, both as regards that which actually exists 
and as regards the possible thing that might be put in place 
of that which exists. Thus they. have no ultimate component 
Clements [principes]^ any more than number has. And as 
a broken number, for instance ^, can be further broken into 
two-fourths or four-eighths and so on ad infinitum, without our 
being able to reach the absolutely smallest fractions or to 
conceive the number as a whole formed by the combination of 
ultimate Clements, so it is with a line which can be divided, 
just like this number. Again, strictly speaking, the number \ 
in the abstract is a perfectly simple ratio [rapport], not at all 
formed by the compounding of other fractions, although in 
numbered things there is equality between two-fourths and 
one-half. And we may say as much regarding an abstract line, 
since compounding takes place only in concrete things, or the 
masses of which these abstract lines indicate the relations. 
And it is also in this way that mathematical points are to be 
regarded : they are merely modalities, that is to say extremi- 
ties. And as in the abstract line all is indefinite, it has 
reference to everything which is possible, as in the case of 

E. reads * and this * [i. e. the breach of the law] * is avoided by 
my System.' 



330 



APPENDIX H 



fmctiona of a uumber^ withotit our trouLling alDOut divisions 
actually made^ which indicate points in the line in varioua 
wajö, But in actual substantial thiiigs the whole m a ium or 
aggregate of simple substancea or mther of a multitude oi' real 
TJinita [uniie,^]. And it is the confoonding of the ideal and the 
actual that has hrought the whole matter itito confusion and 
ha^ prodaced the labyrinth de compositione conthiui. Those 
who have supposed the line to he made up of points have 
Bought for the primary elements in ideal things or relations, 
which was quite a mistake ; and those who have foand that 
relations like n um her or space (which includes the order or 
relation of possible co- existent things) cannot he formed by 
the aggrej^tion of points, have uaually made the nuetake of 
denying the primary elementa of snbstantial realities^ as if 
they had no primary uiiities, or as if there were no simple 
suhstances, Neverthelesa number and the line are not chimeri^ 
üoi things, aUhough they are not thna compounded, for thej 
are relations wliich irtvolve etemal tiiiths, in accordance with 
which the phenomena of natnre are ordeved, Hence it may 
he said that^ considered in the abstract, J and are indepen- 
dent of üne another, or rather the total ratio [mppo7i] i is 
anterior— in the order of reason [dans U signe de la raisöii}^ as 
the Scholasties say — to the partial ratio \, since it is by the 
B^ibdivision of the half that we come to the fourth, following 
the Order of what is ideal ; and the same is the caee with the 
üne, in which the whole is anterior to the part beeauae the 
part is only possible and ideah But in realities^ m which 
there are only divisions actually made, the whole m merely 
ä ßum or aggregate, as in the caae of a flock of sheep, It ia 
tme that the number of simple enbstances which enter into 
a niass, however small it be, is infinite, since in addition 
to the aoul which conatitutea the real nnity of the animal, th© 
hody of the sheep (for instance) is actually snhdivided, that 
ia to say it is also an aggregate of invisible animals or plant» 
(which are likewiae Compound) besides that which constitutea 
also their real unity ; and although this proceeds ad hißnltum, 
it ia manifest that nltimately all is reducible to these unitiea, 
the remainder or the aggregates being merely welKfounded 
phenomena/ 



TmRD EXPLANÄTION ^— EXTRACT FKOM A 
LETTER OF D. L. BEGARDING HIS 
PHILOSOPHICAL HYPOTHESIS AND THE 
CURIOUS PROBLEM, PROPOÜNDED TO 
THE MATHEMATICLiNS BY ONE OF HIS 
ITRIENDS, WITH AN EXPLANATION RE- 
GARDING SOME DLSPUTED POINTS IN 
PRECEDING JOÜRKÄLS BETWEEN THE 
AlJTHOR OF.THE PRINCIPLES OFFMYSICS'' 
AND THE AUTHOR OF THE OBJECTIÖNK 
1696. 

SoME leained and acute friends of mine having coli- 
sidered iny new hypothesis on the great question of the 
Union of soul mtd hody^ aod having found it of vaVue, 
have asked me to give some ©xplanations regarding the 
objections which have been brought against it and which 
arose from its not baving bean rlgiitly understood* 
I tliiiik the matter may be made inteUigible to minda of 
every kind by tlie following ülustration. 

Suppose two clocks^ or two watehes which perfectly 

* E. haa ^Third ExpläOiition/ wliicli. is omitted by 
^ KiehoUs Hartsoeker. * M.D*L/ is a Pseudonym of Loibmas. 
^ Seo Prefktory Note* Geiilincx*s use of the simüe ia as foUows \ 
* My will <?ertaiiily doea not move tho tno virig power that it may 
movo my linibs; but He who imparted motion to matter and 
Iflid down lawa for it, Hims^elf also forraed mj will. Therefore 
H© bound together thesiüQ mo^t diverse things (^the motion of 
matter and the choli^e of my will), so that wlien my will wills, 
&ucb a motion aa it willü ocuure^ &nd on ih& other hünd when 



332 



THIED EXPLÄNATION 



keep time together [s'accordeni], I?ow that may happen 
in three wai/s. The fii-st way consista in the mutual in- 
fiueoce of each clock upon the other ; the seeond, in the 
care of a*^inan who looks after thein ; the tkird, in their 
own aceuraey. The first tm^, that of influence^ wag 
ascertained on tiial by the late M, Huygens \ to hia great 
astonishment. He attaehed two large penduluins to the 
same pieee of wood. The continual swinging of the&e 
penduhims imparted similar yihrations to the particles of 
the wood ; but as these diiferent Tibrationa could not 

th© motion occura, th© will wüla it, without any causality or 
iufluenee [^ir^fluxml of thö one upon thö other ; in the ca&e of 
Iwo eloeks whioh are cnrefully adjusted togethor to the daily 
couree of tht^ suii, as oftuii aj? the ono striktes and teils us the 
hours, the other strikea in the same way and indicates! the hourg^ 
and that apart from any cangtality^ by which the one might produce 
thia effect in the other, but solely oa aceounfc of the counoxion 
whieh coraes from the fact that both wer© m&do by the same 
art and with similar workrnansahip. Thua, for example, the 
motion of the tongue accompanioa our yohtion to gpeiik, and thi* 
volition aceompaniea that motion : and the motion dooa nöt depend 
upon the volition, nor the voHtion upon the motion, but both 
depend upon the same Supreme Artifieer, who ha3 So wönderfully 
tsonnected and bound them together/ Etkica, Tiact. I. cap» 2, | a, 
Bote 19 ; Land's ed,, vol. iii. an. Cf, ibid. note 48 ; Land, HL aacK 
Cf. also Introduetien, Part ii, p. 43. 

* Chriatian Huygens (1629^3695) was a mathematieiaBr phy- 
sicist and astronomer, who livod for the most part in Holland ^ 
where he was born, and in France, whertj Loibnii:, cuming to 
Parii in 1670^ mot him* Antl^^ipating the rovocation of the Edict 
of Kantt'3^ the Protestant Huygens left Paris in i6Sr and returned 
to Holland^ but he continued to corrospond with Leibni^ on 
mathematical snhjecta. In 1673 Huygens published his great 
work Hürdogium ösciflaforiumj afte d$ m&tu pendulomm ad hmologia 
adaptato^ in which he gave a füll aceount of a d iaco very he had 
made in 1656, that of the pendulum clock. Am eng the other 
gireat works of Huygens were discoTeries in eonnoxion with the 
aatronomy of the planetä, the andalatory theory of light, and 
the use of spiral Springs for regulating the balances of watohea. 
Leibnie frequently acknowledges hi» greift indobtednoas to 
Huygens in rcgard to mathematies, and in July, 1695^ he writes 
to Nicaise : * Not hing ean equal the lom of the mcomparablo 
Huygens. Most certainly he oiight to be named immediately 
after Galileo and Descartos, He might still haT© given uä great 
light upon nature ' (Ö. ii, 553). But oko where he says that 
' M. Huygens had no taste for metaphysics.' Lattre ä RBmmid (17 14) 
(E. 703 Q. HL 607). 



OT THE NEW SYSTEM 



333 



contmue in tbeir proper order, without interfering with 
one another, unless the pendulums kept time together^ 
it happened, by a kind of wonder, that wen wlien their 
swingiiig was deKberately disturbed they soon came to 
Swing together agam, somewhat like two Btretched strLDga 
that are in unison» 

Tlie second way of making two clocka (even though 
they be bad ones) constantly keep time together would 
be to put them in charge of a skilled workman who 
should keep them together from moment to mornent, 
I call tili 3 the way of assistanee. 

Finally, the ilnrä imji will be to make the two clocks 
[pmdules] at first with such skill and aecuraey that we 
can be aure that they will always afterwards keep time 
together. This is the way of pre-establighed agreement 
\cünsmtcmmt\. 

l^ow put the soqI and the body in place of the 
two clocks. Their agreement [öccorii] or sympathy will 
also ariee in one of theae three ways, Tke wap of in- 
flumce is that of th© common philosophy; but as wo 
cannot cohceire material particles or immaterial species 
or qualitieg which can paas from one of these substanees 
into the other, we are obliged to give up tlua opinion» 
TJie wmj üf assiMance is that of the syatem of oceasional 
eauses ; but I hold that this is to introduee Deiis ex 
machina in a natural and ordinary matter, in which it is 
reasonable that God should intervene only in the way in 
which He Supports [conmurt d] all the other things of 
nature» Thua there remains only my hypothosis, that 
is to say, ijic way of the harmony pre-estahUshed by a con- 
trivance of the Divin© foresight^ which bas from the 
beginning formed each of these substancea in so perfect, 
so regulär and accurate a manner that by merely follow- 
ing its own laws which wer© given to it when it came 
into being, each substanee is yet in harmony with the 
other^ just aa if there were a mutual influence between 
them, or as if God were continually putting His hand 



334 



THIRD EXPLANATION 



upon them, in addition to Hia general Support 
furreucc]. 

1 dü not think that I need offer any further proof * 
unlesa I sbould be required to prove that God ia in 
& Position'^ to make use of this coiitnvanee of for^ight, 
of which we have instancas eveii among men^ in Pro- 
portion to the skül they ha%^e* And eupposing ihat 
God is able to make use of thia meana, it is Tery evident 
that this is the best way and the most wortby of Hirn, 
It is trae that I have also other proofs of it but tbey 
are deeper and it is unnecessary to adduce tbem bere ^ 



Let me say a word about the dispute between two Ter3^ 
elever j)eople, the au t bor of the recently-published Prifh- 
üipks of Fh^sies ^ and the author of the ObjecHons (wbich 
»ppeared in the Journal of August 13 and elsewher©\ 
because my hypotbesis serves to bring ihese oontroTersiea 
to an end. I do not understand how matter can be 

' It slioiild bö ob.«^orved tliat Leibniz*» argumuat from analogy 
proceedä upon the assumption that body and soulj or soul and 
Büul, are in reality quite indepimdent and separate from on© 
another» If thia bö not admitted hia ' proof ' break a down : the 
*three ways' do not ©zhaust the posaible hypotheses, Leibnij^ 
seema rat her to havö prided himst^lf ou emphasizing^ by Mb 
hypothes^isi, the difference between body and soul. In tbo Post- 
Script to aletter to Basnag«* d© Boanval (1696)^ part of which is 
printed aa the Second ^aircissement (E. 134h ; G. iv, 499'), Leibniat 
j»ays: '^Yon had a suapicion that my eitplanation would be irre- 
concilabl«! witb the great difference which, in <mr opinioii, tbere 
ia between mind [espriY] and body. But now you see clearly, Sir, 
that no one haa eatüblished their independenc© more cojnpletely 
than I. For sinec hithcrto wo liave bcen obliged to explain tlitür 
iuter-relation [communication^ by a kind of miracle, we have con- 
atantly giYon occasion to m-my i>eople to fear that the distinction 
l7etwet?n mind and body is not so real as peoplo tliink^ aince Our 
reasons for n^amtaining it are so fav^fetehed* Kow all these scruple^ 
{^aae/ 

* The Second ^daircissemenl iieada * ia skilfnl enough-' 

^ Tlie reforence i^ probably to ^juch argumeatsi aB those which 
he afterwarda gavc in tlie Monadol(>gy. 

* I have omitted two paragrapha dealing with a purely mathe- 
maticAl problem. 

' HartBoeker, See New B^ä^mf | 6, note 36. 
Fouclier. 



OF THE NEW SYSTEM 



335 



conceived as extended and yet without either actual 
or ideal" parts; and if it is so, I do not know what 
is meant by being extended I even hold that matter 
is essentially an aggregate, and consequently that there 
are always actual parts. Thus it is by reason, and not 
merely by the senses, that we judge that it is divided, 
or rather that it is ultimately nothing but a collection 
[multitude], I hold it as true that matter (and even each 
pait of matter) is divided into a greater number of parts 
than it is possible to imagine. And accordingly I often 
say that each body, however small it may be, is a world 
of creatures infinite in number. Thus I do not believe 
that there are atoms, that is to say, parts of matter which 
are perfectly hard or of invincible solidity ; while, on the 
other band, I as little believe that there is a perfectly 
fluid matter and my opinion is that each body is fluid 
in comparison with more solid bodies and solid in com- 
parison with the more fluid. I am surprised that it is 
still Said that an equal quantity of motion, in the Car- 
tesian sense, is always conserved ; for I have proved the 
opposite, and already excellent mathematicians have 
admitted it. Nevertheless I do not regard the solidity 
or consistence of bodies as a primary quality, but as 
a consequence of motion, and I hope that my Dynamics 
will show in what this consists, as the understanding of 
my hypothesis will also serve to remove several diffi- 
culties which still engage the attention of philosophers. 
In fact, I believe I can intelligibly answer all the doubts 
to which the lote M. Bemier^^ has specially devoted a 

mentcdes, i. e. thinkable. 
" The reference is probably to the views of Foucher, who denied 
that the essence of matter is extension, holding that all our ideas 
(including those of external objects) are merely modifications of 
oursolves and that, in order to represent an object, an idea must 
be like it. See Foucher de Careil, Lettres et OpuscvUes inedits de Leibniz, 
Introduction. 

" Hartsoeker's theory was that the ultimate elements of things 
are perfectly hard atoms in a perfect fluid, the atoms combined 
forming tangible bodies, while the fluid transmits light, &c. 

" Fran^ois Bemier (d. 1688) was more famous as a traveller 



336 



THIRD EXPLANATION 



book; and those who will think out what I have 
formerly published will perhaps find that they already 
have the means of making this answer. 

than as a philosopher. After travelling in Syria and Egypt, he 
went to India (where he was physician to Aurungzebe), and 
affcerwards to Cashmir. In Paris he was nicknamed * the Mogul.* 
He assisted Boileau in preparing the Mock Decree, given in the hall 
ofPamassus, infavour of the Masters of ArtSy PhysicianSy and Professors of 
fhe üniversüy of Stagira, in the land of chimerasy for the support of the 
doctrine of AristoHe, which by its ridicule killed the serious proposal 
that the French Parliament should ofiScially condemn the philo- 
sophy of Descartes. Bernier*s principal philosophical works were 
Abrege de la Philosophie de Oassendi (8 vols., 1678) and, by way of 
Supplement to this, Doutes de M» Bemier sur quelques-uns des principaux 
chapitres de son ahr^ge de la Philosophie de Gassendi (7 vols., 1684). The 
latter is probably the work to which Leibniz refers. There is 
an English translation of Bernier's Travels in the Mogul Empire (new 
ed., Constable, 1897). 



ON THE ULTIMATE ORIGINATION 
OF THINGS. 1697. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

This paper, written in Latin, is dated by Leibniz, November 
23, 1697. It may have been intended for the Acta Eruditorum ; 
but it remained unpublished until 1840, when Erdmann in- 
cluded it in bis edition. Leibniz here explains the function 
of the principle of sufficient reason in bis philosophy, expand- 
ing what be bad already said in a paper written about 1685, 
to wbich Erdmann gives tbe title, De Scientia üniversali seu 
Cakulo phüosophico (see E. 83 b ; G. vii. 200). §§ 36-48 of the 
Monadology may be regarded as a condensation of the main 
argument of this Essay On the TJltimate Origination of Things, 
In the latter part of the Essay we have a vindication of the 
optimism of Leibniz (that this is the best of all possible 
worlds), and some of the chief doctrines of the Thiodicie are 
given in outline. 

The ültimate Origination of Things is given by E. 147 sqq. ; 
G. vii. 302 sqq. 

Besides the world or the aggregate of finite things 
there is a certain unity [unum] which is dominant, not 
only as the souI is dominant in me or rather as the ego 
itself is dominant in my body, but also in a much higher 
sense\ For the dominant unity of the universe not 
only rules the world but constructs or ^ fashions it. It 
is higher than the world and, so to speak, extramundane, 
and is thus the ultimate reason of things. For the 

^ Cf. Monadology, §§ 70 and 7a, notes in and 115. 
8 E. reads *and.' 

Z 



338 



ON THE TJLTIMATE 



sufficient reason of existence cannot he found efther in 
any particular thing or in tbe whole aggregate and 
Beries of tbings. Let us suppose that a book of tbe 
elements of geometry existed from all eternity and that 
in succession one copy of it was made from anotber, it 
is evident that altbougb we can account for tbe present 
book by tbe book from -wbicb it was copied, neverthelesa^ 
going back tbrougb as many books as we like, we could 
never reach a eompl^te reason for it, becauso we can 
alway8 ask wby such books bave at all times existed, 
that is to say, wby books at all^ and wby written in 
this way. Wbat is trae of books is also true of tbe 
difiFerent stat€S of the world ; for^ in spito of certain laws 
of cbange, tbe succeeding state is, in some sort, a copy 
of that wbicb precedes i t Tlierefore, to whatever earlier 
State you go back, you never find in it the complete 
reason of tbings, that is to say, tbe reason wby tbere 
exists any world and wby this world ratber than some 
otber. 

You may indeed suppose tbe world eternal ; bnt m 
you suppose only a succession of states, in non© of wbich 
do yon lind tbe svufficient reason, and as even any number 
of worlds does not in the least help you to account for 
themj it is evident that tbe reason must be sought else- 
wbere» For in eternal tbinga, even tbougb tbere be no 
cause, tbere must be a reason ^ wbicb, for permanent 
tbings, is necessity itself or essence * ; but for the aeries 
of changing tbings, if it be supposed that tbey succeed 
one anotber from all eternity, tbis reason is, aa we shall 
presently see, the prevaÜlng of inclinations ^ which con- 

^ If a tbing is eternal, it cannoi haye a cau9« in Urne ; but there 
mußt still be some reason (other th&n a cause in time^ for ita 
eadatence. Cf. Aristotle's (äriov (whicL is wider than our * cause *> 
and the German Grund, 

* Ey *perraanent things' ismeant things thatare notcontingeüt, 
and these, in 'Leibiiisi'ölaiignagei aro ^possible' tliings — * necesgatj* 
tliingg^esgeneea* Cf. Monndotogyj §§40 and 43 ^ note^ 64 and 67. 

* The sufficient reason of ehanging or eontingent things 13 not 
an absoluta principe whoae oppoaite would self-contr adlet orj, 



ORIGINATION OP THINGS 



339 



sist not in necessitating reasons, that is to say, reasons 
of an absolute and metaphysical necessity, the opposite 
of which involves a contradiction % but in inclining 
reasons. From this it is manifest that even by sup- 
posing the etemity of the world, we cannot escape the 
ultimate extramundane reason of things, that is to say, 
Godl 

Accordingly the reasons of the world lie hid in some- 
thing extramundane, diflferent from the concatenation of 
states or the series of things, the aggregate of which 
constitutes the world. And thus we must go beyond 
the physical or hypothetical necessity, according to which 
the later things of the world are determined by the 
earlier, to something which is of absolute or metaphysical 
necessity*, of which a reason cannot be given. For the 
present world is necessary physically or hypothetically, 
but not absolutely or metaphysically. That is to say, 
the nature of the world being such as it is, it follows 
that things must happen in it just as they do. There- 
fore, since the ultimate root of all must be in something 
which has metaphysical necessity, and since the reason 
of any existing thing is to be found only in an existing 
thing, it follows that there must exist one Being which 
has metaphysical necessity, one Being of whose essence 

but a superiority of the good or desirable over the bad or un- 
desirable in the things which come to pass. The balance or 
preponderance of goodness inclines the will of ßod (without 
absolutely necessitating it) to create these contingent things. 

• The Word contradidimem seems to have been omitted j>er incuriam. 
Neither E. nor G. gives it. 

' Even though the world be taken as etemal, its necessity is 
not on that account absolute or compelling but merely * inclining,* 
and it therefore presupposes some one whose will is Mnclined/ 
i e. God. 

® E. reads 'something which is absolute or metaphysical ne- 
cessity.* Absolute or metaphysical necessity is a necessity that 
is independent of actual things, in contrast with hypothetical 
Cconditional, relative) or physical necessity, which is the necessity 
arising out of the natures of actual things, the necessity which 
a System of * compossible ' things imposes on its members. Cf. 
Introduction, Part ii. p. 67. 

Z 2 



340 



ON THE ULTIMATE 



it is to esist^; and thus there must exist something 
different from that plurality of beings, th© world, which 
as we adniitted and showed, has no metaphyaical necea- 

But to explain more distinctly how from eternal or 
essen tial or metaphysieal truths there arise temporal, 
oontingent or physical truths, we must fii'st observe tbat, 
from the very fact that there exists something rather 
than nothmg, it followa that in possible things, or in 
possibility or essence itself, there is a certain need of 
existence or, so to speak, a claim to exiat, in a word, 
that essence of itaelf tends to existence^'* From thia it 
furfcher followa that all possible things, that is, thixigs 
expressing essence or possible reality, with equal light 
tend to existence in proportion to the quantity of 
essence or reality, or in proportion to the degree of per^ 
fection which belongs to them, For perfection is nothmg 
but qiiantity of essence 

Henee it is moet evident that out of the infinite 
possible combinations and series of possible things there 
exists that one through which the gi^eatest anjount of 
essence or possibiüty is brought into existence. Indeed, 
there is always in things a piinciple of determination 
according to maximum and minimum, so that^ for inatance, 
the maximum effect is produced with the miiiimnm out* 
lay**- And the time, the place, or, in a Word, the 

* Cf. Spinoza's d istin ction between Sub^tance t^^ qiiod in est 
and Mode aa id ißml in alio est Ethics, Part i. de£t 3 luid 5. 9^ 

For Kantus erilicism of the coamological proof of the e^xistenoe 
of God, CriUque 0/ Füre Be^on, TräTmendenicU BialectiCf hk, 
§ Fourth Antimmy. 
" Cf. Monadn^og^f § 40, note 64. 

Eotli ajid U. read essmtiamf whiüh is manlfeeÜy a slip for 
exisimHam* E. eorrects the error in hia Errata. 
" Cf. Monadoio^j 41 54- 

Ontlay or cost is in itself loss or limitation. But if there Is to 
he a World afc all| there must be loas or limitation^ for if the 
elements of the world wer« not in diöerent degrees limited, there 
woiüd be üo variety. All wonid be one * splendidly null ' perfec- 
tion. Yet the world ia the best possible world in the senae th&t it 



ORIGINATION OF THIJ^GS 



xeceptivity or capaeity of the world may here be ßon- 
sidered as the outlay or ground on which the world ia 
to be built as flttiogly [quam cmmodisrnne] as possible, 
while tbe variety of forme corresponds to the fitness 
[commoditas] of the building and to the number and 
elögance of ita rooms. The whoio matter may foe likeiiecl 
to certoin games in which all the Spaces on a board are 
to be filled up according to definite niles, so that^ imless 
you make u&e of some ingenious contrivance, you find 
yourself in the end kept out of some refractory Spaces 
and conipelled to leave empty more spaees than you 
intended and some whicb you niight otherwise have 
filled, Yet there is a definite method by which the 
most complete filUng up of the Spaces may inost easily 
be accomplished. So if we have to draw a triaugle^ no 
other detennitiing condition being giveii, it will be an 
equilateral triangle ; and if a line is to be drawn from 
one point to another, no further condition being assigned, 
the easiest or shortost way will be chosen. So if once 
it is given that being is superior to not-being (that ia to 
say, that there is a reason why something ahould exiat 
rather than notbing ^^), or that possibility niust pass mto 
actuality, it follows that, though nothing further ia 
determijied^ there must exiat aa much as is possible con- 
sidering the capacity of timo and space (that is, of the 
possible Order of existing just as tües are put together 

eontains the gröateat balanc© of perfection over limitation qt of 
good Over evil, i e. the maximum of advaiatjigo flt the miDimiim 
of cogt. In this &oü£ü th© *prin<;iple öf tlie heai,' to whieh Leibniz 
con&taiitly refera, ia a 'principle of determiiiation according to 
maximum and minimuiu** That the cosi shonld be minimum 
might be taken üls & way of stating tbe ' hiw of parBimony/ 

That 18, tbe natural or essen tial limitg within whieh the 
aetufll World may espresa an ideal possibility, whIch hm hö limitsi. 
Tliis Umiting * reeeptivity or capacity ' (whicb is to the world wbat 
the botly iä to the individual Monad) niight bß regarded aa the 
passivity or matter of the world, in contrast with its acfcivity or 
form. 

Cf. Frinciples of NaMre and of Gracs^ § 7, 
" 1. not meröly the order which we digcover amoug aetual 
tbings, but tbe order which ia a condition of possible thinga 



342 



ON THE ULTIMATE 



in such a way fchat as many aa possible may be oontained 
m a given area. 

Thus it is wonderfully ma<3e known to m how in the 
very origination of things a certain Divine mathematica 
or metaphyiBieal mechanics is ©mployed and the greatest 
quantily is bmiight into existence [Ut the determimtion 
of the greatest quantity takes place]. So among all 
angles the determined [fixed] angle in geonaetry is the 
riglit angle and so also liquid» put into heterogeneous 
media take the form of great43st capacity, that of a sphem 
But best of all is the illustration we get in ordinaiy 
mechanica^ where, wheu several heavy bodies act againat 
one another, the resultant laotion is that which produces 
the greatest fall on the whole''\ For aa all possible 
things by an equal right tend to exist in proportion to 
their reahty^ so all weights by an equal right tend to 
fall in Proportion to their gravi ty ; and as in the case of 
the latter there is producod a motion which involyes the 
gi'eatest possible fall of the heavy bodies, so in the cas© of 
the formet there is produced a world in which the greatest 
number of possible things comes into existence* 

And thus we have physical necessity coming from 
metaphysical necessity ; for although the world is not 
metaphysically neeessary, so that its opposite involves 
a contradiction or logical absurdity, it ia nevertheleas 
physically necesaary or so determined that its opposite 
involves imxmrfection or nioral absurdity. And as possi- 
bility ia the pnnciple of essence, so perfection or degree 

Coming into existenoe, Only eompossibl© esitences can give iim , 
to co-tixi«tiiig phenomena, and time and spaco are tlie ordör öf ' 
CO-existenc« of theae phenomona. S^ö Intixiducstion, Part iii. p. loa. 

18 ^'WTaen God cakulates »nd employa thought^ the world is 
made.* De e/mTiex^m^ inter res et verha (1G77) (E. 77 a ; G. vii. 191). 
The phraae was writteo hy Löibni^ on tlie nmrgin of the MS, und 
may accerdingly be of later date» 

" Th© right angle iö always 90^ ; but an acute or an obtiise angl« 
is variable in size. The right angle ia thus ' fiied ' or * determined,' 
and the right angle is the greatest angle at which on© lin© can 
meet another. 

" The finggefition ig of some such arrangement aa we have in 
a System of puUeys. 



OEIGINATIOK OF THINGS 



343 



of essence (through which more thin^ are compossible 
the greater it is) is the principle of existence. Whence 
at the same time it is manifest how the Author of the 
World is froe, although He does all things determinately, 
for He acts from a principle of wisdom or perfection* 
Indifferenca Springs from ignorance» and the wiser a 
man is the more is he determined towards that whieh is 
moat perfecP\ 

Bwt, you will say^ however beautiful may seem thia 
comparison of a certain metaphysical determining mo- 
chanism with the physical meehaiiism of heavy bodies, 
it nevertheless falls in this respect that heavy ho dies 
really exist and act, bnt posaibilities or essences anterior 
to existence or apart frora it are imaginary or fictitions 
and therefore no reason^^ of existence is to be sought in 
them. I reply that neither these essences nor what are 
called eternal trnths regarding these essences are ficti- 
tions, but that they exist in a cortain region (if I raay so 
call it) of ideaa^ that ia to say, in God Himself, the sonrce 
of all essence and of the existence of other things. That 
this is not a mere gratnitous assertion of mine is shown 
by ihe existence of the actual seriea of things. For since 
the reason of the seriea is not to be found in itself, as has 
been ahown above, but is to be sought in metaphysical 
necessitiea or eternal truths, and since existing things 
can come only from existing things^ as we have already 
remarked, eternal trnths must have existence in some 
absolutely or^ metaphysically necessary subject^ that is, 
in God, through whom these things which would other- 
wise be imaginary are (to use a barbarous but expressive 
Word) realized^*. 

And indeed we actually find that all things in the 

Cf. IntroductioDj Part iii. 145. 
Or * ground.' E. rmds 

That is to say, God ^ivea tliom a oertain reality or existeoco in 
His understandivig, as disitinct from existence in Uie adutü uiorld^ which 
belongs to contingtjut tliingä, Cf. Monadühygy, IM3j 44t 4^ and 
47, notfi 75. 



344 



ON THE ULTIMATE 



World take place in accordanee with fcbe laws, not only 
geometrical but also metaphysicalj of etfärnal truths^ that 
is, not only in aecordanee with matenal necessities but 
also in accordance with formal reasons^. And this is 
not only true in general as regai-ds the reason (which we 
haVe just explained) why a world ezi^tB rather than not, 
and why it exists thus rather than otherwise (a reason 
which is to be found only in the t enden cy of possible 
things to esiöt) ; but also when we come down to par- 
ticular thinga we See that metaphysical laws of cause, 
power^ activity, are preaent in a wonderful way through- 
out the whole of natura, and that they are eren superior 
to the pnrely geometrical laws of matter, aa to my great 
astonishment I found when I was explaining the laws 
of motion, so that^ as I have ekowhere more fuUy ex- 
plained ^, I was ultimataly compelled to give up the law 
of the geometrical composition of forces [conakis] which 
I had maintained in my youth when I had more belief 
in the material view, 

Aeeordingly we have the ultimate reason of the reality 
both of essences and of existences in one Being who is 
necessarily greatery higher, and older [anter ms] than the 
World itself^ since through Ilim not only the existing 
things whieh the world contains but also possible things 
have reality, But this ultimate reason can be found 
only in one source on account of the inter-eonnexion of 
all these things But it is manifest that from this 
source existing things continually eome forth [promanare\ 
that they are being and have been produced by it, since 
it does not appear why one state of the world rather 
than another, the state of yesterday rather than that of 
to-day, öhould flow from it^^ It is also manifest how 

^ E. read«) ^ necossities ' instead of ^ reasons/ 
^ See Appendix I, p. 351. 

" That is to say, tho actual sy&tem of things ia on© and tkerefore 
its source is one. Ct MoriadoUj^, § 39. 

^ The reference is not quite elear. Jauet translateB *from the 
World it&elf/ Kirchmaim translatea ' from this source/ Du J3JQ,et's 



ORIGINATION OP THINGS 



345 



God acta not only physicaUy but also freely, how not 

only the efßcient but also the final cause of things is in 

Hirn, and how He manifeats not only His greatness and 

power in the mechaniam of the world as alroady con- 

strueted, but also His wisdom and goodness in the 

constnicting of it 

And lest imy one should tbink that ive are bere con- 

fotinding moral perfection or goodnesa with metapbysical 

perfection or greatness and, allowing tbe latter, should 

deny tbe former, it is to be observed that it follows from 

what has been said not only tbat tbe world k most 

perfect physically, or, if you prefer it, metapbysically, 

tbat is to say, that that seriea of tbings bas come into 

existence in wbicb tbe greatest amount of reality is 

actually manifested, but also that the world is most 

perfect morally because genuine moral perfection ia phy- 

sieal perfection in mLnds [mentes] thems^lvea Where- 

fore the world is not only tbe most admirable mechanism, 

but it is also, in so far as it is made up of min da [mmtes\ 

the best Commonwealth, througb wbicb there is be- 

stowed upon minds the greatest possiblo bappiness or 

joy, in wbich their pbyaical perfection consists^^ 

mteqjretationT the passaj^ wouLd mean that all tlie statfls of the 
world lUUöt come from God^ in whose natura to be foiind th© 
suffiGieiit reaaon of all and of eacli^ and not from tlie world itself, 
which cannofc supply the stifficient r&aaon of ajay, On Kirchmann'ö 
interpretation, the meaning wonld be that eaeh stafcß of tlie World 
comös from God by a ' mntinual ereatioii/ becausö there ia no reason 
why God should create one atate ruther thau another. Bofch inter- 
pFötationB are penible ; but Janet's seems the niore natui^aJ. 
2* Cf. Monadolo^^ 47j 4Ö, 55* 

^ *Phya.ieal' herö meana ^natural' or ^according to the specific 
nature {(f>ijffts) of the thing* in eontrsst witli * metapliyi^icar in the 
sense of 'absolute, indepondent of tlie apeciäc nature of tho thiiig/ 
Thu3 (ef» Siipra) * the World is most perfeet physically ' meana that 
it& individual memhers or elomentü? nre perfect m the nature of 
each. allows, whUe * the world ia most perfect metaphyaically ' moana 
that the world aa a whol© i& the most perfect poaBihlü. So alao 
* genuine moral perfection is physical perfeotion in minda them- 
selvea ' means that the specific natural perfection of mind is moral 
perfection* 

Cf. Monadolügy^ S| 86 sqq. 'Felicity is to persona what per- 
fection is to beingä^^ Paper without a titl« (i686) (G, iv, 46a). 



346 



ON THE ULTIMATE 



Btit, yoü will ßay, we find tliat the opposita of this 
takes place in the world, for Tery often the best people 
suffer the worst tliings^ and those who am innocent, both 
animals and men, are afflicted and put to death even 
with torture ; and indeed the world, espeeially if we 
consider the goveriiment of the human race, seems rather 
a confused chaos than anything directed by a supreme 
wisdoiTL So, 1 confeea, it seems at a iirst glance, but 
when we lüok at it more closely the opposite conclusion 
manit^stly loilowa a priori from those very considerations 
which have been addueed, the conclusion, namely, that 
the highest possible perfection of all thiüga^ and therefore 
of all minds, is brougbt about. 

And indeed, as the lawyers say, it is not proper to 
judge unless we have examined the whole law. We 
know a Tery small part of eternity which is immeasure- 
able in ita extent j for what a little thing is the recoi4 
of a few thousand years, which history tranBmits to us ! 
Nevertheless, from sö slight an experience we rashly 
judge regarding the ixnmeasureable and eternalj like men 
who, ha Ving been horn and brought up in prison or, 
perhap^ in the subterranean salt-mines of the Sarma- 
tians^^, should think that ihere is no other light in the 

^ Tiie referenc© probably to mme of tli© SÄlt-mmeg ia or ii©ar 
the Carpathiana, whieh are th© richeat in Europe» The most 
fnmouä fialt-mineB in tliö World ai-e at Wielicza^ near Cracow in 
Ofllicia (whieh in Leibaiz'a time was still part of the kingdom of 
Foland). They have been worked for about 600 yeftra, and ma^iy 
of th© workera live permaneatly undergroutid, there belng streeta 
and houHua and, in short, eomething like a village in the lowor 
levela. In Jererny Collier's DidionaTy^ publiühed towardä the end 
of the seventeenth Century^ tte famous saU-mines are said to be 
those of Epi^riea, in northern Hungary, on thö othor »ide of the 
Carpathiaas from Criicow. Sarmatia. ia a very vagat^ word. Äö- 
cording to Ptolemy it inclnded alt the eastern E\iropeaii piain from 
the VisfcuLa and tho Dmoatt?r to the Volga. In any case it ineluded 
th© distncfc of the sjalt-mines referred to, Leibni;!; elaewhere seemj« 
to identify Barmati an with Slavonic apeech. {Nrnivcaux Essitia^ iiK 
2, § I j E* 299 b ; G, V, 359, a6o.) In English verse^ SarmatiÄ is 
often uaed aä Bynonjmoua with Poland, e.g. ^Sarmatia feil, un^ 
wept^ with out a crime * (Campbell, i^osicres (if fibgöi Piirt i. line 376 ; 
no& al&o 1, 407), 



ORIGINATION OF THINGS 



347 



World than that of the feeble lamp which hardly sufficea 
to direct their steps. If you look at a Tery beautifiil 
picture, having covered up tlie whol© of it except a very 
small part, what will it present to your sight, however 
thoroughly you examine it (nay, so much the more, the 
more closely you inspect it)^ but a eonfused mass of 
colours laid on without selection and without art ? Yet 
if you remove the covering and look at tli6 whole picture 
from the right point of view, you will see that what 
appeared to have been earelessly daubed on the canvas 
was teally done by the painter with very great art^'. 
The experience of the eyes in painting correaponds to 
that of the eara in muBic. Eminent composers very 
often mingle discords with harmouies so as to stimulattj 
and, as it were, to prick the hsarer, who becomes anxious 
as to what is going to happen, and ia so much the more 
pleased when presently all in restored to order ; just as 
we take pleasure in small dangers or risks of mishap, 
merely from the consciousness of our power or our luck 
or from a desire to make a display of them ■ or, again^ as 
we delight in the show of danger that is coonected with 
Performances on the tight-rope or sword-dancing {smds 
^}eriUeux)^^f and we ourselves in jest half let go a little 
boy, as if about to throw him from us, like the ape which 
carrled Christi ern, King of Demnark^'*, white still an 
Infant in swaddling-clothes, to the top of the roofj and 
then, as in jest, relieved the anxiety of eveiy one by 
bringing him safely back to his cradle, On the sarae 
priaciple sweet things become iiusipid if we eat nothing 
eise; sharp, tart, and even bitter things must be com- 
bined with them, so as to stimulate the taste. He 

^ A most interesting variant of thisi iUustTation occiirs in 
BosanqiteVä Ess$nti<tls of L&giOj pp. 55 sqq. 

^* Löibnlz gives the Frentili phraae tü «xplain his Latin, 

Probably Chvistiern or Christian V (1646-1699)^ the firat 
heröditary {not elected) King of De »mark, who waa reigning at 
the time when Leibniz wrote. In th© text he ia called Christiemiiar 
Chriatiem or Kriatiern heiug the Banish form of the name. 



348 



ON THE ULTIMÄTE 



who hm not tasted bitter things does not deserye sweet 
thinga and, imjeed, will not appreciate them. This 
is th© veiy law of enjoyment, that pleasure does not 
have an even tenor, for this begets loathing and makes 
US dul!, not happy^*. 

But as to our saying that a part may be diaturbed 
^^ithout destroying harmony in the whole, this muat not 
be undei-stoöd as meaning that no account is taken of the 
parte or that it is enough for the world as a whole to be 
perfectj although it may be that tiie human raee is 
wretched, and that there is in the universe no regard 
for justice and no care for ns, as is the opinion of aome 
whose judgment regarding the totality of things is 
not quite just. For it is to be obsei-ved that, as in 
a thoroughly well-constituted commonwealth care is 
taken, as far as may be, for the good of individuals, 
eo the universe will not be sufficiently perfect unless 
the interests of individuals are attended to, while the 
imiveraal harmony is presei^od^^. And for this no 

^ *To have a thou^and well-bound Virgilj^ in your library, always 
to sing airs from iliü opera of Cadmua and Hermione, to break all 
your porcelain that you might have nothing but cups öf gold, to 
have diamonds alcme for buttons, to ©at nothing but partridgesj 
to drink only Himgarian or Shiraa win© — would you call that 
reaaoö? ' TMudick^ 1 134 (E> 539 b; G. vi 179). £L Priimpt^ 0/ 
Nature and of Grac$, | iS ■ aliio Bacon, De ÄugmetUh^ iü, 1. 

^"^ Cf, T}woäice&^ § 118 (E. 535 a; G. vi* 169): *No substaneo U 
ab&olutely «^onttj^mptible or preciona in the sight of God. , * , It 
ia certaiu that God gives more importance to a man than to 
a lion ; yefc I do not kiiow if we can be eertaiti that God prefers 
one man to the whole species of liona in all respecta. But even if 
it wer© so» it would not follow that the interest of a certaiu n umher 
of men should provail in faco of a general diäorder, GXt 011 ding to an 
infinite number of created thinga, This opinion would be a relic 
of the old maximj now quite öut of reput©, that ev©ry thing happens 
solely on mau'a aocount.* Cf. Meditutim sur la fiotion &immun^ de 
ju$üm (Mollat» p. 63) ; * There are people who think that we ar© af 
tuo little confioquence, in tho sight of an infinite God, for Him to 
have any care for ua: we are suppoaed to be iu relation to God 
what th© Worms, wbich we ci-ush w^ithout thinking about it, are 'm 
relation to us. But this ia tö suppoae t hat God is Hke a man and 
eannot tliink of overything. Just bec5auae God is infinite, He doea 
thing^ without labour by a kind of coneequence of His will, as it ia 
a eensequence of my will and that of my friend that wä are in 



ORIGINATION OP THINGS 



349 



better standai'd could be set up than the very law of 
justice which declares that each should participate in the 
perfection of the universe and in a happiness of his own 
in Proportion to his own virtue and to the degree in which 
his will has regard to the common good ; and by this is 
fulfilled that which we call charity and the love of God, 
in which alone, in the opinion of wise theologians, consists 
the force and power even of the Christian religion Nor 
ought it to appear wonderful that so great a place should 
be given to minds in the universe, since they most closely 
resemble the image of the Supreme Author; they are 
related to Him, not (like other things) as machines to 
their constructor, but as Citizens to their prince ; they 
are to last as long as the universe itself, and in a manner 
they express and concentrate the whole in themselves, so 
that it may be said that minds are whole parts [partes 
totales] 

But as to the special question of the afflictions of good 
men, it is to be held as certain that these afflictions have 
as their result the greater good of those who are afflicted, 
and this is true not only theologically but also naturally 
[jphysice], as the grain cast into the earth suffers before it 
bears fruit. And in general it may be said that afflictions 
are for the time evil but in the end good, since they are 
Short wäys to greater perfection. So in physics, liquids 
which ferment slowly take also a longer time to purify, 

agreement, no new action being required to produce our agree- 
ment, beyond the resolve which each of us has made. Now if the 
human race and even the smallest thing were not well governed, 
the universe itself would not be well governed, for the whole 
consists in its parts.' 

^» Cf. Pope, Essay on Man, Fourth Epistle, lines 327 sqq. Nature, 
says Pope, connects 

*Man*s greatest virtue with his greatest bliss. 

Self-love thus push*d to social, to divine, 

Gives thee to make thy neighbour's blessing thine. 

Happier as kinder, in whate'er degree 
And height of bliss but height of charity.* 
See Introduction, Part ii. p. ai« 



350 tJLTlMATE OBIÖINATION OF THINGS 



whil© those whicb und ergo a greater agitation throw off 
certam of their ingredienta with greater force, md ave 
ihm moTe quickly reetified. And this is what you might 
call gomg back in order tliat you may put more foroe 
into yoür l©ap forward {qu'on recede pour mimx sanier*'^), 
Wherefore these things are to regarded not only as 
agreeable and comforting, but also as most true» And 
in general I ttiink there is notMng more true tban 
happiness, and notbing more happy and pleasant tban 
trutb, 

Furtber, to realize in its completeness the universal 
beauty and perfection of tbe works of Ood, we must 
recognize a eertain perpetual and very free progreaa of 
tbe whole universe, such that it is always going forward 
to gi-eater improvement [euUus]. So 6%'en now a great 
part of our earth hm received cultivation [adtura] and 
will reeeive ife more and more. And althougb it is true 
that aometimes eertain parts of it grow wild again, or 
again suifer destruction or degeneration, yet this is to be 
understood in the way in whicb aöliction was explained 
above, that is to say, tbat this very destruction and 
degeneration leads to some greater end, so that somehow 
we profit by tbe loss itself 

And to tbe possible objection tbat, if this were so, the 
World ought long ago to have become a paradise, tbere 
ia a ready ans wer. Althougb many substances bave 

et Prirmples of Nature and of Gracef § ra^ note 51. 

" Cf. LeUre ä la Frinc^sse Sophie (i 706"! (G. vii. 568) *. * And ther© 
i& ireaaon to think that the iiniver&ö itself develops from more to 
more and that all tenda to some end, since all come^ from an 
Autlior wJioso wiadom ia perfectj Wö may similarly believe tliat 
souls, whieh last long ag the univers«, go also from hetter to 
betteri at least natural ly [physiquemeni^ «nd that their perfection» 

on increa^ing, altliongh most ofton this take^ place imperceptibly 
and Bometimea after great circnita baekward/ S&e also Lettre ä 
Bourgvbet (iii^) (G. ÜL 5Ö9) : ' Although the universe has always 
been ©qually p<?i"f«ct* [i, e. each momentiiry state of the unlirerse 
uqually perft^ct with every other] Mt will novör bö süprerayly 
perfeet ; for it always changea and gains now perfoctions, thotigh 
it loses oid ones,' 



APPENDIX I 



already attained a great perfection, yet on account of 
the infinite divisibility of the continuous, there always 
remain in the abyss of things slumbering parts which 
have yet to be awakened, to grow in size and worth. 
and, in a word, to advance to a more perfect state [ad 
meliorem cuUum]. And hence no end of progress is ever 
reached. 



APPENDIX I. 

THE GROWTH OF LEIBNIZ'S THEORIES REGARDING FORCE 
AND MOTION. 

In the second of two dialogues, entitled Phoranomus seu de 
Potentia et Legibus Naturae (16S9), I^eibniz gives an account of 
the progress of his views regarding dynamics and physics. 
What foUows is a portion of this account, combined with 
part of a similar statement in the Specimen Dynamicum. 
' When first I escaped from the prickly thom-brakes of the 
schools into the more pleasant fields of later philosophy, I was 
greatly taken with that fascinating ease of understanding, in 
which I saw a lucid imagination comprehending all the things 
which formerly were wrapped in dark notions. And after long 
and careful deliberation I at length rejected the " forms '* and 
" qualities " of material things, and reduced all things to purely 
mathematical principles ; but since I was not yet versed in 
geometry, I was convinced that a continuum consists of points 
and that a very slow motion is broken by little bits of rest, and 
I was inclined to other doctrines of this kind, which commend 
themselves to those who seek to comprehend all things with 
the imagination and who do not notice the infinite which is 
everywhere latent in things. But although, when I became 
a geometrician, I put ofF these opinions, there yet remained for 
a while atoms and the void, as relics of a state of mind that 
was, in revolt against the idea of the infinite; for although 
I granted that every continuum can in thought be divided 
ad inßnitum, yet I did not really accept the view that in things 
there are innumerable parts which follow from motion in the 
plenum, At last, not only was I freed from this scruple, but 
also I began to recognize something deeper in Jbodies, which 



352 



APPENDIX I 



coüld not be comprehended by the ima^nation. , . , Tliia 
oug-ht not to mexa wondetful, for it w the nature of foundatioua 
to be bnmble, bat if tliey are secorelj Itiid, great massea ariae 
upon tliem, Accordingly^ when I as jet ackßowledged tke 
juriadiction of imagination alone in regard to niaterial things, 
I waa of öpinion that any natural inertia in bodits was 
unintellig-ible, and that a body at rest m mcuo or in a fre« 
Space must receive the velocity of another, howevcr emall that 
other might be ; and that thia does not actually happen in onr 
experience I attributed to the ajatem eBtablished hy the wiadom 
of the ßuprerae Äuthor of thinga, in which all thiaga are mied 
by the moat juat laws. Nor indeed did I doubt that the origin 
of the ajatem might be rationally thought out on mechanical 
principles from thoee veiy laws of natural bodiesj which explain 
o<;currence.^ by the composition of motiona, such as I expounded 
regarding aeveral casea in a treatiae which I publiahed when 
a young man.' FhoranQm^sfj aee Arch. f. Gesch. d. Phil, i, 577, 
* When I was a young man and, at that tinie, following 
Democritus and bis adherents in this matter, Gaasendi and 
Descaiiea, I regard ed the nature of body as consiati ng in mere 
inert mass, I iasued a treatlse with the title Hypothms Fhyswa^ 
in which I expounded a tbeory of motion both abstract (inde- 
pendent of the i^yetem of tbinga) and concrete (aa it appestrs 
in the jsyatem of things), which I aee has pleased many 
diatingnished men hetter than ita moderate worth deaerved. 
In thia treatiae I maintained that, auppoaing mj view of the 
nature of body to be right, every impinging body gives its 
impulae [conatim] to the body on which it impinges or whxch 
is directly in ita way, as such. For when the impact takea 
place, the body impinged upon endeavours to move forward 
and thua to go away^ and (aince, aa 1 then thought, body i« 
indifferent to motion or reet) thia endeavour [effoit, cünatus\ 
niust have its füll effect in the body Lmpinged upon, nnleaa it 
ia hindered by an opposite effort, and even if it ia ao hindered, 
since tliese different efforts muat be componnded together. 
Accordingly it waa manifest that no cauae can be given wby 
the impinging body should not achieve the effect towarda 
which it tendß or why the body impinged upon ahould not 
receive the whole Impulse [conatus] of the impinging body, and 
therefore the motion of the body impinged upon is compounded 
of ita own original impulae and the new or foreign impülae it 
has received* Wheuce I further ahowed that if in body there 



APPENDIX I 



353 



were recognized only mathematical notions, magnitude, figure, 
place, and their changes or their tendency [conatus] to change 
at the very moment of impact, and no account were taken of 
metaphysical notions, namely, of moving power [potentia] in 
the foim, and of inertia (or resistance to motion) in the matter 
[of the body], and if it were thus necessary that the result of 
the impact should be determined by a purely geometrical 
composition of forces [conatus]^ as we have explained: then 
it ought to follow that the impulse of the impinging body, 
however small that body may be„ is communicated to the whole 
of the body impinged upon, however large it may be, and thus 
the very largest body at rest is moved away by an impinging 
body, however small, without any retarding of the latter, since 
matter, thus understood, is not repugnant but rather indifferent 
to motion. Hence it would not be more diflBcult to move 
a large body at rest than a small one, and therefore there 
would be action without reaction, and no estimate of power 
could be made, since anything might be accomplished by 
anything. . . , But afterwards, having considered the whole 
matter more profoundly, I saw in what the systematic explana- 
tion of things * [i. e. the explanation of things as they actually 
are] * should consist, and I observed that my former hypothesis 
regarding the nature of body was not complete, and that this 
as well as other arguments proved that body must be regarded 
as having, in addition to magnitude and impenetrability, 
something from which arises the consideration of forces [vire»], 
the metaphysical laws of which, when combined with the laws 
of extension, give rise to those very laws of motion which l had 
called systematic. . . .* Spedmen Dyncmicum, &c. (1695) 
Math. vi. 240). * I am of opinion that the mechanical principles 
and reasons of the laws of motion do themselves arise not from 
the necessity of matter, but from some higher principle than 
imagination, and one independent of mathematics. . . . Besides 
I began to have considerable doubts as to the nature of motion. 
For when formerly I regarded space as an immovable real 
place, possessing extension alone, I had been able to define 
absolute motion as change of this real space. But gradually 
I began to doubt whether there is in nature such an entity 
as is called space ; whence it followed that a doubt might 
arise about absolute motion. Certainly Aristotle had said 
that place is nothing but the surface of what surrounds us 

A a 



354 



APPENDIX I 



[superficies amhientis]\ and Descartes, followingliiin,liad defined 
motion (that is, change of place) as change of neighbourhood 
\mutatio viciniae], Whence it seemed to follow that that which 
is real and absolute in motion consists not in what is purely 
mathematical, such as change of neighbourhood or Situation, 
but in motive force [potentia motrix] itself; and if there is 
none of this, then there is no absolute and real motion. . . . 
Accordingly I found no other Ariadne thread to lead me out 
of this labyrinth than the calculation of forces [potefUiae]j 
assuming this metaphysical principle, "That the total effect 
is always equal to its complete cause" [Qtiod effectus integer sit 
Semper aequalis causae suae plenae], When I discovered that 
this agrees perfectly with experience and satisfies all doubts, 
I was more confirmed in my opinion that the causes of things 
are not, so to speak, senseless [surdus] and purely mathematical, 
like the concourse of atoms or the blind force of natura, but 
proceed from an intelligence which employs metaphysical 
reasons.' Phoranomus^ see Ärch,f. Gesch, d, Phil. i. 577. In the 
first of these dialogues (PhoranomuSj &c.) Leibniz says: 'As in 
geometry and numbers, through the principle of the equality 
of the whole to all its parts, geometry is brought within the 
scope of an analytical calculus, so in mechanics, through the 
principle of the equality of the effect to all its causes or of 
the cause to all its effects, we obtain certain equations, as it 
were, and a kind of algebraic mechanics.' loc, cit, p. 576. Cf. 
Introduction to this book, Part iii. p. 107 note. 



* Fhys, A. 4. 212* 20. 



NEW ESSAYS ON THE HÜMAN^ UNDER- 
STANDING. 1704. 



By THE AüTHOR OF THE SySTEM OF PrE- 
ESTABLISHED HaRMONY. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

The New Essays contain the füllest statement of Leibniz's 
appreciation and criticism of Locke. Leibniz became ac- 
quainted with the main outline of Locke*s Essay, before it was 
actually published in English, by means of an abstract of the 
book, prepared by Locke, translated into French and published 
in Le Clerc's BihliotMque Universelle (1688), vol. 8, pp. 49 sqq. 
When in 1690 the Essay itself was published Leibniz read it, 
making notes as he went, and his criticisms were expressed in 
various short papers, some of which were transmitted to Locke 
through Thomas Bumet of Kemnay. Locke, however, seems 
rather to have disparaged Leibniz's criticisms and he did not 
count them worthy of a reply. Meanwhile Locke*s Essay 
passed through several editions, and in lyoo Coste's French 
translation of it was published. This enabled Leibniz, whose 
knowledge of English was somewhat imperfect, to make a 
thorough study of the Essay, and'afber writing some papers on 
special parts of it, he set himself to the task of preparing the 
elaborate exposition and criticism of the Essay which was after- 
wards published as the New Essays. The book was written 
somewhat hurriedly and discontinuously, during scraps of 

* G., with over-accuracy, omits * human,' which Leibniz cannot 
deliberately have intended to omit, for he includes it in the titles 
of the first three books of the New Essays, 

A a 2 



356 



NEW ESSAYS 



leisure time* Accordiixglj Leilmizj in riew of publicatioiii 
subiaitted hie workto Hizgony and Barbeyrac (the great Jurist), 
who reviaed a considerable portion of it, mcluding the Intro- 
düction, and made nnmeroua cbangea in ita expresaioa. 
Meanwhile a new edition of Coste*a tranBlation, revised and 
corrected bj Locke hiniBälf, wa3 promised, and Leibniz was 
itrongly advised bj Coste to delay publication imtil after he 
had Seen this new edition. Locke died in the end of 1704, and 
Leibni^j understanding that he had made conaiderable changes 
in his opinionsp feit that it was now of little uae to publish his 
own criticism. 

Accordinglj the ^tßte Esaaps remained in mannscript until 
1765, wben they were pnblkhed by Raspe, He printed the text 
in the form wbich it had finally aasumed after the correction 
and revision of Hugony, Barbeyrac and Leibniz hiniaolft 
Erdmann (E, 194 aqq.) follows thia text. Gerhardt (G, 39 
sqq.), however, haa thbught it better to reconstnict the original 
textt by going behind the correctiona, on the ground that, 
wbüe these eorrectiona often inipmve the French atyle of the 
original^ they do not alwaya so well expresa Leibniz'a thought, 
Boutroux, approving the conrae taken by Gerhardt^ haa in 
variona poinfcs corrected the text made by that editor. My 
tranalation is made from Boutroüx's text. Such variations aa 
involve a cbange in tranalation are nientioned in foot-notea. 

In the Introdaction to the New E.vtayji (which waa written 
later than the reat of the book), Leibnia aummarizea the inain 
points regarding which he differa from Locke ^ while he 
characteriaticaily suggesta that^ after all» the tüfferences 
between hia view and that of Locke are not aitogether in- 
aurmoun table. After some prefatory sentencea. the Intra* 
duction deala in the firafc place (a) with the quebtion whetber 
(aa Locke held) the mind ia tabula i^a or wbether (aa Leibniz 
thought) there are innate ideaa, neceaaary trutha, including 
the question wbether or not all oar knowledge comea from the 
Genaea (pp* 357-367)- (^) Thia leada naturally to the queation 
wbether (aa Locke aeema to say) there ia not hing in our mind 
of which we are not actually conacioua or whether (aa Leibnia 
maintaina) we have unconscioua perceptiona (pp. 367-385). 
Leibniz here connects hia psychology with hia metaphysica by 
Bhowing how the petiiea perceptims throw light upon the pre- 
established harmonyi the law of contiimity, the identity of 



NEW ESSAYS 



357 



indiscemibles and the indestructibility of souls, as well as 
their inseparability from bodies. (c) The next question con- 
sidered is that of atoms and the void (in which Locke believes) as 
against o^plenum (Leibniz's view) (pp. 385 sqq.). (d) References 
to the criticism of Locke by Stillingfleet lead to a consideration 
of the question whether matter can think, Locke maintaining 
the possibility of this, while Stillingfleet and Leibniz deny it 
(pp. 390 sqq.). This gives occasion to Leibniz to draw a 
distinction between the physical or real genus of a thing 
and its logical or ideal genus (p. 394), and in the remainder 
of the Introduction he applies this distinction, maintaining 
that as matter and soul are heterogeneous (i.e. not of the 
same physical or real genus), thinking, which is a mode of 
soul, cannot be a mode of matter, except by miracle, and that 
accordingly, if Locke's contention were true, we should have 
to adopt a philosophy of unintelligible qualities or faculties, 
which would be even worse than the Scholastic theories of 
*occult* qualities or faculties, so justly derided by later 
thinkers. 

Introduction. 

As the Essay on the Understanding^, by an illustrious 
Englishman, is one of the best and most highly esteemed 
works of the present time, I have resolved to make some 
remarks upon it, because, having for a long time given 
considerable attention to the same subject and to most of 
the matters with which the essay deals, I have thought 
that this would be a good occasion for publishing some 
of my opinions under the title of New Essays on the 
Under Standing, in the hope that my thoughts will obtain 
a favourable'* reception through appearing in such good 
Company. I have hoped also to be able to profit by the 
work of another, not only in the way of lessening my 
own work (as in fact it is less trouble to foUow the 
thread of a good author than to work on entirely un- 
trodden ground) *, but also in the way of adding some- 

^ E. reads * human understanding.* 
^ E. reads * more favourable.* 
^ E. omits the clause in brackets. 



358 



NEW ESSAYS 



thing to what he laas given us, which is always easier 
than maktng an independent beginIliIlg^ For I thinlt 
I Imye remoyed some difficulties which he left entirely 
alone. Thus bis repulatioii is hei pfui to me ; and besides, 
being disposed to do justice and very far from wisMng 
to less«n th© esteem. in which his work ia lield, I would 
increasG his reputation, if niy approval have any weight^ 
It is true tbat I often differ from liini in opinion ; but, 
far from ^ denying the worth of famous writers, we bear 
witness to it by making known in what respeet and for 
what reasons we differ from their opinion, when we 
think it necessary to prevent their aiithority from pre- 
vailing against reason on some important points''; and 
besides, in replying to such excellent men, we make 
it eaaier for the truth to be aecepted^ and it is to be 
supposed that it is principally for truth that they are 
working. 

In fact, although the author of the Essay says a thousand 
fine things of which I cordially approve, our Systems 
greatly differ, His has more relation to Aristotle and 
mine to Plato although in noany things both of us have 

* omits ^ftlwaya' and adds (after ^ beginnin^ ^ ^and working 
on entirely untrodilen gronnd/ 

* E. omita ftöm * For I thmk ' to * nny weight,* 

' E, reada *■ denying on that account the Worth of thls £ajaou9 
writer, 1 do htm justice/ &e, 

* E» omits the remainder of the Bentenöe, from thia point. 

^ The maln prineiplos of Leibniz's philoaophy are reallj much 
moro akin to the philosophy of Aristotle than to the doctrines 
which are peeuliar to Plato, Eut, aa regards Aristotlej Leibniz 
is höre thinking of that ei de of hia philosophy whioh led thft 
Scholafiticft to attribute to him tho saying, J^ihü esi in inMläctu qutjd 
nm primfuerit in sensu. {Ct Düna Scotns, Super UnizeTsaltlim BwpAyrft, 
Qtieation 3 : Ula proposiiio AristotdiSy nihü est in irüeUedu qiiin prius 
fuerii in s«nsM. , » .) This phraää does not occur in any of Ariötotle*n 
writings ; but it servos aa a fair enough analysiä of aoTeral pasaagei 
in tho Fnstm-ior Annlytics^ in which fwiffT7fff.r} is traeed to afu^^», 
though other passages aupplement this hy bringing in the work of 
fouF, (See ©special ly ÄnaL FosL iL 19, and Eth. ti. 3, §3.) The 
Tiew that the soul is a tabula rasa is anggest^ hy the pas^ge ; 



NEW ESSAYS 



359 



departed from th# doctrme of the&e two ancient writers» 
He is more populär, and I for my part am sometimes 
eompelled to be a littl© more acroamatic^'' and abstract, 
which is not of adTantage t-o me, especially when a liviiig 
language is used, But I think that by introducing two 
Speakers, one of wbom expcuods opiniona taken from 
this author's jEssa^, wbile tbe other adds my observations, 
I sbow tlie relation between us in a way that will b© 
mor© satisfactory to the read er tban if I had put down 
mere remarks, the readiBg of which would have been 
constantly intermpted by the neceasity of tuining to bis 
book in order to iinderstand mine, KeTertheless it will 
be well also to compar© our wxitings sometimes, and not 
to judge of hia opinions excepfc from bis own work, 
although I hav© usually retained his expressions, It is 
true that owing to the Hmitations involved in following 
the thread of another person's argument and making 
remarks upon it, I have been unable even to think of 
achieving the graceful turns of wbich dialogue is sus- 
ceptible ; but I hope that the matter will make up for 
the defects of the style, 

(Ik Änimaj iü, 4. 429*' 30). Cf. note is, it\fra. In regard to Plato, 
on the other hand, Leibniz is probably thinkmg mainly of the 
Platonio tli«ory of reminiFsconc©, according to which our knowledge 
of realities, in so far as we cau attaiü to it, ia a recoÜection or 
restoration of knowledgts posaessed by tho soul in a previoua atato, 
ao that necosaary and eternal trutha are^ in a aenae, innat© in ua. 
Oa the whole toatter cf» Nolea, Qttid Leibnisim jhislotdi d$hmntj and 
Trendelenburg, Eist. Beiträge, voL li. 

^* e, eaoteric, See Aulija GellitiSj, Xüt^s AtUca^j xiL 5 (quot^d 
by Ritter and Prclkr, Hist. PhiJ, üraec § 396), where a diatmction is 
drawn between the exoteric and the acroatiq ' wriiings of Aristot2e. 
Leibniz hitnself defintis the word : ' The Äcroamatic way of philo&o- 
phizing ia that in which all thinga are dem on straf ed, tho exoterio 
is that in which certain thiags are aaid withont deraonatra- 
tion^ and 3'et are confirmed by the eonsistency they liave wilh 
Variola other things and by probable [topicae] reaaons (or even 
reÄsons th^t might demonatrate, but are put for ward only aa 



360 



NEW ESSAYS 



The difFerences between us have regard to ßubjecta " 
of some importanca There is the question whether the 
soul, in ifc&elfj is tjntirely empty, like a writing-tablet on 
"Wbich nothing lia^ yet been written (tabula ram)j (wMch 
iB the opinion of Aristotle and of the author of the 
Essmj\ and whether everything that is inscribed upon it 
comes solely from the senses and expei'ience ; or whether 
the soul originally coutains the prineiples of several 
not Jons and doctrines, which are merely roased on certain 
occasions by exttjraal objeets, as I hold along with Plato 
and even with the Schoolmen, and with all those who 
Interpret in this sense the passage of St. Paul (Romans^ 
ii. 1 5), in which he shows that the law of God is written 
in men*s hearts. The Btoies ealled these principles^* 
7r/>oXiJ(^£t5 that iö, fundamental aasumptions or what 

probable), and are illustTated by instances and Bimilar casea,' De 
3lilo phti^mphim NisoUi (1670) (E, 63 a ; iT. 146). 
" E. reads * objeets/ 

1^ Cf* üote 9. Aristotle's m&oning, however, is very dllferent 
from tbat of Locke. 6 vods is not the ' soul/ but reason aa opposed 
U> senae. And there is a povt: tSira^?. The context the pasaag© in 
which foSr is coinpared to the \^i-iting4ablet shöwa fchat Ariatntle 
merely meant to proteat against the view that reason has certain 
complet© ' ready-made ' ideas, apart from all sense- tsxporiüac^). But 
thia is quite consiötent with holding that there are in reaswjin. 
Potential or Virtual forma or ideaa* Even the clean writing-tablet 
is flt löaat a writing-tablet and not a äheet of water on which 
nothing can b© written. Cf. Anima^ i\L 4. 429* 27 : Kai tu *^ 
ßt hiyovTfs TJ^P \fvx^y tlyai t6wüv flhwVj itXiJf ^tc ovrt oAtj dX^' if vor^Ttteiif 
öör* fvnXtx^^'^ dhAa. liut^afift yd tiBij. CL An(djfti{:a FosL ii. T9, 99^ 
ao sqq, 

^3 dpxaif grounds or Bourcea, 

E. reads ^ cximmon notions' after 'principleg/ 

The original liaa protepses. Tlie Stoie ir^HjAf^if'is, however, was 
not an anticipation prior to, or presuppo^d by, all esperienee, but 
the common image resulting from a seriös of aense-impreasiona, 
which leads na to expecfc other stmilar impreasions. The diatin- 
guishing oharacteristic of the npo^Yppfts ia that they arise f^vetvüK 
(naturaliy), and aro not doli berat ely constructed by ms. Thua 
Diogenes LaertiuS;, vii. 54 1 Iffri 8' ^ vpöAi^^^if twoia ^^vaitcff rwr 
«QÖuAötj. Cf. Racüai iv. quofced by Kitter and Praller, Bist. Phil. 
Qraec. § 393, in which the Stoics are repreaeiited aa holding a view 



NEW ESSAYS 



361 



we take for granted beforehand. Mathematicians call 
them common notions (kolvoI Iwotat)". Modem philo-" 
sophers give them other excellent names ; and, in 
particular, Julius Scaliger" named them semina aeter- 
nitatis item eoppa^^ as much as to say, living fires, 
flashes of light [traits lumineux] hidden within us but 
appearing at the instance of the senses, like the sparks 
which come from the steel when it strikes the flint. 
And not without reason it is thought that these flashes 
[ecZa^s] indicate something divine and etemal, which 
appears above all in necessary truths. Hence there 
arises another question, whether all truths are dependent 
on experience, that is, on induction and instances ; or 
whether there are some which have yet another founda- 
tion. For if some events can be foreseen before we have 
made any trial of them, it is manifest that we contribute 

much more akin to that of Locke than to that of Leibniz : 61 'XtojXkoI 
<l>a<Tiv orav ytvvrjB^ 6 ävOpomroSf ^x** '''^ ^y€fAoviic6v n^pos ^I^vx^^ 
&<nr€p X'^P^v evfpyov €ts dTroypaxfyi^' eis tovto fiiav kK&arrjv rSiv kwoiSiv 
kvavoypouptrai, But the peculiarity of the Stoic Monism makes it 
possible to regard this as less inconsistent with Leibniz's view than 
at first sight it appears to be. Cf. Rendairs Marcus Äurdius Anta- 
ninus^ Introduction, pp. Ixxvi-lxxviii ; and Bonhöffer, Epidet und 
die Stoa, pp. 187 sqq. 

Euclid calls axioms koivoL ivvoiai, 

" Julius Caesar Scaliger (1484-1558), one of the great scholars of 
the Renaissance. Among his chief works (besides many translations 
from Greek into Latin) were a treatise on Latin grammar, Be cattsis 
lingitae Latinae, and a book in Opposition to the views of Cardan, 
Exotericae Exercitationes de Subtilitate ad Hieromymum Cardanum. 

* Seeds of the eternal and kindling sparks.' The reference 
is to Poeticej Lib. iii. cap. 11. (sth ed., 1617, p. 211) : *Sunt in nobis 
insita zopyra quaedam, id est, semina aeternitatis.* For similar 
expressions cf. Poeticej Lib. iii. cap. i and 20 ; Poemata^ Pars Altera 
( 1574), pp. 79 and 160 ; and Ad Amddum Ferronum AtHcum Oratio 
{Epistolae et OroHones, p. 427). Zopyra is the Greek (imvpa^ * lights 
used for kindling fires.* In the Laws, bk. iii. 677 b, Plato speaks of 
the survivors of the Flood as (y icopvfjHus irov fffuicpä (timvpa rov rStv 
dvBpümojv diafffffojfffiiva yivovs, 

" Trait de lumiere is used in French for an illuminating thought^ 
and probably Leibniz's phrase is intended to suggest this. 



362 



NEW ESSAYS 



to ihem sometbing of our own^\ The senses, although 
they are necessary for all our acttial acquiring of know- 
ledge, are by no means sufficient to giv© us th© whole of 
our knowledge, aince the senses never give anything but 
instanoes^^ that is to say particular or in di vi dual tratha*^, 
Now all the instances which confirm a general truth, 
however numeroua they may be, are not sufficient to 
establifih the universal nee«ssity of thia same truth ; for 
it does not at all follow that "what has happened will ^ 
liappen in the same way* For example, the Greeks, the 
Komans, and all the other peoples of the e^rth, as it was 
known to the ancienta^*, always observed that before 
twenfcy-four hours have passed, day changes üito night 

^ E, reada ' on our pari* 
i. e. special coJäes, 

In a Lettre tmcitant ce qui est independaM des Sms et de ta Maiiire 
written to Queen Sophia Charlotte in 1702 (during the time when 
he was working at th© New Essays), Lcibtiiz saya : * We 11 &e our 
extern al sensea aa a blind ma.n useg his stick (after the similü of an 
aneient writer), and they make known to us ttoir particular objoots^ 
whieh are colounsj sonndst odoura, tastes, and touch-qtialitieB. But 
tlwy do not makö known to us what these Benae-qualltiea are, 
nor in what they consist. * . » It nvay be said that s^vtsG-q'imUUea are 
in fact o(xult qHaUHes^ and that there must be other more man\feM 
qualities, which can makü them eiplicable. Ajxd far frora ita being 
true that we Widerstand thingB of senae alone^ theso are the very 
thinga we uiidcratand lenat. And although they aro fumiliür to 
w© do not on that aecount eompi-^^hend them hetter, as* a pilot 
does not undorstand better than other peoplo tho natura of the 
magnetic needle which tunLS to tho north, although he haa it 
always bofore his eyes in the compasa, and on that account haß 
ölmoat oeased to wonder afc it» , . . Nevertheless I admit that, in 
our presont state, th© external senses are naces8Ary for onr thinking, 
and that, if we had none of them, we should not think, But what 
ia neceasary for Anything is not on that account the essence of th© 
thing. Airis neoessary to ua for life ; hnt our life ia something 
©lae than air, The senaes fnrniah us with matter for reasoningt 
and we never have thoughts so abstracfc that something of aense ia 
not mingled with them ] but reasoning roqtiirea in addltion some- 
thing other than that which ia of sense/ (G. vi, 499^ 500^ 506,) 

E. adda ■ alwaya/ 

E- haa merely ' and all other peopleap' 



KEW ESSAYS 363 

and nighi into day. But they would have been wrang 
if th^y had thought that the same rule is observed 
everywhere el&e^'^i for since that time, the oppoaifce hm 
been öxpemnced by people on a viait to Nova Zembla. 
And he would still be wrong who sliould tbink that, in 
our regions at least, it is a tjecessflay and etornal truth 
that shall endure for ever ^''j since we must hold that the 
earth and the sun itself da not ex ist nocessarUy, and that 
perhaps there wül come a time when this heautifiil star 
with its whole System will no longer ©xist, at least in ita 
present form Wbence it seems that necessary truths^ 
such m we find in pure mathematics and especially in 
arithmetic and geometry^ must have principles whoae 
proof does not depend upon instances nor, eonaequently, 
upon the witness of the senses, although without the 
sensea it would never have come into our heads to think 
of them. This is a point which ahould be carefully noted, 
and it is one which Euclid so well understood that he 
often proyes by reason that which is evident enough 
through experience and through sens^-images'^^ Logic 
also, along with metaphysiea and ethics [la ^noraU]^ of 
which the one forms natural theology^** and the other 
natural jurisprudence, are füll of such truths ; and con- 
sequently their demonstration can com© only from the 

omiU ^ eise/ E. reads * seen.* 

" E, omits * that shall etidure for ever/ 

^ et MünadoiQgy, § sS* 

Cf. tho lotter to Queen Sophia Charlotte, quotcd abeve: 'Thö 
sensee can indeed in a way mako knowfl to u& tbat which is, hut 
tliey can not make known that which onght to be or which cannot 
be other wise. * . . The sensos and induetions never yield us truth 
perfectly universal nor that whieh 12 absolutely necessary, bufc only 
that which ia and that which occura in particular instancea/ 
(G. vi, 504, 505-) 

^ ^ True metaphysic^ is hardly diflerent from true lofic, that ia 
to sayi from the art of discovery in gerieral j for in fftot metaphysiea 
ia natural theologyj and the same Qod, who is th© sourco of aU good 
things, is also the principle of all parts of knowledge/ Lettr$ ä la 
Prtnc^ss^ Sophie (undatod) (G. iv. sga). 

the certainty of logioi metaphyaics and ethica as Bciances. 



364 



NEW ESSAYS 



inoer piineipl^ wM^^h are csdled ioimie. It is trae we, 
mnsi not imagine tbat we can read tliese eteroal Ibwb of 
reafiOE in the soul ^ in an open book^^ as the edicl 
öf the praetor m&y l>e read on bis aJlmm ^ without trouM@ 
or inrestigation ; but tt is enough tbat we cau discoYer 
these law» in ouiselves hy me^m of attention, for wbieh 
opportunities aiB fumished by the senses ; and tbe 
sacceas of expemnents Serres also as a oonfirmation of 
reason, eomewhat as in arithmetiG ' proofs ' are tiaefiil in 
helping U5 to avoid errors of calculation wben the proocea 
is a long one. In this also lies the diflemice between 
human knowledge and that of the lower animals. The 
lower animals are purely empirical and direct tbem- 
Belv€3 by particular instanees alone ; for, so f ar as we can 
judge, they never succeed in forming necessary proposi- 
tions ; while men, on the other band, have tbe capacity 
for demonstrative sdence, It is also on this aceount that 
the power of making coneatenations [of ideas] whieh the 
lower animals possesa is something inferior to the reason 
whieh is in meu The concatenationa [of ideas] made by 
the lower animals are simply Uke those of mere empiiics, 
who maintain that what has somefcimes happened will 
happen again in a case whieh resembles the form er in 
charaeteristies whieh strike them, although^ they ai« 
incapahle of judging whether or not the same reasons 
hold good in both cases, That ia w^hy it is so simple 
a matter for men to entrap animals^ and so easy for 
mere empirics to make mistakes, From this making of 
mistakes even peraons who hare beeome skilful through 
age and experience are not exempt, when they trust too 
much to their past experience, as Bome have done in civil 
and military affairs ; because enough consideration is 
not giyen to the fact that the world changes and that 

" ä Uwe ourer#, Ut.-ad apertumm ii^. 
^ i. fi, the tablets with * noticea,* posted up in a publio p]ace| so 
that he who runs may read. 
** Cf* Monamogy^ §§ 36-39. fldds ' for all that/ 



NEW ESSAYS 



men become more skilful by finding countiess new con- 
triyances, while on the other band tbe stags or the bares 
of Our time do not become'® more füll of sbifts tban 
tbose of former times. Tbe concatenations [of ideas] in 
tbe lower animals are only a sbadow of reasoning, tbat is 
to say tbey are only connexions of Imagination and 
passings^'' from one image to anotber, because in new 
circumstances wbicb seem to resemble otbers wbicb bave 
occurred before we'^ expect anew wbat we*^ at otber 
times found along witb tbem, as if tbings were actually 
connected togetber because tbeir images are connected in 
memory. It is true tbat reason also leads us to expect, 
as a nile, tbat tbere will occur in tbe future wbat is in 
barmony witb a long experience of tbe past, but tbis is, 
nevertbeless, not a necessary and infallible trutb; and 
OUT forecast may fail wben we least expect it, because 
tbe reasons wbicb bave bitberto justified it no longer 
operate And on tbis account tbe wisest people do not 
trust altogetber to experience, but try, so far as possible, 
to get some bold of tbe reason of wbat bappens, in order 
to decide wben exceptions must be made. For reason 
is alone capable of laying down trustwortby rules and 

E. reads * are not.* 
^ E. reads * a connexion ' and * a passing.' 
«« E. reads * they.* 

* Cf. Lettre ä la Beine Sophie Churlotte (1702) : *■ For instance, though 
we may have observed a thousand times that iron, when it is put 
by itself on the surface of water, goes to the bottom, we have no 
assurance that it must always be so. And without referring to the 
miracle of the prophet Elisha who made iron to swim, we know 
that we can make an iron pot so hollow that it floats, and that it 
can even carry a considerable load, as do boats made of copper and 
tin. And even abstract sciences, like geometry, afford instances in 
which that which usually happens no longer happens. For 
instance, we usually find that two lines which continually approach 
one another ultimately meet, and many people will be ready to 
take oath that this can never fail to happen. Nevertbeless geo- 
metry makes known to us unusual lines (called, on that account, 
Asymptotes) which, if prolonged to infinity, continually approach one 
another and yet never meet.* (ö. vi. 505.) 



365 



NEW ESSAYS 



of Büpplying wbat is lacking in those whieii wer® not 
fcrustworthy, by stating the exceptioiiB to tiiem, and in 
Bhort of finding sure connexions in the foroe of nec^ssaiy 
consequenees ; and tbia ofien enables ns to forese© the 
fryent without baving to ©Äperienoe tbe sense-conoexions 
of Images, to wkieh the animals are confined, so that 
that whieh sbows that the sonrces [pritwipes] of necessary 
tnitbs ar© within us also distinguishes man fmm the 
lower animals. 

Perbaps our able autbor may not entirely diöer from 
me in opinion. For after having deToted the wbole of 
his first book to the rejection of innate knowledge 
[lumieres^j understood in a certain sense, he nevertheless 
admits, at the beginning of the second book and in those 
which foHow, that tbe ideas wbicb do not originate in 
Sensation come from reflexion, Now reflexion is not hing 
hat an attention to tbat which is in ns, and the senses 
do not give ns wbat we already bring with ns* Tbat 
being so, can it be denied that there is much that is 
innate in our mind [esprit], since we are, so to speak, 
innate to onrselves, and since in ourselves there are 
heing, unity, substance» duration, ehange, activity [action\ 
perception, pleasure and a thousand otber objects of our 
intellectual ideas ? And as theae objocts are immediate 
objects of our nnderstanding and are always present ** 
(altbough they cannot always be consciously perceived 
[aperpf*s] because of our distractions and wants), why 
shonld it be surprising that we say that these ideas, 
along witb all that depends on them, are innate in us? 
Äccordingly I have taken as Illustration a bloek of veined 

*• As distingui»hed from ideas or images of sense. Cf Mmuddogif^ 
I and Frin^iples 0/ Naiure and 0/ Grace, | 5 ; also Fetii di^cmtra d§ 
Metaphy^iq»e ii^6'\ (G. iv. 45a) r *ThoHe expieasions which are in 
our soul, whetht*r they ar© coneeived or not, may b© called idcas, but 
tboa© whieh are conceivad or formäd may be sald to be noUsmA, 

^ E. «adfl 'ibeaa objecta m immediate , aad always t«^Bont 
our understanding/ 



NEW ESSAYS 



marble, rather than a block of perfectly uniform marble 
or than empty tablets, that is to say, what is called by 
philosophers taibula rasa. For if the soul were like thcse 
empty tablets, truths would be in us as the figure of 
Hercules is in a block of marble, when the block of marble 
is indiflferently capable of receiving this figure or any 
other. But if there were in the stone veins, which 
should mark out the figure of Hercules rather than other 
figures, the stone would be more determined towards 
this figure, and Hercules would somehow be, as it were, 
innate in it, although labour would be needed to uncover 
the veins and to clear them by polishing and thus 
removing what prevents them from being fuUy seen. 
It is thus that ideas and truths are innate in us, 
natural inclinations, dispositions, habits or powers [vir- 
timlitäs] and not as activities [adions], although these 
powers [virtuälit^] are always accompanied by some 
activities [actions], often imperceptible, which correspond 
to them. \ 

Our able author seems to maintain that there is in us 
nothing Virtual, and even nothing of which we are not 
always actually conscious But this cannot be understood 
in a strict sense ; otherwise his opinion would be too para- 
doxical, since, for instance we are not alvays conscious 

** Cf. MonacMogy, §§ 40, 43 and 54, with the notes. By a virtualite 
Leibniz means something between a mere potency or capacity 
and a fully-developed activity or actual idea. Thus necessary and 
etemal truths are not innate in the soul in a fully-developed form, 
nor, on the other hand, does the soul merely have a capacity for 
receiving or acquiring them, but they are innate in germ, as im- 
perfectly perceived ideas with a tendency to become perfectly 
perceived. See Introduction, Part iii. pp. 125 sqq. and 130. 

Cf. Locke's Essay, bk. i. ch. i, § 5. This position is an imme- 
diate result of Oartesian principles. See Introduction, Part iii. 
p. 126. Cf. Geulincx, Metaphysica Vera, Part i. (Opera, Land's ed.» 
vol. ii. p. 150) : * It is impossible that he who does not know how 
a thing is done should do it. If you do not know how a thing is 
done you do not do it.* 

** E. reads * since, although we are not, &c. . . . we often 
bring, &c.' 



368 



NEW ESSAYS 



of acquired habits and of the tliings stored in our memory, 
and, indeed, they do not always come to our aid when 
we requii^e them, alüiough we oftan bring theni back 
eaaily into our mind on öome elight oceasion wbieb recalls 
tham to US, as we need only the beginning of a song in 
Order to remember it*\ Our author also limits bis 
thesis in other places, saying tbat tbere is in us nothing 
of which we have not at least been coiisciou3 [aperf?/5j 
fonnerly, But in addition to the fact tbat nobody can, 
throiigh reason alone, be quite certain how far our past 
a^erceptiom have extended, for we may bave forgotten 
them, especially in ligbt of the PJatonic doctrine of 
reminiscence, which, though a myib *\ contains, in part 
at least nothing incompatibie witb bare reason — in 
addition, I say, to this fact, why inust everything be 
acquired by us througb apperception of extemal things, 
and wby sbould it be impoBsible to uneartb anytbing in 

E. r^ßda * to mnkfl ub remember the rest of it/ 
" lioibniz's objection to the Pia ton ie doctrine is that it irapliea 
ü complete (or elear and distinct) knowledge of the ^ideaa * in 
a previous atate* He acceptä tlie Fla ton ic doctiine in so far aa it 
impHoa that knowledge of the eternally true comes to the söul not 
through extern al aense, but by developmtnt from its own inner 
fx'ing. Cl Nrnveatiss^ Essaisj hk. L ch, i, § 5 (E. 209 a ; G. v, 75) i * It 
was the opinion of the Fla ton ist b that all our ideas {cmnaissanc^^ 
were reminiscenceSj and that thus th© trutha which the soul bringa 
with it at a man's hirth, and whiöh are called innate, must he 
remains of a former deliuit© knowJedge. But thia opinion hag no 
foundatinn. And we may readily believe that the aoul must havö 
already had innato ideaa [mimtmances] in ita preceding 3tate l if it 
did pre-exiat), however far back that atate might b€, just aa it has 
tbem now ; accordingly they must in turn have come from anothet 
preceding State, in whieh they would ultimatoly be innate, or at 
least creuted along with it ; or eise we shouJd have to go E(i^ inßnitum 
and regard souls aa oternalj in whieh oase theseideaa [connaisscinc^s] 
would in fact be innate, böcauso they %vould never haTe had a 
beginning in the soul ; and if any one maintains that each prior 
State has received from anofcher, prior to itself, something which It 
hfl B not transmitted to those which folloWj the ans wer ia that it ia 
manifest that certain evident trutha must have helonged to aü 
theae atafcea,' 
*^ £. omita * in part at leasL' 



NEW ESSAYS 



Ourselves? Is our soul, then, so empty that, beyond*'* 
images borrowed from outside, it is nothing? That, I 
am sure, is not a view which our judicious author can 
approve. And where shall we find tablets which have 
not some variety in themselves? For there is never*' 
such a thing as a perfectly unbroken [uni] and uniform 
surface. Why, then, should not we also be able to 
provide ourselves with some sort*® of thought out of 
our own inner being, when we deliberately try to 
penetrate its depths ? Thus I am led to believe that 
his opinion on this point is not fundamentally different 
from mine, or rather from the common opinion, inas- 
much as he recognizes two sources of our knowledge, the 
senses and reflexion ^\ 

I do not know that it will be so easy to reconcile him 
with US and with the Cartesians, when he maintains 
that the mind does not always think, and especially that 
it is without perception when we sleep without dreaming ; 
and he holds that, since bodies can exist without motion, 
Souls might also qüite well exist without thinking**. 
But here I reply in a way somewhat different from that 
which is usual ; for I maintain that, naturally a sub- 

E. reads * without.* 

In E. the sentence is interrogative : * Is there ever,' &c. 
E. reads * object.* 

Leibniz is here applying his principle of the *identity of 
indiscernibles,' viz. that no two things are absolutely identical, 
which implies that no real thing is an absolute unity, exclusive of 
all difference or variety, but that everything has some essential 
characteristic or internal quality. See Monadologyj § 9. 

If the mind is really tabula rasa, what are those * internal 
Operations ' or * actings of our own minds,* which Locke regards as 
the objects of reflexion? Leibniz suggests that Locke may not 
really mean all that he seems to mean by the tabula rasa, and that, 
accordingly, Locke is fundamentally at one with him in admitting 
at least innate *dispositions.' 

" Essay, bk. ii. ch. i, § 9 (Fraser's ed., vol. i. p. 137). See Intro- 
duction, Part iii. p. 129. 

** i.e. *in the ordinary course of things,' *otherwise than by 
miracle.* 

Bb 



37Ö 



NEW ESSAYS 



stance oannot exist without activity [ae^io«]^ and indeed 
tbat there Dever m a body without motion, Experience 
is already io my favour as regards tliis^ and to be per- 
suaded of it one haa only to refer to the book of ttie 
illustiious Mr. Boyle^'' against an absolut© rest, But 
T tkiiik that reason also sQpports it, and this is one of the 
proofa Tviiicb I use to overthrow the theory of atoms 

Besidea there are countleaa indications which lead us 
to think that there is at erery moment an infinity of 
percepHons within ns» but without apperception and 
without reflexion ; that is to say^ ehatiges in the soul 
itself of which we ara not conscious [8'ap€r€evoir\ because 
the impressions are either too small and too numerous 
or too closely corabined [trop unies], so that eaeh is not 
distinctive enough by itself, but nevertheless in eom- 
bination with others each has its etfect and makeg iteeLf 
feit, at least confusedly, in the whole, Thüs it is that, 
through being aceiistomed to it, we take no notice of the 
motion of a mill or a waterfall when we have for some 
time lived quite near them. Kot that thia motion does 
not continually affect our organs, nor that something 
does not paes into the soul, which reaponds to it bacauae 
of the harmony of the soul and the body, but these 
impressions which are in the soul and in the body, 

" Robert Boyl© (b. Lismore, 1627, d. London, the fftmoua 

chemist and physicist, who (almoat contemporaneously with 
Mariotte) discovet^d the law of tliö preasuro of gaaes, whiüh is 
called the Boyle-Madotte l&w. H« maintaiJied thut there ia no 
such thing as absolute rest, in the book here reförred to, under tb© 
title O/Äbsdute R^st in Bodies. [Boyle'a Works (London* 1744% vol. I. 
p, a8r,] It was also published in Latin in hiti Opera Varia (G^neva, 
16B0). Löibniz had some intercüuraö with Boyl© dnring hia stay 
in London in 1673, See Introduktion, Part i. p, 7. 

As reät is infiuitely small motioiij everything moves. Conae- 
quently the e&sence of body cannot be absolutely namoved 
e:s-tenÄion, but must be forco, whicii is the aourco of motion. But 
a foree is a real unity, abaolutely indivisible, while the atom is only 
physicfllly indivisibie, it being ideatly divieibto. Hone« phyeical 
atomg are not the elemcnts of thingi^ Cf. New Systemt S 1 1. 



NEW ESSAYS 



having lost the attractions of novelty, are not strong 
enough to attract our attention and our memory, busied " 
with more engrossing objects. For*® all attention re- 
quires memory, and often" when we are not, so to 
speak, admonished and warned to take notice of some 
of our present perceptions, we let them pass without 
reflexion and even without observing them ; but if some 
one directs our attention to them immediately after- 
wards and for instance bids us notice some sound that 
has just been heard, we remember it, and we are con- 
scious that we had some feeling of it at the time. Thus 
there were perceptions of which we were not immediately 
conscious [s'apercevoir], apperception arising in this 
case only from our attention being directed to them 
after some interval, however small. And for an even 
better understanding of the petites perceptions which we 
cannot individually distinguish in the crowd, I am wont 
to employ the illustration of the moaning or sound of the 
sea, which we notice when we are on the shore. In 
Order to hear this sound as we do, we must hear the 
parts of which the whole sound is made up, that is to 
say the sounds which come from each wave, although 
each of these little sounds makes itself known only in the 
confused combination of all the sounds taken together, 
that is to say, in the moaning of the sea^^, and no one 
of the sounds would be observed if the wave whiph 
make3 it were alone. For we must be affected a little 
by the motion of this wave, and we must have some 
Peremption of each of these sounds, however little they 
may be ; otherwise we should not have the perception 
of a hundred thousand waves, for a hundred thousand 

^ E. reads * which are busied only/ " E. omits * for.* 

^. omits * often * and * admonished and.* 
E. omits * afterwards.* 

E. reads * in this case of our attention being directed to them 
only after,* &c. 
** E. reads * sound.' 

" E. omits * that is to say, in the moaning of the sea.* 
B b a 



372 



NEW ESSAYS 



iiothings cannot make something* We never sleep so 
profoundly as not to have some feeble and confused 
feeling, atid we should never be wakened by the greatest 
noiae in the world if we had not some perception of its 
beginning which is small, just as we should never break 
a cord by the greatest effort** in the world, if it were 
not strained and stretched a Httle by less eiforts, thougb 
the small extension tbey pi-oduce is not apparent 

These peiUes ptrceptions have thua thron gh their eonse- 
quences an influence greater than people tbink, Tt is 
they that form this someihing I know not what, tbeae , 
tastes, these Images of sense-qnaUties^ clear in combijiation 
but eonfused in the parts*', these impressiona wbicb 

Cf. Montaigne^ Emiis, bL iL ch. 14: * If w© suppoße a pieeu 
of twine eqqalljr «trong throughout^ it is utterly impossible that it 
should evt?r break, For in what part of it is tlio breaking to begin^ 
the fiaw to appoar? And for it to break in everj part at once 
Bgainstöll nature.' Se© Introduotion^ Part iii. p, 144 note. 

E. omita ' tiirough their con^qu^nces.* 
" Seiisti-qualitiüäi according to LeibnLz, are eacli dear slü b. whole, 
that 13 to sajj eaeh can b« perfecfcly distinguiahed from othors. 
But they are not also distind i that ia to say, cannot perfectly 
anaiyz© theii^ elements. Such an analyais U possibl© ; but iw cannot 
perform it, for it wouM involve an Inßnit«i proceas, Eafth aenae- 
qiiality * cc>ntains infinity/ for Ifc haa connexiona with evorything 
eise in the univers«. Cf, Lettre a la E&ine Sophie Charlotte (1702) ■ 
* Wo know by what kind of refraction blue and yallow are madt«, 
and that these two colours when mixed mak© gi-een. But we 
cannot y©fc understand, for all that, hew our pereoption of green 
resTilta from our perccptions of tho two colours whitih compo«© it, 
nor ho w our perceptions of these coloura arise from their cauBüa. We 
havo not eyen nominal dt^ünitiona of Eue Ii qualitios bo as tn explain 
the terms for thom. . . . If I were to say to aome one : You know that 
green means a colour consiating of blue and yellow mixcd, he would 
not make ub© ef this definition ae a means of reeognizing green 
when he came upon it. But tliis ia th© füncti{>n of nominal 
defljiitiona. For th© blne and the yellow which utb in tho green 
are not diatinguishablo or reeogniüable, and it is only by Chance, smi 
to »peak, that we have found this hy obser^ ing that this mixture 
always makefi greetk Tbuif th© only way to enabl© a man to 
recognize green in futuiie is to show it to hitn at present ; but this 



NEW ESSAYS 



373 



surrounding bodies make upon us, who contain infinity 
this connexion which each being has with all the rest 
of the universe. It may even be said that in conse- 
quence of these petites perceptions the present is big with ®* 
the future and laden with the past, that there is a conspi- 
ration of all things {crv^irvoui Travra, as Hippocrates said ''®), 
and that in the least of substances eyes as penetrating 
as those of God might read the whole succession of the 
things of the universe, 

Qme sintj quae fiMrint, quae mox futura trahantur'^^. 

^ These unconscious \msmsMe\ perceptions also indicate 
and constitute the identity of the individual, who is 
characterized by the traces or expressions of his pre- 
vious states which these unconscious perceptions preserve, 
as they connect his previous states with his present state ; 
and these unconscious perceptions''^ may be known by 

is not necessary in the case of more distinct notions, which can be 
made known to people by description, although we do not have 
them at hand. . . . For this reason we are wont to say that the 
notians of sense-qualities are c^ear, for they enable us to recognize the 
qualities ; but that these notions are not distinctj because we cannot 
discriminate nor unfold what they contain within them. What 
they contain is an I know not what, of which we are conscious but of 
which we can give no account/ (Passages combined from G. vi. 
492, 493» 500.) 

^ E. reads ' and which contain infinity.* 

«» E. reads ' füll of.' 

^® See Mmadology, note 97. 

* What things are, what things have been, and what future 
things may soon be brought forth.* Virgil, Georgics, iv. 393. Virgil 
ascribes this knowledge to Proteus. Leibniz misquotes futura for 
Ventura : futura would not scan. 
E. omits * or expressions.* 

^3 Leibniz merely says *and they,' so that the reference is 
doubtful. He may mean *the traces of previous states.* What 
is meant is simply that as the unconscious perceptions are the 
development of previous states of perception and at the same time 
contain, in a germinal or confused way, all future states of percep- 
tion, they give continuity to the individual possessing them, i. e. 
they constitute his identity. Contrast Locke's view, Essayj bk. ii . 
ch. 27. Cf. Monadology, note 114. 



374 



NEW ESSAYS 



a higher miiid [esprit], althougli the individual himself 
may not be conscious of them, that is to say, though he 
niÄy 110 longer have a deiimte recollection of them, But 



th ey [these perceptions] furntsh also the meana of re- 
covering tlik recollection» when it is needed^ through^ 
periodic dBTelopments which may some day occur "\ That 
is why deatli, owing to these perceptions can only be 
a sleep, and cannot even last m a sleep, for in animale 
perceptions merely cease to be distinct \distmgue\ enough'\ 
and are reduced to a state of confusion^ in whicK*con- 
sciousness [apereeption] is suspended, but which cannot 
last for ever^', not to speak here of man who mnst have 
great priTileges in this regard in order to keep bis 
Personality 

Furt her j the unconscious [umnsihk[\ perceptions ex- 
plain that wonderful pre-eatablished harmonj^ of body 
and aoul, and indeed of ull Monads or simple substances^ 
which takes the place of the untenable theory of the 
influence of one upon another, and wliich^ in the opinlon 

Wliat iii meaiit irt that, as perceptions are no6 isolatod but 
linked together, they do not each independently and fall in 
distmctnosä by a Jcind of ehaticej but as one group or By^tem of 
perceptions falls out of consoiousneaa anothor riaes mto con&inous- 
ne^Bf so that tbere ig ä kind of periodic ity Ln our perueptionaj witli 
troughs and creats as in wavc-motion. Thua tho rocolleetion ofany 
former perception means that the ayatem or group of which it i=» 
a member has pasised from the crest of conseiousnesa tt> the traugh 
of sub-cotiscioüaneas und so buok to the crest agjtin. CL üoTmdtretHims 
sur la Dodrine cVun Esprit Unhcrsd Unique (1702) ^^E. iSi a ; vi* 
p53S) * The Organa ' [of the animal] ' üra merely enveloped '* &nä 
neducßd to a ämall size, but the ordor of nature requires that some 
day all srihall re-devölop and retum to an observable conditloHj and 
that in theise vicissitudea there be a certaln well^jrdered progroas, 
which serves to matui-e thinga and to bring them to porfeclion*' 
For a devetopment of this idea cf» Jamm*^ I^ychology^ voh i. ch. 9. 

"^^ E, omita ' owing to theae perceptiona/ 

^* i.e. diatißct enougli to prodnce consciousnesa, 

" The remaindor of thia sentence ia oroitted by E. 

Cf. PrincipksQ/ Naturemd qf Gra^$j § is^ note 51 \ Mamäd^^ § 8a, 
note 130» See alao Introdaction, Part iü. p» Ti6k 

'™ E* reada ^ by the unconscious perceptions I explain/ 




NEW ESSAYS 



375 



of the author of the most excellent of Dictionaries 
exalts the greatness of the Divine perfections beyond 
what has ever been conceived. After this I should add 
little, if I were to say t^^at^^ it is these petites per- 
ceptions which determine us on many occasions without 
our thinking it, and which^ deceive people by the appear- 
ance of an indifference of equilihrium, as if, for instance, 
we were completely*^ indifferent whether to tum to the 
right or to the left It is also unnecessary for me to 
point out here, as I have done in the book itself, that 
they cause that uneasiness which I show to consist in 
something which difPers from pain only as the small 
from the great, and which nevertheless often constitutes 
our desire and even our pleasure, giving to it a kind of 
stimulating relish ^. It is also due to these unconscious 
[insemihle] parts of our conscious [sensible] perceptions 
that there is a relation between these perceptions of 
colour, heat, and other sensible qualities, and the motions 
in bodies which correspond to them ; while the Carte- 
sians, along with our author, in spite of all his pene- 
tration, regard the perceptions we. have of these qualities 
as arbitrary, that is to say, as if God had given them to 
the soul according to His good pleasure, without regard 
to any essential relation between the perceptions and 
their objects ; an opinion which surprises me, and which 
seems to me not very worthy of the wisdom of the 
Author of things, who does nothing without harmony 
and without reason*\ 

^ Pierre Bayle. See Monadohgy, § i6, notes 28 and 29. The 
reference is to the article Rorarius in Bayle's IHctionary^ where he 
says (note L, i) : * It * [the system of pre-established harmony] 
* exalts above all that can be conceived the power and intelligence 
of Divine art/ Bayle, however, makes this remark by way of 
objection to the system. 

E. reads after this I ought also to add that/ 
E. omits * completely/ 
^ Cf. Introduction, Part iii. p. 141. 
" Cf. Introduction, Part iii. p. 140. 

See Descartes, Principia, Part iv. §§ 196-198 and 204. Descartea 



376 



NEW ESSAYS 



In a Word, uncommm [insefmhle] percepiwm are of as 
great use in pneumatics as impörceptible [insemible] ^ 
CO rpu Stiles are in physics ; and it is aa unreasonable to 
reject the one as the other od the ground tbat they are 
beyond the reaeh of our senses ^\ Nothing takes place 
all at oiice. and it is one of my great maxims, one 
among the most completely verified of maxims, that nature 
neuer makes kaps ; whieh I called the Imv of conthiuitp^^ 
when I spoke of it in the firsf^" NomeUes de la Mepttbiique 
des Lettres ; and the use of this law in physics is very 
considerahle : it is to the e£Pect that we always pass from 

hpld that ^colour, heat/ &t^., aa we perceive tliem^ fti'e not to be 
attributod fco external hodiea, th© qnalitiös of wliicli ar© all Form^ 
of motioü* Ther© is bis view no absolute reiiäon why one kind 
of motion should pi^dtice in us the sen£»itiaii of oolour and another 
tlje eensöMon of heat. Leibniz, nn the other hand^ regards motions 
ikü themselTes perceptions of a very low degreo of distinclneda, and 
the uDConscious percoptioiui which in combinatlon gire lise to o\ir 
conaciouä äon!dat]<»n form a connecting link between the tnotion^ of 
bodies and our corr^sponding 6enso-|>*>rception of thoir qualities. 

** A name for the phUoäophy of mind or spirifc, derived from the 
New Testament U3ö of Tjvfvpux. In ScLolastic times it iiicluded 
natura] theology and the doctrinea regarding angelB und demons, 
aa well aa ' payehology.' In the aevonteenth coiitury it was uaed 
in tli© more liniited senae by Aisted in Encyklüpädte (1630), 
a work whichj according to Diderot^ Leihniz thotight of te- 
modellingj wlth the assistanc© of othcr seliolars [(Euwe^de Bidef-ot, 
ed. Aaedzatj toI. xv, p. 440). Cf. y'iL 67. ThB terinA FmumaUeks 
and Pneumatokgy (in tho aensö of pliilo&ophy of Ihe mind) were 
u&ed in th© Scott iish Uriiversitks in the end of the »erenteenth 
lind beginning of the eighteenth centuries, The word Pneutmiüs 
has now ceaaed to have aiiy connexion with the philoäophy 
mind and i& used to describe the branch of hydrodynamiea which 
ii^ coiicerned with ga±i©ä. 

*^ omlts * imperceptible JJnaen&ible].' 

The r(\ferenco is probably to the views of Descartea, See 
Frinäpia^ Part iv, f 201, 

* Cf, Introduktion^ Part ü. p. 37 ; Part iii. p. 83. 

K. readii ^ when 1 spoke of It eliäewhere in the JTouüei/es/ &c. 

^' Thia waa Bayle's magi;2ine, and Leibniz formulated his law for 
the first time in th© leiter to Bayl© (16S7) to whieh reference is 
h©re m&de, (See 6. iii- 51 ; E. 104.) For a tmnslation of thia see 
Introduction, Part iii. p. 83 note. 



NEW ESSAYS 



377 



small to great, and vke versa, through that which is 
intermediate in degi-ees as in parts ; and that a motion 
never immediately arises from rest nor is immediately 
reduced to rest, but comes or goes through a smaller 
motion, just as we never completely traverse any line or 
length without having traversed a smaller line, although 
hitherto those who have laid down the laws of motion 
have not observed this law, and have thought that a body 
can in a moment receive a motion contrary to that which 
it had immediately before**. And all this leads us to 
think that noücedble jperc&ptions also'* come by degrees 
from those which are too small to be noticed. To think 
otherwise is to know little of the illimitable fineness 
\subtüit4\ of things, which always and everywhere contains 
[enveloppe] an actual infinity 

I have also noticed that, in vii-tue of imperceptible 
[insensible] variations, two individual things cannot be 
perfectly alike, and that they must always differ more 
than numero ^\ This makes an end of * the empty tablets 
of the soul,' *a soul without thought,' 'a substance with- 
out activity' [action], 'the void in space,' *atoms,* and 

i. e. in degree as in quantity. 
^ Cf. Introduction, Part Iii. pp. 87 sqq. 
E. omits * also.' 
See Monaddogy, § 65, note 107. 

Cf. Introduction, Part ii. pp. 36 sqq. Also Monaddogy, § 9, note 
15, and Nouveaux Essais, bk. ii. ch. 27, § i (E. 277 b ; G. v. 213) : 
* Besides the difference of time and place, there must always be an 
internal prindple of distinction, and although there are several things 
of the same kind, it is nevertheless true that none of them are 
ever perfectly alike. Thus although time and place (that is to say, 
external relation) enable us to distinguish things, which we do not 
readily distinguish by themselves, the things are none the less 
distinguishable in themselves. The exact determination of identity 
and diversity is not a matter of time and place, although it is true 
that the diversity of things is accompanied by that of time and 
place; because they* [i.e. time and place] * bring with them 
different impressions about the thing. Not to mention the fact 
that it is rather by means of the things that we must distinguish 
one place or time from another, for in themselves they are perfectly 
alike, but of course they are not substances or complete realities.' 



378 



NEW ESSAYS 



even particles not actually divided in matter, 'absoluta 
rest,' 'complete uniformity in one part of time, place or 
matter,' ^perfeet globos of the second element^ ariBing 
from original perfect cubes^'^,' and a thousand other 
fictions of philosophers, which come from their incom- 
plete notions and which the nature of things doeg not 
adniit of, and which are made passable by our ignorance 
and the slight attention we give to the imp^rceptible 
\m$ensible]j hiit which cannot be made tolerable iinless in 
the limited sense of abstractions of the mind, which 
protests that it does not deny what it sets aside and 
thinks ought not to come into any present consideration. 
Otherwise, if we seriously meant thia^ namely that tha 
things of which we are not eonscious [s'apercetöir] are 
neither in the soul nor in the body, we should err in 
philosophy as is done in statecraft [politique]^ when no 
account is taken of ro fjuLKpov ^\ imperceptible [insemibU] 

^ The reference lh to tbö Yortex hypotheaig of DesßarteB. Ac- 
cording to Deaeartes, bod)- Is xiltiraately extension in three 
dimension»^ the original divisioii of it (a* ihe rcsult of inotioJi 
imparfced by Godj would reault in perfüctly cubical parts. This 
original motion Dest^arteü siipposes to have böen such aa to tn^ik^* 
thL* parta royolve on their own axeg and also in groups round 
different centrcs. As a result of this (matter being a p^^iiwtnl the 
aaglea of the cube& are rubbed down, and tlie detrition prtKjeods at 
an ever-inereaaiiig rate, bocauwe the ams.llor the body, the lai*ger 
(ih Proportion to its bulk) is the »uifac« it exposes to the j^ubbLn^ 
of other bodies, Äceordingly thore are three primary elements of 
the visible world^ (i) the detritua, which includea the sun and the 
fiied stara, (a) the remains of the original euhcs in thtj form of 
exceedingly minuto globules^ of which element the aky conaLsta, 
and (3) aomo parts of matter which have beon le±ta easy to movti 
than the globuJes of the aecond element and consequeütly have 
not boon rubbed down so qnickly ; öuch äb the earth, tho planet;* 
and cometfi. In short, the first eleoient consisfcs of luminous 
bodies, the second of transparent bodiea and the third of op^que 
hodies, See Descartes, Prindpiaj Part ÜL 46 sqq. In a letter to 
Nicftisö (1692) Leibniz speaks about the * uaelesa chatter regarding 
little bodiea and the first, aecond or third element| whieh are of &» 
little value a» the occult qualitiea ' (G. ii, 534). 

*^ Afi. , , t5 ftiKp^v ^vkurrety (Ariatotle, PoUtics, v. 9> § 1307*" 3a). 



NEW ESSAYS 



379 



progressions ; but on the other hand an abstraction is 
not an error, provided we know that what We ignore 
is actually there. So mathematicians make use of 
abstractions when they speak of the perfect lines which 
they ask us to consider, the uniform motions and other 
regulär effects, although matter (that is to say, the inter- 
mingling of the effects of the surrounding infinite"*) 
always makes some exception. We proceed thus in 
Order to discriminate conditions [considerations] from one 
another and in order to reduce effects to their grounds 
[raisons], as far as possible, and to foresee some of their 
consequences : for the more we are careful to neglect 
none of the conditions which we can control, the more 
does practice correspond to theory*®^. But it belongs 
only to the supreme reason, which nothing escapes, to 
comprehend distinctly all the infinite and to see^°^ all 
grounds [raisons] and all consequences. All that we can 
do as regards infinities is to recognize them confusedly, 
and to know at least distinctly that they are there ; 
otherwise we have a very poor idea of the beauty and 
greatness of the universe, and also we cannot have a 
sound physics, which explains the nature of bodies^^'* 
in general, and still less a sound pneumatics^% which 
includes the knowledge of God, of souls, and of simple 
substances in general. 

This knowledge of unconscious [insensible] perceptions 
serves also to explain why and how no two souls, human 

The chapter deals with maxims for avoiding revolutions. § 3 refers 
to the fallacy of the spendthrift : ' Each expense is little, there- 
fore the whole is little.* Cf. Politics, v. 4, § i, 1303*' 18 : yivovrat fiiv 
ovv ai (JT&a€is ov irfpl lUKpwv dXX* l/c jxiKpSjv, 

E. reads * the infinite which surrounds us.* 

That is to say, the more do actual occurrences correspond to 
our explanation of tHem. 

E. omits * and to see.* 

* Otherwise ' = ' but if we entirely ignore the infinities in 
things.' 

E. reads < things.' 
See note 86. 



38o 



KEW ESSAYS 



or otber, of one and the ssme kind evör eome perfectly 
idike from the hands of the Creator, and each has always 
frora the first a reference to the point of view it will have 
in the universe But this tndeed follows already from 
what I ob&erved regarding two individualsj namely, that 
their difference is always more than a numerical one. There 
is also another important point, aa to which I muBt dififer, 
not only from the opinion3 of our author, but also from 
those of the majority of modern writem I believe^ with 
the majority of the ancienta, that all guperhuman spirits 
[ffenks]j all souls, all created simple substances are ahvays 
combined with a body, and that there never are souls 
entirely separated [from body] I have a priori reasona 
for this, but it will also be found that the doetTine is of 
advantage in thia respect, that it solves all the plülo- 
aophical difficulties ahout the state of soula about their 
perpetual preservationj about their immortality and about 
their wor kitig ; for the difference between one state of 
the soul and another neyer is and never has been any- 
tbing but a difference between the more and the leas 
eonacioüs [sensihle]f the more and the less perfect, or vice 
versa, and thua the past or the future state of the soul 
h as explicable as its present state ^^"^^ The slighteat 
reflexion makes it sufficiently evident that this is in 
aecordance with reasoii, and that a leap from one state to 
another infinitely different atate eould not be natural. 
I am fiurprised that the philosophic schools have without 
reason given up natural exi^lanation and have delibei^ 
ately plunged themaelves into very great difficulties and 

E. reüds no two human aoula or twü thiiiga of one and the 

Cf. Mcmadologyj 55 51 öqq. 
1^ E, omita * combined/ reiwlhig ' sotit toi^mr» d tm carps/ 

God aloije ia actiis purus^ without body- Cf. lutroducHgu« 
Part iii, pp. 108 sqq., and Monadotogy^ § 7a, noto 115, 

ThH probabiy means questioiiB ab to what bas been the atate 
of bouIb in the past and what will be tlieir atate in th© future. 
See Introdnction, Part iii. pp. 113 s<iq, 
^ E. re&dfl 'nature/ 



NEW ESSAYS 



381 



given occasion for the apparent triumphs of freethinkers 
[esprits /orfs]"^ all of whose argumenta fall at once 
through this explanation of things, according to which 
there is no more difficulty in conceiving the preservation 
of souls (or rather, as I think, of the animal), than there 
is in the change of the Caterpillar into the butterfly, and 
in the preservation of thought during sleep, to which 
Jesus Christ has divinely likened death"^ But then 
I have already said that no sleep can last for ever ; and 
it will last for the shortest time or almost not at all in 
the case of rational souls, which are destined always to 
preserve the personal character [personnage] which has 
been given them in the City of God, and consequently 
to retain memory ; and this is so, in order that they may 
be more susceptible of punishments and rewards. And 
I add further that no derangement of its visible organs 
is capable of reducing things to complete confusion in 
an animal, or of destroying all its organs and depriving 

Cf. Monadologyj § 14, note 25. See also Consideratims sur la 
Dodrine d^un Esprit üniversd ünique (1702) (G. vi, 532; E. 179 b) : 
* What has also, in my opinion, contributed greatly towards 
making men of intellect believe in the doctrine of a Single uni- 
versal spirit is this, that ordinary philosophers have set forth 
a doctrine about souls separate [from bodies] and about the * 
functions of the soul being independent of the body and its organs, 
which doctrine they could not sufdciently justify. They were 
perfectly right in wishing to maintain the immortality of the soul 
as in conformity with the Divine perfections and with a genuine 
morality, but seeing that by death those organs in animals which 
we observe are deranged and ultimately corrupted, they thought 
it necessary to have recourse to separated souls, that is to say, to - 
the opinion that the soul continues to exist without any body and 
none the less retains its thoughts and functions. And in order to 
give a better proof of this they tried to show that the soul has 
already in this lifo thoughts which are abstract and independent 
of ideas of matter. Now those who rejected this separated con- 
dition and in dopenden ce [of the soul] as contrary to experience 
and to reason were so much the more led to believe in the 
extinction of the individual soul and the preservation of the 
universal spirit alone.' 

St. John xi. ver. ir. 



382 NEW ESSAYS 

the soul of the whole of ita organic body and of the 
in^ffaceable remaina of all its former impressiona 
But the ease with whicb people have given up th© 
ancient do€trine that the angels haye ethereal [mhtils] 
bodies connected with them ( wbicb hm been confounded 
with tho corporeality of the angels theiueolves), the in- 
troduction of supposed unembodied [s^fes] uitelligencee 
among created things (to which Aiistotle's tbeory of 
intelligencea that niake the skie?* i'^volve has greatly con- 
tributod) ^^*^ aod finally the ül-conaidered opimon people 

1'* et Monaddogy, II 73-77 ; New Sysfm, |§ 7 9, 

According to ÄJ-istotk^ tliö heavetua are jnoved by the ffpeSrc»' 
HiViyifv oT priitiö mover, i.o. by God^ who {fts Leibuiz a.lso admits) is 
(vctus pttrus, But thia ig au etemal (dfStoc) motion, and Arisfcotle 
deseribes thü lieavens as üStfxa t* Buop [De Ccie^o, ii. 3^ a8ä* 11), 
Acüordingly the heavens are not moved by * inteUigencts/ On the 
other band, Arlötotle röpresents the planeta liavkig itiotions of 
their own, differeiit from that of the fixed stara or the sphere of 
the heavens in geu^raL Theae planetftry motiona are atti'ibuted 
to an activity (irpä^i^) aimilar to that which exiata in animala and 
plant» {Ik CaelOj iL la, aga^ 1). But evon aö, Aris^totle cannot 
regarded a» meaikhig that the planeta are moved by * separate ' 
inteüigt^ncea, It seems Ukely that Leibuiz was thinkiDg of the 
viewa of ThomaiS Aquinaa^ who says ; ^ A heavenly body is moved 
by some intellectual subatance' {Contra ödn^&j HL ^3, j); and 
also : ^ Heavenly bodiea are moved by the substancea whioh move 
them throiigh apprehension : not hqwever a sonae-apprehonaion 
. . . . and thereforo an intellectual oue*' At th© end of the ohapter 
qußtedf he saya ; ' For our present purpoae it does not matter 
whether a heavenly body In moved by an intellectual siihätanoe 
(3onjoined with it as its sonl, or by a separate aubätance : or 
whether ea^^h of the heavenly bodies moved by God or aone 
of them ia immediately so moved, but all through the mediation of 
oreated intellectual aubstances ; or whether the flrst heavenly 
body alone ia immediately moved by God and the othera by the 
mediation of created subatancea — provided we hold that the motion 
of the heavens is due to an intelleotual aubstance.' There iö here 
a Suggestion of the Neo-Platonit; inüuences to which Thomas 
Aqtilnaa waa necesaarily subject. The theory mentioned by Leibniz 
is atated also by Albertus Magnua, Mäapkysica^ Lib, xi, Traot ^ 
cap, 10 (Opern, ed, Jammy^ 1651, vol. iii. 374 b', and by J. C. 
Scaiiger, üomm. in Hippocratis lih. de Somniis (1539), p* I3* Cf, Leibiuz's 
Conäid&raiim^ SKr la Doetrifie d'un Emit Univ^d Unique (E. i7Bb; ö. 



NEW ESSAYS 



have held that we cannot believe in the preservation 
of the souls of the lower animals without falling into 
metempsychosis and making them go [promener] from 
body to body, and the perplexity in which people have 
been through not knowing what to do with them^^*, 
have, in my opinion, led to the neglect of the natural 
way of explaining the preservation of the soul. This 
has done great injury to natural religion and has led 
a good many to believe that our immortality is only 
a miraculous grace of God ; and our celebrated author 
also speaks of it with some doubt, as I shall mention 
presently But it were well if all those who are of 
this opinion had spoken about it as wisely and as 
sincerely as he ; for it is to be feared that a good many 
people who speak of immortality through grace, do so 
only to save appearances, and are at bottoin nearly of 
the same opinion as those Averroists^'® and some eiTing 

vi. 530) : * It is true, the Peripatetic philosophei*s did not regard this 
spirit as absolutely universal ; for besides the intelligences v^hich, 
according to them, animate the stars, they had an intelligence for 
this lower world, and this Intelligence performed the function 
of active understanding in the souls of men.* See also Bayle's 
Dictionary, vol. iv, article BiciuSf note C. 

E. omits from * and making * to * with them.' 

Infra, pp. 389 sqq. See Locke, Essay y bk. iv. ch. 3, § 6 (Fraser*s 
ed., vol. ii. p. 195, with note), and bk. iv. ch. 4, § 15 (Fräser^ vol. ii. 
p. 240 note). Cf. also Locke's Reasonableness of Christianity (opening 
paragraphs), where Locke seems to make the immortality of the 
soul conditional on religious faith. 

Averroes (or Ibn Roschd) was born at Cordova in 11 26 and 
died in 1198. Much of his philosophizing was concerned with the 
relation between the vovs hoititik^s (a phrase never actually used by 
Aristotle) and the vovs iraOriTiKÖs of Aristotle. (See De Anima^ in, 
5, 430* 10 sqq.) Developing a Suggestion of Aristotle, Averroes 
regards the vovs voirjriKÖs as one principle appearing in all men, 
while the vovs TfaOrjTiKds is peculiar to the individual. The vovs 
voirfTifcds is ultimately identical with the Divine Spirit and is thus 
immortal ; but there is no individual immortality, for the vovs 
■naßrjTiKds is mortal. Cf. Leibniz's ConsideraHons sur la Doctrine d*un 
Esprit üniversel Unique (1702) (E. 178 a ; G. vi. 529) : * Several people of 
intellect have thought and do stiU think that there is only one spirit. 



384 



NEW ESSAYS 



Quietista who imagine an absorption of the soul 
and 'ÜM reunion with tli© ocean of divinity, a notion 

wbich is UEiversal and whleh animate» th© whole unf verse and all 
ita parta, aecording to the atructure of «aeh and the organs it finda 
in each^ m the same blast of wind prodüces the various aounda 
from diflferent organ-pipes. And thus when the organs of an 
iinimal are rightly ürfiinged, this spirit appoars m it as an in- 
dividual soul, but when the organs are broken up, this indiyidual 
soul com es t o noihing again or ratumsj ao to apeak^ into the ocean 
of the universal apirit. To many people Ariatotle appears to have 
hftd an opinion of tlvis kind, which ha» been revjved by Averroes, 
a famans Arabian philosopher. He held that ther© ia in ua an 
inieUeduE {igms^ or active u n de rata n ding, and also an inkUccius pnUrnia^ 
or pasbiTe underatanding ; and that the former of theae, roming 
from outaido of ua, is etemal and universal for all, whilo the 
paasive understanding, which ia pecüliar to oaehj pasaea away at 
the man'a d<?ath. Thiis doctriue waa held by fMjme of tho Peri- 
patetics, two or three centuries ago, such as Pomponatius, 
Contarenus and othei-a/ 

See ionsid&ratiom mr la Dodrine d'tm Esprii Unkersd Unique 
{E. 178 b j G. vi, 530) ; *Apparently Molino^j and soni© other new 
Quietiatö, among othera a certaln author called Joannes Angelus 
Sileaiua, who wrote before Molinos, and somo of whoae works have 
Ifltely been reprintßd, and even Weigeliua before them, favoured 
thia opinion of the Sabbnth or reat of soula in God, And for 
thia reason they held that the ceasation of individual fnnetiona is 
the highest state of perfection/ Miguel de Molinoa waa born at 
Snragoaaa in 1637 and died (in the ptiaon of the Inquirnition) in 
1697. His Chief book waa bis Spiritual Guiife, published in Spaniah 
and aftorwards translated into many languages. Madame Guyon 
and Fenelon were muoh influene^ed by his work, Valentine Weigel 
waa born at Hayn in Thuringia in 1533 and died in 1588» He was 
a Protestant miniater in a village near Dresden, and although only 
one book of bis was publishod in Iiis lifetime, he left a large number 
of works in manuscript, many of which are still unpubliahed. He 
was a bcliever in the diroct i^vtdation of trufch by the * in ward liglit/ 
in ans wer to prayer I^eibniz elsewhere mention^ hira aa * a olever 
man, who was Indeed too clevor^'and he saya that Äng^lua waaHhe 
au t bor of certain rafeher prefcty liltle bita of devotioual Terae, in 
the form of epignims.' Biscours de Ict CottßrmiU de la Foi avec Ui 
Raison, § 9 (E» 48a b ) G. \L 55). There haa been niucli disput-e aa 
to the identity of Angelus and littlo ia known about him, His 
best known po^m ia tho Chetubiniächei^ Wander smann. See Vaughan» 
Hmrs mih the MysHcSj bk. vii, ch. i ; and Schräder, Ajigdm Siiesius u. 
aeim Mystik. Leibniz diatinguiahea between the Quietiat ^Sabbath' 
and the * beatificviüion/aaying that the 'b«atifiü vision of oompletely 



NEW ESSAYS 



which perhapa my System alone clearly ahowa to be 
impossible 

W© seem also to differ as regards matter in this^ that 
the author tbmks there must be a Yoid in it [matter] ^ 
for the sake of motion, because he believes that the 
particles of matter are indivisible [roide]. And I admit 
tliat if matter were composed of sueh parts, motion in 
ih^ plmum would be impossible, as if a room were flUed 
with a great many little p^bbles, so that not even the 
smallest place in it empty. But this supposition 
is not by any means grant^d, and indeed there does not 
seem to be any reason for it ; altbough this able author 
goes so far as to think that the rigidity er cohesion of its 
particles constitutea the essence of the body. 8pace must 
mther be conceived as füll of an ultimately fluid matter, 

iiappy souk is compatible witli the functions of tlieir glorified 
bodiesj wlilch will atill remain oi^anic in their own way/ Esprit 
Universel Unique (E, 182 a ; G. vi. 536). 

^° FoTj accordiüg tö Leibni^, no BubsUnce can be withont au 
aetivlty of its owHj and tlius nonö can be loat in the ocean of the 
üne apirit. Agüingt this idea that * fche universal s^pirit i» like an 
ooean eomposed of an infinity of dropa, which are aeparated from 
it when they animate sporne particular orgftiiic body, but are 
reiiititcd to their ocean after the destruotion of the hody'a organs/ 
Leibniz argues that * aa the oc^au h a qn&iitity of dropa, God would 
thus be an aaaemblage of all souls, somewhat in the same way aa 
a swarm of hee^ ia aii asg^^mblage of these insecta, but aa the awarm 
is not itaolf a genuin© öuhstAneej it ia clear that in this way the 
universal spirit itaelf would not be a genuine boingj and in place 
of saying that it ia the only apirit, we should have to say that in 
itaelf it ia nothing at all, and that in nature there is nothing but 
individual souls of which it is the aggregate. If we hold that 
thö aoula, when reunited to God, are without any fiinetions of 
their own, we fall into an opiniou eontrary to reason and to all 
good philoöophyj aa if any böing with a continued existence couM 
everreacli a atate in which it is without fiinction or impreaaion. 
For when one thing is combined with another it retaina never- 
theleaa ita peculiar functionjä, which ^ when combined with the 
functiona of the othera, produce the functiona of the whole, other- 
wiäo the whole would have no functiona, if the parts had none/ 
Esprit Universd Uniqns (E* 181 b ; 6, vi. 535). 
E. omita 'in it' [y], 

C c 



386 



OT:W ESSAYS 



Biieceptible of all divisione and even sübjeeted aetually to 
diviaions and BiibdiYisions ad infinUum^^ ; hui neverthe- 
less with this difference that it ib diviaible and divided 
unequally in difFerent places, because of tb© motianß, 
move or less tending to division, ivhich are already in 
tbe particular place. Consequently matter has ©very- 
Tvber© some degree of rigidHy as well as of fiuidity, and 
there is no body which is hard or fluid in the highest 
degree^ that is to say^ there is no atom of invincible 
hardness^ and no qnantity of matter completely 
indifl'i&rent to division Thus tho order of natura and 
oepecially tbe law of continuity make both^** equally 
inadmissible. 

I have alao ehown that cohesion, if not itself the effeet 
of impulse or motion, would cause a tractim, strictly 
apeaking^^, For if tbere were a fundamentally bard 

Cf. Mmaddö^, § 65. 

Two eiKtremea are höth impossiblo : (i) the abaolutely hard or 
solid^ (a) the absolutelj soft or fluid. An ab&olütelj hard picjtie of 
matter would be one in which tli© force holding it together ahould 
b© so strong that no combination of other forcea could overcome it. 
An abflolutelj soft portion of mattor would he one in which thore ia 
no foroe of cohesion whatover, nothing to tesiat division, so that it 
woTild be 'cqmpletelj mdififerent fco diviaion/ Hardnoss or solidity 
is, Äccording to tho law of oonfcinuifcy, aimplj a low de^gree of 
softneas or fluidity. 

i*e. toofch a porfect atom and a perfect fluide Cf. Thirä 
Explmi^ion of the New System^ p. 335 with note. Also Jrß«t;ea«o: Essais, 
bk, ii, ch, 4. 5 4 : * I am alao of opiJiion that all hodtoa have »ome 
dögree of cohesion, aa in the same way I hold that there ar© non© 
whieh have not some ßuidity and of which the coheHion eannot be 
overcome : and coasequently in my opinion the atoms of Epicurus, 
the harduesa of which is suppcaed to be invindblej cannot exist 
any more than the perfectly fluid minute [twilito] matter of th« 
Cartosiana/ (E, 029 b ; G< v. 114.) 

^ But, äccording to Leibnlz, tradim or attroffim in unintelligible, 
unlcfis in tho senae of a forc© or impulse which ean be overcome by 
eounteraoting forces. A * tracfcion, strictly speaking/ would imply 
that one part of matter is for ever bound (Hhiried ' ) to another and 
must tberefore alwaya be draggöd aloug with it. Leibniz, howover, 
does admit that there ia an apparent tractimj even though there be 
no visible eontaet between the part* which draw one another, aa 



NEW BSSAYS 



hodjf for instance, one of the atoms of Epicums, which 
should have a part projecting in the fonn of a hook {m 
we can imaginö atoms of all kiiids of shapes) ^-^^ the hook 
when ünpeUed would draw with it th© rost of the atom, 
that is to say, the part which is not impelied and which 
does not lie in the line of impulsion, Yet our able 
author is himself opposed to these phÜoöophical tractione, 
auch as were formerly attribüt€Md to nature's abhorrence 
of a YÄcuum ; and he reduces them to imptdses, maintain- 
ing, with the moderns, that one part of matter acts 
immediat^ly upon another oidy by impelling it throogh 
*contact^-^. In this I think they are right, becaus© 
otherwi8e there would be not hing intelligible in the 
Operation, ' 

Nevertheless I must not conceal the fact that I have 
observed a kind of retraction regarding this matter on 
the part of our ezceUent author, whoae unpretending 
straigbtforwardneaa in this respect I cannot but praise, 
as much as I have admired hia penetrating genius on 
other occasions, I refer to his reply to the second letter 
of the lata Bäshop of Worceater printed in 1699, 

in the case of tho magnet and Stome ekctric&l phenomena, But 
in any such cas^j there ig contact and Umpulee' between thö bodiea 
coDoemedf although it may not appear ao to our senses, Cf. 
Nmvmux Essais^ bk. ii. ch. 4j § 4 ; ch» Ö, § 11 (E- 23g a, 331 b j C4, 
V. 113, 118;, 

™ According to Democritus, atoms differ in * shape, arraugiement 
and Position/ (Aristotle, Metaph, A. 4, 985^ 13.) 

^ See Locke's Essay^ bk. iL eh. | 11 (cf. Frs&er^B uote, yoI, L 
p, 171), and bk. iL ch. 23^ 5 17 sqq, 

^ Edward StülingAeetf born at Cranbournef Dorsetahire, 1635, 
died at Westminster, 1699, having for ten ye&ra been Bishop of 
Worcesten His chief work was tlio Originm Sacrae {1662% His 
oontroYoray with Locke originated in the anti-roUgiou^ use to 
which Toland (in his ümiHmiUy 7ioi Mmttf}iQu$) tnrned ßome of 
Locke's views. In 1696 StUlingfleet publi^hed A Dmourse in 
Vindicaii<}n qfihe Doctrim qf (he Trinity with an ansioer iü ih^ Ms Soänian 
objectiofiSy in wliiüh thexc appcared a critieiam of Locke's * way of 
ideAEL' To this Locke replied at groat length and the ccntrover&y 
contiuuäd untü StiilingÜeet's death. Cf» Praser'B ed. of Locke'» 

C G 2 



3Ö8 



NEW ESSAYS 



p, 408, in whieh, by way of justifyiiig the opinion he 
had maintained against the learned prelate, namely that 
mattet might think, he says among other thiogs : * It ia 
true, I isay^ **that bodies operate by impuls« and nothing 
eise (Essa^, bk* ii. cb, 8, § 1 1). And so I thought wben 
I writ it, and can yet conceive no other way of tbeir 
Operation. But I am sinee convinced by the judicioua 
Mr. Kewton^s incomparable book, that it is too bold a 
presumption to limit God's power, in tbis point, by my 
iiarrow eonceptions, The gravitation of matter towards 
matter, by ways intwjncseivable to me, is not only a demon- 
stration that Oed can, if He pleaaea, put into bodies* 
powera and ways of Operation above ivhat can be devised 
fi-om our idea of body, or can be explained by what we 
know of matter, but also an unquestionable and every- 
where visible instance, that He bas done so. And 
therefore in the nexfc edition of my book I shall take 
care to have that passage reotified ^^l' I find that In tbe 
French ti-analation of this book, doubtless made fi-om tbe 
latest editions^'**', this section ii reads thns: -It is 
evident, at kost so far as we can conceive it, that bodies 
act upon one another by Impulse and not otherwise ; for 
it ia impossible for ua to imdei-atand that a body can act 
upon that whicb it doea not toueh, which ia m muoh as 
to imagine that it can act where it is not 

Esm'^t voL i, Pml^otnem^ p. ili ; Stillingfleefc's Wwks (1710), VqL iii, 
pp, 413 sqq, ; Loeke*i3 Works (1803), vol. iv. 

™ sie Fraaer'B ed, of Loeke'a Essa^i voL i. p. 171 aoto. Also 
Ijocke's Works (to vol. ed., iSaa)^ vol. iv. p, 467. 

See PrefatDiy Note, Tlie itiilics are by Leibniz. Tlie Eog- 
lish edition haa merely t * The neit thlni^ to be conaidered is, liow 
bödioa produce ideas in ; and that is manifeatly by impulae, the 
only way wbicli we <^n coneoive bodies to operat© in/ 

Of COUT6O the Newtonian theory does not necessarily imply 
that a büdy can act where it iB not. * The wfwie isgreater than theptsrt: 
höw exceedingly true 1 Nature abhöre a vacuum : how exceedingly 
falae and calumniöus I Again, NotMrig can ad but where it is ; witli 
all my heart ; only, whiäe is it ? * Carlyle, Sartar EesartuSf bk, i 
uL, 8 (Library ed., voL i. pw 52% C£ Newton, Prindpktj de£ 8^ and 
ScMium Generale ; also Stalio, Qmcepts qf Modem PhyskSj eh, 5. 



NEW ESSAYS 



I cannot but praise ihe modest piety of our celebrated 
author, who recognizes that God can do beyond what we 
can understandj and that thua tbere may be inconceivable 
m^^ries in the articles of faitli ; but I would rather 
that we were not compelled to bave recourse to mii-acle 
in the ordinär y course of nature and to ad mit absolutely 
inexplicable powers and Operations» Otberwise too greut 
a licenca will be given to bad philosophers on the strength 
of what Ood can do ; and if we admit those eentripdal 
powers [vertus] or those immtdiate aUractions from a dis- 
tance, without itä being possible to make them intelligible, 

^ In Nöumaw^ EssaiSf bk. iL ch. 8, 1 1 he call» them vires sentripeiae 
(E. 331 b ; Q, V, r 18)» Cf. Antibarbarnä FhT^sicmpro Phitosophia reali cimtm 
rmomtimes qmUiabim schdastimrum et intelligenüarum chimaedcarum 
(G. vii. 34a) : * And &ll who are not content to recogniüe with ns 
ctuaJitiea which are so fax occnlt, that ia, which are unknown, have 
Huppoüed qualities wliich ar© perpotually occulty d^ßtjTüi, mesplic- 
able, which not even the high est spirit [gfrnius] could tliorüiigh]j 
know and make intclligiblo. Buch Are they who^ led by the 
suecess of thö Observation that the largö bodies of th© world exert 
araong themselves and upoa their own perceptibl© parte the 
attraction of this System ^ supposo that every body is aüranted by 
erery ofcher through th© very forco of matter ; wKether^ aa it wejre^ 
like feels like and delighta in it evon from afar, or whether God by 
a perpetual miraele ijecuroä that they shall strivc* towards one 
another, as if they had feeling, However that may be, theae people 
neither can rednce attraction to impolae or to explieahle reaaons (a« 
Plato did in the Thmens) nor do they wish they could* . ^ .It is 
surprising that evon now, in th© great light of thia age, there are 
somo who hope to perf^uade the vvorld of a doctrine so opposed to 
roofson. John LockOj in the firat edilion of his Esmy on the Under- 
standing^ declared rightljj and in aceordanee with the meehanieal 
phyfiios established by his illustrioiis countrymen, Hobbea^ Boyle, 
and their ntmierous followers, that no body ia moved except by th© 
impul^e of a body Coming into eontaet with lt. But afterwardH 
(obeying, I thinkj the authority of his friond;* rather than his own 
judgmeiit) h© withdrew this opinion, and held that there may lle 
hid in the essenee of matter I know not what extraordinary Ihings 
[mirahiUa] ; which is just as if on© were to think that there an/ 
oceult qualities in niimberj time^ apace and motlonf takon by them- 
B^lveBf that is to say» as if on© wer© to »eek a knot in a bulruah ' 
[a diffictiJty where there is aone], * or to try deliberately to make 
clear ihinga obacure/ 



390 



ItEW ESSAYS 



I se€ nothing to hmder our Scholastics from saying that 
everythiiig happens merely thron gh their ^ faculties,' and 
from mamtaining their * intentional apecies/ whieh go 
from objects to us and find it posdble to ent^r even into 
our öonls If that is ao, 

Omnia jam ß&it^ ßeri quae passe negabam 

so that it eeems to me that our autlior^ judicioüs as he ia^ 
goes her 6 a little too much from one extreme to the other« 
He raises diffieulties about the Operations of souls when 
the question ia merely whether that which is not per^ 
eepiihh \sensible] h to be admitted ; and here we bave 
hün giTing to hodks that which is not even mteUigihle, 
attributing to them power» and activities which surpass 
all that a ereated spirit can, in my opinion, do or under- 
stand, for he attributes to them attraction^ and that at 
great distanees without any limit to the sphere of its 
activity ; and he doea this in order to aupport an opinion 
which aeems to me^*^* no less inexplicable, namely, the 
posaibility that within the order of nature matter may 
think, 

The qneatioii which he diacuaaes with the distinguiahed 
prelate who bad attacked bim is whether matter can thmh ; 
and, as it ia ao important point, even for the preaent 
work , I ca n not avoid entering' into it a little and exam- 
ining their controversy I will atate the substance of 

"5 See Momd<iIügtfj § 7. note la 

* AU the thijiga will pFeaently happen, which I said could not 
happen/ Oirid, IWs^iat^ bk, i* el. 8, ver. 7, The whole pas^ag© ia: — 
Omnia natura© praepostera legibus ibunt, 
Paraquß euum muudi nulla tetiebit iter : 
Omnia jam ü&nt, fieri quae poaso negabam^ 
Et nihil mt^ de quo non ait habenda üdm. 
[All things hy the laws of nature will go top&y-turvy, and no part 
of the World will hold on its own way ; all the thiags will prB^ntly 
happen which I aaid could not happen, and there ia notting we may 
not believe»] 

E. reada * which ia * inatcad of * which eeems to me/ 
That Leibniz waa deeply interested in the eontroveray appears 
from hin letters to Thomas Bumet of Kemnay {Q. üi, 151 aqq.\ in 



NEW ESSAYS 



the eontroyersy on this aubject, and will take the libetty 
of mymg what I think about it The late Bishop 
of Worceater, fearing {in my opinion without much 
gxound) Üiat out author's doctrin© of ideaa was liable 
to Bom& abusea prejudicial to the Christian faith, set 
himseLf to esamine certaiii parts of it in his Vindication 
ofihe Boctrim oftke Trtniiy ; and having done justice to 
this ©xcöllent au t bor, in recognimng that he thinka the 
existönc© of the mind [espnt] as certain as that of the 
body, although the one of tbese substances is as littl© 
known as the other, he asks (pp< 241 sqqO " ' liow re- 
flexion can assure ua of the existence of the mind 
if God can gire to matter the faculty of thinking, aceord- 
ing to the opinion of our author (bk. iv, ch» 3), sinoa 
thus the way of ideas, which should enable us to dis- 
ciiminate what may be proper to the houI and what 
to the body, would become useless, while yet it was said 
in the second book of the Esm^f m the Undersianding 
(ch. 23, §§ 15, 37, 28), that the Operations of the soul 
furnisb us with the idea of the mind [esprU], and that 
the understanding along with the will makes thia idea 
as intelHgible to us as the nature of body ia made intelli- 
gible to ua by solidity and impulse, Thia is how our 
author repliea in his first letter (p. 65)^^: 'I think 
I haye proved that there ia a Spiritual substance in us, 

which he fraqueEfely refers to it and likena it to his owii controv^örsy 
witli AruAtild. H© haä ^ no doubt that Locke will come weil oüt of 
it. He [Locke] haa too Emj<5h Judgment to give an advantago to 
messietirs Us ecclesia.'itiqiiesj wliö arö tli© natural directors of the 
peoplea and whoae formularies mu&t be foOowed as much as 
posaible/ (G, iii- 316,) Loibniz alßo wmte two accountg of the 
controversy, with commenta of his own, (ö. ÜL 323 sqq.) See 
also Fouclier de Oareil, Lettre et Opmcuhs inMit^ dh LeibniSf Introduk- 
tion, pp» Ijtii-bcxxiii, 

Stillingfltjet'ä Works (1710), Yoh üL p. 505- 

reads ' inrestigate ' \_di3cuter] instead of dm*r«er- 

Locke's Works (ed. 1823), voL iv. pp. 3a sqq.; Bohn's ed.j 
vol. ii. p. 387 ; Fraser'a ed. of the Essay^ voL ii. p, 193 note, Here, 
and in other passages qaoted, I give the words of the author— not 
re-translaiing from Leibniz. 



KEW ESSAYS 



for we experiment in ourselves thinldng. The idea of 
this adion or mode of thinking is inconsistent with the 
idea of eelf-subsiatence, aiid therefore has a n^cessary con* 
nexion with a support or Hubjeat of inhesion ; the iden 
of that Slipport is wbat tvo call substance. . , p For the 
general idea of substance heing the sufne cverywhere^^^^ the 
modification of thinking, or tbe power of thinking joined 
to it, makes it a spiritj wjthout considering wbat other 
modification it has^ as wbether it has the modification of 
solidity or no. As on the other side, subst^ince that has 
the modification of solidity is matter, wbether it has 
the modific^ition of thinJcing or no. And therefore if 
your lordship means by a spiritual an immaterial siib- 
stanCGj I grant I have not proved, nor upon my prin- 
ciples can it be proved (your lordship meaning, aa I think 
you do, demonstratively proved) that there is an imma- 
terial substance in us that thinks. Though I presume, 
from what I have said about the supposition of a System 
of matter thinking (bk, iv. ch, lo, § 16} (which there de- 
monatrates that God is immalerial), it will prove in the 
highest degree probable that the thinking substance in 
US is immateriaL , , , Yet I have shown ' {adds the author, 
p* 68) ^ that all the great ends of religion and morality 
are secured barely by the immortality of the soul, withont 
a neeessary supposition that the soul is immaterial/ 

The leamed Bishop in his reply to this letter, in order 
to show that our author was of another opinion when 
he wrote the second book of the Essai/, quotes from it 
(p» 51)"^ the passage (taken from tbe aame book, ch- 23, 
§ 15), in which it is said that *by the simple ideas we 
have taken from our own minds we are able to frame 

Leibaiz'a italios. Ed. 1823, vol. iv. p, 34, 

1** Still ingfle«t's Works^ vol. iii. 534, 

Leibniz's translation has * from the opörations of our mind/ 
I give thö worda 11a they are in Stillingfleet, who condeuaBS Locke's 
eentence^ which is as foUows ; ' By the Bimple jdoas we have taken 
from those Operations of our own mindsj which wo expermi^nt 
daily in ourselves, äej thinlting* utiderstanding^ wÜling, knowing. 



NEW ESSAYS 



393 



the complex idea of & spirit And thus by putting 
together the ideas of thinking, percdving, libörty and 
power of moving themselves we haye as clear a per- 
ception and notion of immaterial substances as well as 
material He also quotes other paasages to ehow that 
our author opposed spirit [esprii] to body, and says 
(p. 54)'^^ that the ends of religion and morality are best 
gecured by proving that tlie soul is immortal by its 
nattire^ that is to say that it is immaterial. He also 
quotes (p. 70)^*'^ this passage that *all tha ideas we liave 
of particular distinct sorts of substanees are nothing biit 
several combiuations of simple ideas,* and that thus our 
author thought that the idea of thinking and of Willing 
presupposes another substance, diÖerent from that which 
is presupposed by solidity and impulse, and that thus 
(§ 17)'*'^ he indicates that theee ideas constitute body as 
opposed to spirit [es^w^fj, 

The Bishop of Worcester might have added that from 
the fact that the ^eneml idea of substance is in body and 
in spirit j it does not foLLow that their differences are 

and pQwör of beginnmg motioB^ &e., co-exiating ia some substanc«, 
Äre üble to fram© the compleit idea of an immatorial spirit,' 

Leibniz reacla * our body ' instead of ^ themaelves.* 

LeibDiÄ reada *ft3 of material,' Stillingfleet höre again 
ßhortenfi Loeko'ö statement, though he givea a more exact quotation 
it on p. 540. Loeke wrote ; ^ And thua hy putting together the 
ideas of thinking^ pereeiving, liberty, and power of moving them- 
selrea and other thing«, wo have slü clear a perception and notion 
of immatorial flub&tances as we have of matorial, For putting 
together the ideaa of thinking and Willing, or the power of moving 
or quieting eorporea! motion, joined to substancej ef which we have 
HO diatinct idea^ we have the idea of an immaterial spirit ; and by 
putting together the ideas of coherent solid parts, and a power of 
belng movedj joined with Bubstance^ of which likewis© we have no 
positive idea, we have the idea of matter.' 

StiUingfleet's Worka^ voL iii, p. 535 : ^ I am of opinion that 
the great ends of religion and morality ai*e best aecured by the 
proofs of the immortality of the soul from its natura and prüperties, 
and which I think prove it immaterial.' 

Stillingfleet, iii 539 J I^ocke's Essay, iL 33, § 

Esmy^ ii. 33^ I 17 ; Stillingfleet, iü, 540, 



394 



KEW ESSAYS 



modißmiions of one and the same thing, as öur author 
Said in tbe passage I have quoted from his ümt letter^*^ 
We must certainly distinguish between modifications 
and attribntea, Tbe faculty of baving pereeption and 
tbat of acting, extenaion, and solidity ar© attributes or 
perpetual and principal predicates ; but tbirüfing, impetus 
[impeimsite]) figurea and motions are modificationB of 
tbese attributes Furtber, we ought to distinguish be- 
tween phfjswal (or rather real) genus and (ogical or ideal 
gen IIS, Tbings wbicb are of tbe same physical genus^ 
or which are homogemous, are of tbe same maUer\ so to 
speak, and can offcen be changed one into anotber by 
cbanging their modification, like circlea and Squares, 
But two heterogemous tbings may bave a eomraon logical 
geniiSj and tben tbeir diffef^nces are not mere accidental 
modificationa of one and tbe same aubject [sw^^e^] or 
one and tbe same matter, metaphysical or pbyaical. Thus 
tirae and Space are very beterogeneous things, and ifc would 
be a mistake to snppose I know not wbat real common 
ground i^e^], baving notbing but continuous quantity 
in genenü, from the modifications of wbicb time and 
Space ariae. Nevertbelesa tbeir common logical genus ia 
continuous quantity Some one will perbaps ridieule 
this distinction ^■'^ of the pbilosophers between two genera, 
tbe one merely logical^ tbe other real'"*, and between 
two mattersj tbe one physical (tbat of bodies), tbe otber 
merely metaphysical or general, as if one were to say 
that two partö of space bave tbe same matter, or tbat 
two bours also bave each the same matter as tbe otber. 
Yet tbese distinctions are distinctions not only of terms 
but of tbings tbemaelvesj and tbey appear to be most 

suji^Qj p. 393, 

Cf. IntroductioUj Part iL p. 34 ; Part Iii. p, 127 ; MonctäfilogVf 
S§ 14 flqq. 

Iii Or ' ground/ E. gives this sentence ; 0. omits iL 

E, reada ^ these dktinetious/ 
^ E. reada * also reaV 



NEW ESSAYS 395 

pertinent here, where confusion befcween them has pro- 
duced a false conclusion These two genera have a 
common notion, and the notion of the real genus is 
common to the two matters, so that their filiation will 
be as foUows"®: — 

'Merely logical, its variations consisting of mere differ- 
ences. 

f meta/phy Siedl merely, in which 



real, the differences of 
which are modifica- 
tions, that is to say, 
matter 



there is homogeneity, 
physiealy in which there is a 
solid homogeneous mass. 



I have not seen the second letter of our author to the 
Bishop ; and the answer which the prelate makes to it 
hardly touches the point about the thinking of matter. 
But our author s r&ply to this second answer returns to 
that point. *God' (he says, nearly in these words, 
P» 397) "^ *superadds to the essence of matter what 
qualities and perfections He pleases : to some parts mere 
motion, but to plants Vegetation, and to animals feeling 
[sentiment], Those who agree with me so far exclaim 

1»« The point simply is that no real thing can have two or more 
conflictiDg attributes, though it may at different times have modifica- 
Hons which in themselves are conflicting. Nevertheless attributes 
which, in a real thing, would be impossible because conflicting, 
may abstractly or Mdeally' be comprehended under the same 
concept or in the same class, on the ground that there is an 
essential (not merely accidental) Community between them. They 
are thus species of a logical genus. Modifications, on the other 
hand, are more or less accidental variations of some real thing, 
which is the bond of uniön between them. They are thus species 
of a real genus. Ultimately, perhaps, the modifications may tum 
out to be species of a logical genus (it is probable that they are so in 
the mind of God) ; but, for us, an infinite analysis would be needed 
to show this. 

^ This ' filiation ' as a whole is, of course, an arrangement of 
logical genera and species. 

^ * Matter' here is equivalent to * real genus.' 

Works (ed. 1823), vol. iv. p. 460 ; Bohn's ed., vol. ii. p. 390. 
In translating this passage I have used Locke's words as much as 
possible. 



396 



NEW ESSAYS 



againat me when I go a step further and say, God may 
give to matter thought, reason and volition, as if that 
were to destroy the essenee of matter. Bot to make 
good this assertion they say that thought and reason are 
not included in the essence of matter ; which provea 
nothing, for motion and life ai^ just as little included in 
it< Thoy also urge that we cannot conceive how matter 
can think ; but our conception is not the measure of God's 
omnipoteney He afterwards takes as an instance 
the attraction of matter, on p, 99*^"^ but ©specially on 
p, 408 where he speaka of the gravitation of matter 
towards matter, attributed to Mr. Newton (in worda 
which I have quoted above), declaring that we can naver 
conceive the * how * of It, This is practically to go back 
to oceult qualitiea nay more, to inexplicable qualities. 
He adds (p. 401) that nothing is more calculated to 
favour scepticism than to deny what one does not under* 
stand j and (p. 402) that we do not conceive how even 
the soul thinks. He thinks (p. 403)^*^ that as the two 
aubstances, material and immaterial, can be concaived 
in theLr bai-e essence without any aotivity, it is in the 
power of God to give to the one or the other the power 
of thinkingi And he endeavours to take advantagö of 
the admission of hiB Opponent, who attributed sense 
\_sentimmt\ to the lower animals, but did not attribute 
to them any immaterial substance He maintairts that 
liberty and self-consciousness [la consciosite] (p> 408) "^^ 
and the power of making abstractions (p. 409) ean 



^ Cf. Emifff Fra&er's ©d., voL ii. p, 240 ijote. 
^■^ All the texts give * 99/ which seema to a slip for *3g^' 
Wwks (ed. 1833), iv. 463 Bqq. ; Boha's ed*^ ii. 39a sqq. 
Works (ed 1833), iT, 467 ; Bohn's ed., ii. 395, 
Thö qualitates cccuUae of the Scholaetics, Se& Introduction, 
Part iv, p. 156, 

Works (ed, 1833)^ iv, 463; Bohu's ed., ii, 393. Cf. Essay, 
Fraser*s ed., vol. ü. 194 ßote, 

Works, iv. 466 ; Bohn'ö ed., ii, 394. 
^ Works, iv, 468; Bohn'a ed., ii. 395. 



NEW ESSAYS 



397 



be given to matter, not sm matter, but as enriched by a 
Divine power. Finally he quotes (p. 434)^^^ the Observa- 
tion öf a traveller so considerable and judicioua as 
M, de la Loub^re that the Pagans of the eaat i'ecognize 
the immortality of the aoul withont being able to com- 
prehend its immateriality, 

Eegarding all tbis I will observe, before Coming to 
the Statement of my own view» that it in certain that 
matter is as littl© eapable of producing feeling [sentimentj 
mechanically, as it is of producLng reaBon ^^^^ aa our 
author admits ; and that I most oertainly recognize that 
it is not allowable to deny what one does not understand, 
but I add that we have a Hght to deny (at least in the 
Order of nature) that wliich is absolutely neither intel- 
Hgible nor explicable, I maintain also that substances 
(material or immaterial) cannot be conceived in their 
bare essence withont any activity, that activity m of the 
essence of stibstance in general ; and that the conceptions 
of created beings are not the measure of the power of 

Wwks^ ir, 485 ; Bohn*s ed, ii. 406. 
^ Locke's Word. 

Simon de lu Loubferftj bom at Tonloiise in 164a, died in 1739, 
In 1687 Louis XIV ontru&ted him with a miflaion to Siftm for tho 
purpose of eatablishing diplomatic andcommercial rdatious botween 
that country aüd France. As tho ro^ulfc of a three roonths' roai- 
dence in Siam he publiahed two volumoa Du Royaiime deSiam (1691 ; 
Eng* tranö. 1693), in which he gives an elaborate aceount of tho 
Siame»e i>eop]e| tbeir hiatoty, c^ustoms, and iiiBtitutiong, The hook 
»tili ranka aa au authority on its subject. Locke'a quotation iä 
taken from toI. i, ch. 19^ § 4, 

CL Noui^mux Essais, bk, iv. eh. 3, § 6 (E, 346 b ; G, v. 360) : 
* The primary pott'ers constitute the subatancea themöelvea ; and thö 
iierimitive powers, or if you like, the facultif^a, are merelymodes [fa^na 
t!'ilT$\ wWeh Douat be derived from aubatauces, and thoy are not 
derivod from matter in so far as it is mexely mechanical, that ia to 
my, in ao far aa by abatraction we take ac«ount only of the inoomplet» 
hsintf of mßtteria prifmi, er that whi«h is entirely paaaiTö. And in 
thia I tbink you will agre« with me, air^ thät it ia not in th© power 
of a more mochanism to produoe j>erception, aenaation, reason/ 
et Locke, Essay^ bk. iv. ct. to, § ro i^Fraser^ voL ii. p* 313) ; alse 



398 



NEW ESSAYS 



CJod, hni Üiat their cone^ptivity, or ability [/ora] to 
conceive, is tho measure of the power of nature : for all 
that IS in accordance with the order of nature can be 
conceived or understood by some created being^^^, 

Tboae who will think out my System will ae© that 
I cannot wholly agree with eitber of tbese excellent 
authors, whose contraversy, howeverj is very instructivB, 
Bui^ to explain riiyself distinctly^ it is before all tbings to 
be eonsidered that the modifications which can naturally 
or without niiracle belong^'^ to a subjeet [sujet] muat 
ariae front the limitatioos or variations of a real genus or 
an original nature which is constant and absolute"^. 
For it is thus that among phüosophers the modea of an 
absolute being are distinguished from the being ifcself : 
for instancej we know that size, figure and motion ar© 
manifestly limitations and variations of tho bodüy nature. 
For^^"^ it is clear how an extension when limited gives 
figureSf and that the change which takes place in it is 
nothing but motion. And wbenever we find any quality 
in a subject [^Jei], we should believe that if we under- 
stood the nature of the subject [mjd] and of the quality, 
we should understand [c(>«ceTO«V] how the quality ean be 
a result of it*^*. Thus in the order of nature (setting 

™ For Loibniz this would follow a priiyri from th© ©saential umty 
of naturei aJiown m tha f^ct that each Monad [mid th^efore toaish 
created being) containB withln itaelf & representatioiL of the whole 
UTiiverflG, 

E. reads * eome * Ivenir] for ^xmüenir. 
^'^ Thmgs do havc &n * absolut« ' original essenoe of Borne kind. 
Tbey are not ultimate bare umüee^ equally capa.blQ of mrvtf kind of 
modifi<^iion. 

omits * for/ Cf. Spinoza's Leiters^ 50^ | 4* 

Cf. LetttG ä Arnauld ( 1686) (O. iL 56) : * Alwa.yB iB evBiy tme 
affirmatiTe propoaition, nocesaaiy or contingont, universal or 
amgularj tht* notii>n of the predicate iö in aome wny comprehonded 
in that of tho snbjeetjjH'flt^ica^J» imst subjecto .- othorwise I know not 
wbat tnith ifl. , . . There mmt alway& bö some foundation ßyr ths am- 
nmion 0/ the tef^ms in a fropüsiUon and ihis ü to be fmmd in their notims. 
That k my graat principle, to which I think all philosopher« mmi 
aaaent, »Jid of whieh onö of the corollaties is the commoo axionif 




KEW ESSAYS 



399 



aside miTacles^, God ia not arbitrarily free ta giTe to 
subatances one set of qualities or another indifferenüy ; 
and He will never give tliem any but thoae which are 
natural to thenij that jb to say, which can hß denTetl 
from their natur^y aa explicable modiftcatioiis of it. Thue 
we may hold that matter will not by nature have the 
attraction mentioned above, and will not of itself go in 
a curved üne, because it is not poaaible to conceive how 
that can happen, that iB to say to explainit me<jhanieally ; 
while that which is according to natnre [na^wre?] ought 
to be capable of becoming distinctly conceivable, if we 
were admitted into tbe aecrets of things, This distinc- 
tion^ between that which 13 natural and explicable and 
that which ig inexpHcable and miraculous, removes all 
difficulties, and to reject it would be to maintain sorae- 
thing worse than occult qualities and accordingly to 
renounce philosophy and reason, and to provide refug^s 
for ignorance and idleneas by a confused [^oi^rc?] systein 
which allows, not only that there are qualities wö do not 
understand (of which ther© are only too many), but also 
that there are qualities which the greatest mind [a^pfif], 
even if God were to give it the widest possible grasp, 
could not comprehend, that is to say^ qualiti^ which 
would either be nairacnloua or without rhyme or raason ; 
and that God should usually perform miraeles would 
certainly be without rhyme or reason< Accordingly this 
laisy ^"^^ hypothesis would equally destroy our philosophy, 

that nothing bftppens without a reason, which can always b© givön 
why the thing took place so rather than otherwiae/ TJiia, of 
courtie^ ia radically upposed to the view of Locke. 

Amles Vignorance. Cf. Spinoza, EthicSy Part i. Appendix :— 
Dome (jLd Iki vduntat&nf hoc estf ignormHae^ asylum cm/ugeris (Bruder*» 

The FrBnch is/aineanh, I/eibniz is prohably tbinking of the 
faUacy of ApyAs k6jot or Iffnam IkUiOf to which he fr&quently refers 
in the TfmüMe (cf. 470 b ; vi. 30). The fallacy that 
which coimsela dolng nothing, becaiia© tbings are fated oße way or 
another, whateyer we do. Leibnlz meana that the hypotbesia of 



400 



NEW ESSAYS 



whieh Beeks reasons, and the Divin e wisdom which 
furnishös them« 

ITow BS to thiBking it is certain, and our author 
more than once allowB it^ that it cannot be a modifieation 
of matter that is inteUigible or can he comprehended 
and explained by matter : that is to say, a feeHng or 
thmking being is not a mechanical thing, Uke a watch 
or a mill, so that one might conceive sizea, fignres and 
motionSj the mechanical combination of which could pro- 
duce somethiug thmking and even feeling in a quantity 
of matter in which there was nothing of this kind— 
which thinking and feeling would also come to an end in 
the same way when the mechanism falls into disorder 
Accordingly it is not a natural thing for matter to feel 
and to think, and this can take place in it only in two 
ways, one of which is, that God should unite with it a 
aubstance to which it is natural to think, and the other 
is, that God ahould miratsulously impart thinking to it» 
In tbis matter, tben, I am entirely of the opinion of the 
Cartesians^ except that I extend it even to the lower 
animals, and hold that they have feeling [senüment\ and 
that their souIs are immaterial {properl y speaking) and 
no more perisbable than are atoma according to Demo- 
critua or Gassendi^^*; while the Cartesians, who ar^ 
witbout reason perplexed regarding the souls of the 
lower animala, not knowing what to make of them 
if there is conservation of them {be cause it bas not 
occurred to them that there is conservation of the animaJ 
itself in a minute form), have been compeUed to deny 
fiven feehng [sentiment] to the lower animals, contrary 
to all appearance and to the judgment of man kind 



which he is äpeakiQg Ib a ^lazy' an<3, heasMae accdptanc« of it 
would imply that it ia f utile to investigate the * secreta of thiug^,' 

E. omits frora ^ or can be' to 'matter/ 

Of. Mojuid^gifj § 17, 

^ See Mcfnadolog^^ § 14. 



NEW ESSAYS 



401 



But if some one should say that at any rate God can add 
the faculty of thinking to a mechanism prepared for it, 
I would answer that, if this took place and God added 
this faculty to matter, without at the same time putting 
into matter a substance which should be the subject in 
which this same faculty (as I conceive it) is inherent 
(that is to say, without adding to matter an immaterial 
soul), matter must needs have been miraculously exalted 
so as to receive a power of which it is not naturally 
capable : as some Scholastics declare that God exalts fire 
so as to give it the power directly to bum spirits separated 
from matter which would be entirely miraculous 
And- it is enough that we cannot maintain that matter 
thinks, unless there is attributed to it an imperishable 
soul or rather a miracle, and that thus the immortality 
of Our souls follows from that which is natural since 
we cannot maintain that they are extinguished, unless 
it be by a miracle, consisting either in the exaltation of 
matter or in the annihilation of the soul. For we know, 
of course, that the power of God could make our souls 
mortal, although they may be quite immaterial (or im- 
mortal by natura), since He can annihilate them 

E. reads *bodies.* 

Cf. Nouveaux Essais, bk. iv. ch. 3, § 6 (E. 347 a ; G. v. 360' : 
* To suppose that God acts otherwise and gives to things accidents, 
which are not modes [fa^ons d*itre] or modifications derived from 
substances, is to have recoürse to miracles and to what the Schools 
csilled öbediential power, through a kind of supematural exaltation, 
as when certain theologians hold that the fire of hell burns 
" separated " souls. In which case it may even be doubted whether 
it would be the fire which would do it, and whether God would 
not Himself produce the effect, acting in place of the fire.* 
Cardinal Bellarmine (1542-1621) in his De Purgatorio, bk. ii. chs. 10- 
12, expounds a view of this kind, holding that the fire of purgatory 
is material fire, but nevertheless miraculously burns souls. In this 
opinion he openly follows Augustine (De dvitate Bei, bk. xxi. ch. 10 j, 
and a similar view is expressed by Thomas Aquinas {Summa Tkeol. 
Suppl. P. iii. Q. 70, Art. 3, conclusio^, 

i. e. * from their nature ' or * from the order of nature.* 
^ Cf. Mmaddogy, § 6. , 

Dd 



402 NEW ESSAYS 

liow this truth of the immateriality of the soul is iin- 
doubte dly of impor tan ce, Fo r it m infi nitely m ore h e Ipt u 1 
to religion and niorality, especially at ihe present day 
(when many i>6üple hava Vöry Httle regard for revelation 
by its^lf and for miracles i to showthat soiils are natura 
ally immortal and that it would be a mira^le if they were 
not. than to niaintain that our eouls would die in the 
eouFBo of nature, and that it is in virtue of a miraculoua 
grace, founded on nothmg but the promise of God, that 
they do not die, Besides it has for some time been 
generally known that those who have tried to destroy 
natural religion and to reduce all to revealed religion, m 
if reason taught us nothing aboiit it, have boen coanted 
öUBpect, and not always without reason But our 
autlior m not of their number. He iiphoMa the demon- 
stration of the existence of God and he attributes 
prohaMiti/ in ihe Mühest degree to the immateriality of 
the aonl which may accordingly he accounted a moml 
certainfg ; and conaequently it seems to nie that, having 
as inuch candour as penetration. he could quite well agree 
with the doctrme I have expounded^ lyhich is fundamental 
in ßvery rational philosophy ; for^^^ otherwise I do not 
see how we are to keep from falling back into fanatwal 
Philosoph^, such as the Mosaic pküosopki^ of Fludd which 

E. oiDibs the passage in brackets. 

E* reads * it has for aoine time been the case/ 

In hia J>i3c&urs de la Co^/ormiY* rfe la Fid öifwc la Baü&n (1710), 
Leibniz gives, at eonaid©rable lengtb^ an a<icount of thoee who 
inaisted on the Opposition between renson and revelation, in which 
he tratMis the origin of thia view to the Averi:'oiata, He approvea of 
the Kondemnation of this position by the fifth Lateran Couneit^ 
under Leo in 151a* (See E. 4B3 sqq. ; Ö. vi, 56 aqq.) Cf. Nmxmysx 
Essaia, bk. iv, ch. 17, g 23 (E. 403 a ; G, t. 477) ; also Bnyle's 
Bictiimary^ Appendix (vol. W. p. 620, JJ*™' tdairdsmTnmt). 

Soe Essay f bk* iv, oh. 10, § 10 (Fi^aer, vol. iL pp» 3p6 sqq. 
with notes)* 

See Essay^ bk. iv. ch* 3, § 6 (Fräser, vol. iL 194), 
E. omlts ' for/ 

Eob&rt Fludd {Eohertus de Fluetibua) waa born at Milgate, 
Kent| in 1574 (or 1571), and di&d at London in 1637. After 



NEW ESSAYS 



finds a ground for all phenomena by attributing them 
directly and miraculously to God, or into the harbarous 
philosqphy, like thafc of certain philosophers and physicians 
of the past, who^®'^ still showed traces of the barbarous- 
ness of their time, and who nowadays are rightly con- 
temned, who found a ground for phenomena [a^arences] 
by inventing for this purpose occult qualities or faculties, 
which were pictured as being like little sprites or elves 

studying at Oxford he travelled abroad and made acquaintance 
with the theosophical views of Paracelsus, which he sought to 
make known in England through his Philosophia Mosaica (1638) and 
his Hisforia Macro-et-Micro-Cosmi Metaphysicoy Physica et Technica (1617). 
In these writings he tries to find a complete philosophy in the Oid 
Testament and more especially in the Pentateuch. His System, if 
so it can be called, is a combination of Neo-Platonic doctrines with 
those of the Eabbala, and one of his favourite ideas is that of the 
analogy between the universe (macrocosm) and the human body 
(microcosm). Leibniz is here referring to his theory that all things 
flow directly fröm God, who continually produces the variations in 
phenomena by condensation and rarefaction of matter. All things 
are emanations from God and return into His absolute unity. 
Gassendi and Kepler wrote against the views of Fludd. 
^" E. reads * which * [philosophy]. 

Leibniz is probably referring to the *elemental spirits* of 
which Paracelsus (1493-1541) writes in his De Nymvhis, SylphiSj 
Pygmaeis et Salamandris. He attributes to the * nymphs * the pheno- 
mena of water, to the *sylphs* the phenomena of air, to the 
'pygmies' the phenomena of earth, and to the ' Salamanders * 
the phenomena of fire. Fludd also adopted this view. Possibly 
Leibniz may also be thinking of the eider Van Helmont (Johann 
Baptista Van Helmont, 1577-1644), who was a follower of 
Paracelsus. In the Epistola ad Thomasium (1669), § 11 (E. 5a b ; 
G. i. 23), Leibniz speaks of Van Helmont along with Paracelsus 
and others as representative of the stupid [stolida] form of the 
reformed philosophy, absolutely rejectuig Aristotle. In the 
same letter he refers to the * occult philosophy of Agrippa * 
(Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa von Nettesheim, 1486-1535), *who 
ascribes to everything an angel to bring it to birth* [<quasi 
obsletricai&rem], * Thus,' adds Leibniz, * we return to as many little 
gods [deuncuH] as there are substantial forms and we approach the 
Gentile voKvdiiaiws.^ There may also here be a reference to the 
^ritus famiUaris of the Italian physician, philosopher and mathe- 
matician, Girolamo Cardano (1501 -1575). See his De Vita Propria, 
ch. 47, Opera (1663), vol. i. p. 44. On the whola matter, cf. Leibniz' s 

D i\ 2 



404 NEW ESSAYS 

capable of artlessly doing what is required, as if watches 
were to indicate the time of day by a certain horodeictic 
faculty without needing wheels, or as if mills were to 
crush the grain by a fractive faculty without needing 
anything resembling millstones As to the difficulty 
several peoples have had in conceiving an immaterial 
substance, it will readily pass away (at any rate in great 
part), if it be no longer maintained that there are sub- 
stances separated from matter, as in fact I do not believe 
that there are ever naturally'** any* such substances 
among created things. 

Äntibarbarus PhysicuSy &c. (G. vii. 337"^. See also Vaughan's Hours 
toith the Mystics, bk. yiii. chs. 4 and 5, and the Dedication of Pope's 
Rape of the Lock, where the ' nymphs/ &c. are attiibuted to the 
Rosicrucians. Milton speaks of 

<Those demons that are found 
In fire, air, flood or under ground.' 

11 PenseroaOf 1. 93. 

E. reads * all that is required.' 

See Introduction, Part iv. pp. 156 sqq. 

i. e. other than miraculously. Cf. MonadoHogy, § 7a. 



PKINCIPLES OF NATURE AND OF 
GRACE, FOÜNDED ON REASON. 1714. 

PREFATORY NOTE. 

The Principles of Nature and of Grace has much in common 
with the Monadology ; and, indeed, it reads like a preliminary 
study, out of which the Monadology has been elaborated. They 
seem to have been written about the same time ; and Gerhardt 
holds, against the view of previous editors, that the Principles 
of Nature and of Grace is the treatise which was written for 
Prince Eugene. It has been shown by Gerhardt that when 
Nicholas Remond wrote to Leibniz from Paris in 171 4, asking 
for a Condensed statement of his philosophy, Leibniz sent 
him a copy of the Principles of Nature and of Grace, with a 
letter in course of which he says : * I now send you a little 
discourse on my philosophy, which I have written here for 
Prince Eugene of Savoy. I hope that this little work will help 
to make my ideas better understood, when taken ^n connexion 
with what I have written in the Journals of Leipzig, Paris and 
Holland. The Leipzig papers are on the whole in the language 
of the Scholastics; the others are more in the style of the 
Cartesians; and in this last writing I have endeavoured to 
express myself in a way which can be understood by those who 
are not yet thoroughly accustomed to either of the other styles.' 
(Letter of Aug. 26, 17 14, quoted by Gerhardt, vi. 485 ; E. p. xxvii 
and p. 704 a.) Kirchmann suggests that probably Leibniz 
wrote the Principles of Nature and of Grace for Prince Eugene, 
and afterwards, thinking it insufficient, worked it up into the 
Monadology, which he gave to the Prince. The Principles of 
Nature and of Grace was first published in the French journa], 
L'Europe Savante, in November, 171 8. 

There are three different MSS. of this work. The first of 



4o6 PEINCIPLES OF NATÜRE AND QRACE 



theae, whict h the ahorteat, ia divided, not into pamgraphs, 
but into two cbapters, the point of division being the eijd of 
Paragraph 6, wbere transition ii made froni 'Physica ' to 
' Metapbysics/ In tbe other two MSS. the paragraph diviaion 
appearSj and tbe text from which the translation ia made ia 
that {}f the last and moat comp] et e nianußcript. In the 
l^ijiciples of Nature and of Grace the arran^ement of tbe 
matter is mnch lesa clear and careful tban it ia in the Monad* 
aloffif. Bntf folJowing the lines of the division originally made 
by Leibniz himaelf. we maj saj that paragrapba 1-6 inclüsiTe 
give an acconnt of the created Monads in themselvea and in 
their relations to one an other, so far aa these can be considered 
apart from God; while the remaining paragraphs consider tbe 
nature of God as nltimate reason of the nniveraSj and the 
consequencea which follow from Hiä perfection in power, 
wifidom and goodneas. Some of the most important pointa in 
the Monaüolügy are either paased Over or very slightlj treated 
in the Prmc 'q}U$ of Natu>^ and {yf Grace. For instance, in 
the Principles cf Natura and of Grace tbere is nothing- to 
correapond to tbe paesage in the Monadohgt/ regardiiig the two 
great principlea of knowledge, and wblle the prc-eatahlished 
harraony is mentioncd, it ia not dwelt upon* Bat the connexion 
between the two writings, both in treatment and espresgioni ia 
BO close that tbe annotations to the Frinciples of Nature and of 
Grate may he comparatiTely brief. 

The Principlea of Natum and of Graes will he fotmd in E. 
714 sqq. ; vi. 598 sqq, 

I, Substance is a being capable of action. It is simple 
or eompotind- Simple substance is that which has no 
parts, Compound suhstunce ^ is the combiDatioii of sLmpIe 
substances or Monads. Monas is a Greek Word, which 
means unity^ or that which is one. Compomids or bodies 
are pluralities [muUUudes] ; and simple substances, lives, 
souls, spirits, are unities. And everywhere there must 
be simple substances, for without simple substanees there 

* See Monadd<igyf note Strictly apeaking * Compound sub- 
stance,' according to Leibniz, ia not 'smbstanpe ' at all, It ia not 
subsiantia but subäantiatum. Pailure to observe thia diätinctioD was 
to some ext^nt the aourcse of WolCs misinterpr«»tation of Leibniz. 



PRINCIPLES OF NATÜRE AND GRACE 407 



would not be Compounds ; and coiisequently all nature is 
füll of lifo ^ 

2. The Monads, having no parts, can neither be made 
[formSes] nor unmade. They can neither come into being 
nor come to an end by natural means, and consequently 
they last as loAg as the universe, which will be changed, 
but which will not be destroyed. They can have no 
shape [figure] ; otherwise they would have parts Con- 
sequently any one Monad in itself and at a particular 
moment can be distinguished from any other only by 
internal qualities and activities [adions] *, which cannot 
be other than its perceptions (that is to say, the represen- 
tations of the Compound, or of that which is outside ®, in 
the simple) and its appetitions (that is to say, its tendencies 
to pass from one perception to another), which are the 
principles of change. For the simplicity of substance is 
by no means inconsistent with the multiplicity of the 
modifications which are to be found together in that 
same simple substance, and theso modifications must 
consist in variety of relations to the things which are 
outside ^ It is as in the case of a centre or point, in 

^ To say that matter is infinitely divisible is the same as saying 
that'there is Compound substance everywhere ; for to be divisible 
is to be Compound. But Compound substances are made up of 
simple substances. Consequently there are simple substances or 
living beings everywhere. 

' If they had shape, they would be extended or spatial. But 
everything extended is divisible, and hence they would not be 
simple but Compound, having parts. 

* Thus we cannot perceive Monads by means of our senses. 
What the senses give us is not the substance itself, but merely 
a phenomenon bene fundatum. ^ Spirits, souls, and simple substances 
or Monads in general cannot be known [comprehendi] by the senses 
and Imagination, because they have no parts.' Epistola ad Bierlingium 
C1711) (E. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 

* The Compound, as Compound, consists of partes extra partes ; but 
as Compound, it is merely phenomenal. 

« *The simplicity of a substance is by no means inconsistent 
with its having within it several modes at one time. There are 
successive perceptions ; but there are also simultaneous perceptions. 
For when there is perception of a whole, there are at the same 



4o8 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AXD GRACE 



which, although it is perfeetly äimple, there is an infinite 
number of anglea formed by the lines which meet in it. 

3* All nature ia &pknum* Thero are simple substancea 
everywhere^j which are actually separated from one 
auother by activities af tbeir own and which continually 
change tbeir rektions ; and each specially impoi-tant 
[distingtiee] sunple stibstance or Monad, which forma the 
centre of a Compound substance (e, g, of an animalj and 
the piinciple of its oneneas, ia aurrounded by a mass 
üomposed of an infinity of other Monads^ which constitute 
the partieular body of this central Monad, and according 
to the affections of its body the Monad represents, as in 
a kind of centre, the things which are outside of it, Thia 
bod^f is organiCj though it forma a kind of automaton or 

tirue perceptiona of the »ctual part% and ©ven each part has mora 
tha.li oiia müdiQujition ; and ihero iä porc«ptioji at the äame tüiiä 
not only of each modiöc^ition, hut alüo of eauh part. Thes43 multi- 
plied pereeptions arö diSbrent from one another^ ulthough our 
att<?ntion cannot alvvaya distinguish them, and thu^ we have 
confused perceptions^ infinity of which ia contained in ^ch 
di»tinct Peremption, boeause of ita relatlon to everytliing wbick ia. 
oiitside. In öhort, that which is combiuation of paita in tha out- 
aide World reprtjstjiited in thö Monad only by combination of ifca 
inodifieationa ^ und withoui this simple beinga could not h& 
intenially diBtinguishad from one another, and tbey would have 
no ralation wliatevur to ext^rnal things ; and in ahortT ^ there 
ai-e everywhero only simple substaneea, of which cjocnpounds are 
mer«ly the aggregates, there woiild be no Yariation or diversity in 
thingg^ if there were no internal Tariation or diveraity in simple 
substances.' Lettre ä Ma^m (1716) (G^ vL 628). Cf. Mmadd&g^^ 
notes IS and su. 
^ E. omita parUmi^ ' everywhere/ 

* The idea is that each Monad is separated from every other 
inasmuoh aa it has sjpontaneity, i,e. an activity entirely its own ; for 
if it had morely an aetivity like motioa^ which paas*ji^ from one 
thing to anuther indifferently, it would be united with all other 
Monade in a mtiHnuum and would thus c^ase to be a realj indep^n- 
dent unii 

* E. omits disimgu^j reading * each aiinple subatanoe.' 

^ Of coursoj this does not mean tbat the Monads constituting 
the body are rmffy afiected by outäide thinga. Loibni^ ia here uaing 
populär language. 



PRINCIPLES OP NATÜRE AND GRACE 409 



natural machine, which is a machine not only as a whole, 
but also in the smallesi parts of it that can come into 
Observation Since the world is aplenum all things are 
connected together and each body acts upon every other, 
more or less, according to their distance, and each, through 
reaction, is affected by every other. Hence it follows that 
each Monad is a living miiTor, or a mirror endowed with 
inner activity ^\ representativ^ of the uniyerse, according 
to its point of view, and as subject to rule as is the 
universe itself. And the perceptions in the Monad are 
produced one from another according to the laws of desires 
[ajßpetits] or of the final causcs of good und evil, which con- 
sist in observable perceptions, regulär or irregulär, as, on 
the other hand, the changes of bodies and extemal pheno- 
mena are produced one from another according to the 
laws of efficient causes, that is to say, of motions Thus 
there is a perfect harmony between the perceptions of the 
Monad and the motions of bodies, a harmony pre-estab- 
lished from the beginning between the System of efl&cient 
causes and that of final causes. And it is in this way 
that soul and body are in agreement and are physically 
united, while it is not possible for the one to change the 
laws of the other 

4. Each Monad, with a particular body, forms a living 
substance. Thus not only is there everywhere lifo, 
accompanied with members or organs, but there is also 

" Cf. Mmadologyy § 64. 

^ * This " mirror " is a figurative expression ; but it is suitable 
enough and it has already been employed by theologians and 
philosophers, when they spoke of a mirror infinitely more perfect, 
namely, the mirror qf the Deity, which they made the object of the 
beatific Vision.* Lettre ä Masson (17 16) (G. vi. 6a6). 

^' Ultimately, motions and desires {appetiis) are difiPerent degrees 
of the same thing, viz. appetition, or the passage from one con- 
scious or unconscious perception to another. The unconscious 
appetition is motion or cfficierit cause, not setting before itself an 
end, while the conscious appetition or desire does set before itself 
an end of good or evil, i. e. final cause, 

" Cf. Monaddogy, §§78 sqq. 



4IO PRINCIPLES OP N ATÜRE AND GRACE 



an infinity of degrees in th© Monads^ one dominaiiiig 
more ot less ovt^r another. But when the Monad has 
Organa so arranged tliat they give prominenee and sharp- 
nefls [du relief ei du distingu^] to the impressiona they 
receivB, and consequently to the perceptions which repre- 
sf^nt these (as, for ixistance, when, by nieans of the form 
of the eye's humourSj the rays of light are concentrated 
and act with more force), this may lead to feeling [senti- 
ment] ^% that ia to say, to a perception accompanied by 
metmn/, in other words, a perception of which a certain 
echo long remama^ so as to make itself heard on occa- 
sion. Such a living heing ib called an animalj as its 
Monad ia caDed a souL And when this soul is raised to 
reason, it is something more sublime and is reckoned 
among spirits [e^^r?is], as will presentiy be explained* It 
is tru© that animals are sometinies in the condition of 
mere Hving beings and their sonls in the condition 

of mere Monads naraely when their perceptions are not 
auffiele ntly sharp [diMmgue] to be remembered, as happena 
in a deep dreamlesa sleep or in a swoon, But perceptions 
which have become compietely conlused are sure to be 
developed again in animala for reasona which I shall 

" The transition from tlie imeonseioufl to the conaeiona per- 
ception ia not by any menns TOade elear. Leibniz is, of coure^t 
using ordmary languag© ; but it is difficult to how he oould 
traimlat^) it into the terms of hl3 eysfcem^ unless h© wer© to content 
himself with sajing tbat conacicus Mona da have lesfl confuaed 
perceptions than uncongoioua Monads and have bodies whoa@ 
Organa aje dißerently arranged. For^ in Leibniz's viow, the action 
of any one Moniid upon anotber is purely ideal ; and there ia 
nofching in the world but Monad;^ Cf MiMadology^ | 35. 

G. roada etendrßj which might here be translated ' increase/ for 
enkndfe [hejird], which ib E/e reading* Enimidre seonia more iiatiiraU 
i, e. unconacious living beInga and unconscions Monads. 

^ That is, perceptions ;in animals) which have pasaed into the 
complete confüaion of imeonsciouanesa are sure to pass into con- 
aciousness* agaiiK Confusion in perceptiona m the Bamo thing as 
envclopment or contraction, (Honco the petitea perc^ion^ are eon- 
ftised.) On the other hand, cleamess in perceptiona is the Bamo 
thing m development or tjiJipansion. Cf. note 51 and New E^f/A^ 
Introduction, note 74, 



PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 4II 



presently inention (§ 12). Thus it is well to make dis-. 
tinction between perception, which is the inner state of 
the Monad representing outer things, and apperception^ 
which is consciousness or the reflective knowledge of this 
inner state, and which is not given to all souls nor to the 
same soul at all times. It is for lack of this distinction 
that the Cartesians have made the mistake of ignoring 
perceptions of which we are not conscious as ordinary 
people ignore imperceptible [insensible] bodies °. It is 
this also that has led these same Cartesians to believe 
that only minds [espnfe] are Monads, that the lower 
animals have no soul, and that still less are there other 
princvples oflife And as they came into too great con- 
flict with the common opinion of men in denying feeling 
[sentiment] to the lower animals, so on the other hand 
they conformed too much to the prejudices of the crowd 
in confounding a prohnged wnconsdousmss, which comes 
from a great confusion of perceptions, with absolute death, 
in which all perception would cease. This has confirmed 
the ill-founded opinion that some souls are destroyed, and 
the bad ideas of some who call themselves free-thinkers 
[esprits forts] and who have disputed the immortality of 
Our soul ^\ 

" See Monadologyf § 14. 

* *As in body we hold that there is dvriTwria and figure in 
general, although we do not know what are the figures of im- 
perceptible bodies ; so in the soul we hold that there is perception 
and appetition, although we do not distinctly know the imper- 
ceptible elements of the confused perceptions by which the im- 
perceptible parts of bodies are expressed. . . . You ask whether 
I believe that there are bodies which do not fall within sight. 
Why should I not believe it ? I think it impossible to doubt it. 
Through microscopes we see animalculae otherwise imperceptible, 
and the nerves of these animalculae, and other animalculae, 
perhapis swimming in the fluid parts of these, cannot be seen. 
The minuteness [subtilitas'] of nature goes ad infinitum/ EpistoJa ad 
Bierlingium (171 1) (E. 678 a ; G. vii. 501). 

" Leibniz probably means what elsewhere, following Scholastic 
usage, he calls * forms/ Cf. Introduction, Part iv. p. 156. 

^ Cf. Monadologyy § 13. 



412 PEIJ?CIPLE3 OF NÄTUEE AND GRACE 



5. There is a connexion among th© perceptions of 
animals which has some likeneas to reajion ; hnt it is 
l>ased only on the memory of /(icts or efifects and not 
at all on the knowledge of cames, Thus dog avoids 
the stick T^^th which it has been beaten, because memory 
represents to it the pain which thia stick has caused it, 
Äiid men, in so far as they are empirics, fchat is to say 
in three-fourths of their actionSj do not act otherwise 
than the lower animaISi For instanee, we expect that 
there will be daylight to-ftiorrow because our experience 
has always been so ; it is only the aatronomer who 
rationally foresees it, and even hia prediction will ulti- 
mately fail when the cause of dayhght^ which is not 
etemal, cea&es^*. But gmuine reasoning dei^ends upon 
necessary or eternal truths, such as those of logic, of 
number, of geometry, which produce an indubitable 
connexion of ideas and infalUble inferences, The animals 
in which these inferences do not appear are called the 
lower mlmah \betcs\ ; but those which know these neeea- 
sary truths are properly those which are called mtionaX 
animals f and their souls are called jninds [esprUs]. These 
souls bave the power to perform acts of reflexion and 
to observe that which is called ego, substance ^"^^ öoul, 
mind [esprit]j m a word, 'immaterial things and truths. 
And this it is which makes science or demonstrative 
knöwkdgo possible to us '^^ 

6. Modern research has taught ns^ and reason confirms 
it, that tite living beings whose otgans are known to 
UB^'j that lÄi to say, plants and animals, do not coma 



E. rcads * Mona4f*-J>*iweeii ' substAiace' and ^soul ';'G. omita it. 
Cf. MontjLda^ogy, sg^nd 30. In th© MoTKiddogy God ia addod 
as aa objcct of th© self-eonscious sciul. 

All Monadä hiive organic bodies, and the seHea of Monada and 
of organiiims extends continuously from the loweat of Monada with 
th© Jeast porceptible of organiams up to the Monad of Monada, Qod. 
At both ends of the aeale there are beinga who^ Organa are Qot 
known io ua. 




PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 413 



from putrefaction or chaos, as the ancients thought, but 
from preformed seeds, and consequently from the trans- 
formation of pre-existing living beings. In the seed of 
large animals there are animalcules which by means of 
conception obtain a new outward form, which they 
make their own and which enables them to grow and 
become larger so as to pass to a greater theatre and to 
propagate the large animal It is true that the souls 
of human spermatic animals are not rational, and that 
they become so only when' conception gives to these 
animals human nature ^. And as in general animals are 
not entirely bom in conception or generatiofiy no more 3o 
they entirely perish in what we call death; for it is 
reasonable that what does not come into being by natural 
means should Apt any more come to an end in the course 
of nature. Thus, thrpwing off their mäsk or their tattered 
covering, they merely retum to a more minute theatre, 
where they may nevertheless be as sensitive [sensible] 
and as well ordered as in the larger theatre And what 
has just been said about the large animals applies also 
to the generation and death" of spermatic animals 
themselves, that is to say, they are growths of other 

» Cf. Monadology, §§ 74, 75. 

* Cf. Monadology, § 82, It would be inconsistent with Leibniz's 
general principles to suppose that a spermatic animal could have 
a rational soul (othei-wise than in germ, as all souls may be regarded 
as potentially rational). For the rationality of a soul is merely 
a very high degree of clearness and distinctndss in its perceptions, 
which again determines its rank as a dominant Monad. But 
nothing eise than its rank as a dominant Monad determines the 
nature of the body it has. Consequently a rational soul must 
always have a human body or a body of some higher kind, spiritual 
or angelic, and the imion of a spermatic animal's body with a 
rational soul is impossible. 

Cf. Monaddogy^ §§ 73, 76, 77. 

E. (manifestly by mistake) omits a clause following these 
. words. A translation of his text would be: * The 'generation and 
death of the smaller spermatic animals in comparison with which 
they* [sc. the large animals] *may be counted large,' &c. This 
misses the point of the sentence. 



4X4 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GEACE 



sroaller apermatic animale^ in comparison with wbich 
they in turn may b© counted large^ for everytbing in 
nature proceeds ad inßnUujir ^. Thus not only souls bot 
also animala are iiigenerable and imperishable : they ar^f 
only developed^ enveloped, clothed, unclothed ^, trauä- 
formed- Souls neret put off the whole of tlieii* body, 
and do not pass l'rom one body into another body wtdeh 
13 entirely new to them* Accordiiigly there is no Ämtern- 
pstfchosiSj hut tbere is mdamürphosis. Animals change, 
take on and put off, parta only**. In nutrition this 
takes place gradually and by little itnpercoptible [jmensihh] 
portionsj but continoally ; and on the otiier band, in con- 
üeption or in death, when mach is gained or lost all at 
once, it takes place auddenly and in a way tliat caa be 
noticed [notoMeTiient]^ bnt rarely, 

7, Thus far wo have spoken merely aa pure pA^sicisfö™ : 
110 w we must rise to mdaphysics^ niaking use of the 
(frmt prindple, usnally littk omployed, wbich affirras that 
mthing takes place withmt mfficimi rmmn^ that is to 
say, that nothing happens without its being possible for 

** *So, nataraliats obeervö^ a fiea 

Has smaDer fleas that on him prey ; 
And the^ have Bmall^r still to bite ^em, 
And so pro€Ood ad it\fl«iium. "Swifts Oji Podtry, 
The idßft of * infinities of Infinity ' ia a favourite ono with LeibniZi 
lind it is closely connected with the notiona underlying Iiis diffe- 
Ttintial calcuhiä, * For inatance^ we mtist conceiveti) the dianieter 
lif a smaU eJeinent Ld a grain of «and, (a) thö diameter of the grain 
of aand itaelf, (3) that of tho globe of tlie earth, (4) the di^tanee of 
a fiied &tar from Uäj (5) the mugnitudo of the wholö ayatem of fijted 
atars, as (i) adifferential of th© second degroo, a diffci Gntial of the 
first degrüej (3) an ordinary absignable liue, (4) an infinite üne^ (5) 
an infinitely infinite line/ lMtr& ä M, d'Angtcourt (17 16), Dnlena, iii. 
500, Cf» Monadologie, §§ 65-70, 
CL a Corlnthians, v. 4. 

et Monadotagy, 7t, 73, 77, Aristotl© condemns th© theory of 
tra Iismigration of souls in hia I>£ Anima^ i. 3j 407^ 13. 

omits Uaucöup ['much'J and reads, ^ all is gained or lost at 

once.' 

i. students of uature. 



PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 415 

one who should know things suf&ciently, to give a reason 
which is sufficient to detennine why things are so and 
not otherwise. This principle being laid down, the first 
question we are entitled to put will be — Why does some- 
thing exist rather than nothing ? For * nothing ' is simpler 
and easier^^ than ^something/ Further, granting that 
things must exist, we must be able to give a reason why 
they should exist thvs and not otherwise^*. 

8. Now this suf&cient reason of the existence of the 
universe cannot be found in the sequence of contingent 
things, that is to say, of bodies and their representations 
in souls: because, matter being in itself indifferent to 
motion and to rest and to one or another particular motion, 
we cannot find in it the reason of motion and still less 
the reason of one particular motion And although the 
motion which is at present in matter comes from the pre- 
ceding motion, and. that again from another preceding 
motion, we are no farther forward, however far we go ; 
for the same question always remains. Thus the suffi- 
cient reason, which has no need of any other reason, 
must needs be outside of this sequence of contingent 
things and must be in a substance which is the cause 
of this sequence, or which is a necessary being, bearing 
in itself the reason of its own existence, otherwise we 
should not yet have a sufficient reason with which we 
could stop. And this ultimate reason of things is called 
God'\ 

i.e. more easily brought into existence. But if we can say 
even this of * nothing,* must not * nothing * be * something * ? How 
can we say of that which is not at all, that it is * simple ' and * easy * 
in comparison with other things ? 
" Cf. Mmadology, § 3a. 

Motion (which, for Leibniz, is what we should now call an 
abstraction) is regarded as passing from body to body and as having 
no definite source in the phenomenal world. The point of view is 
that which Descartes substituted for the Peripatetic theories, and 
Leibniz's point is that, while Descartes's view is good so far as it 
goes, it is insufficient and requires to be supplemented by a deeper 
explanation. 

Cf. Monadology, §§ 36-38, and Ultimate Origination qf Things,^, 338. 



4l6 PRINCIPLES OF NÄTURE AND GRACE 



9, This primary simple substance muat include emi- 
nently " the perfections contained in the deriTative aub- 
stances which are ita effects, Thus it will have power, 
knowledge and will in perfection, that is to aay, it will 
hav6 supreme [sou m'aine] omnipoteaeej omnisciencö and 
goodness. And as justice, takan very""^ generally, is 
notlüng but goodness in conformity witti wisdom^ there 
nnisfc also be in God supreme justice The reason 
which bas led to the existence of tbings through Hirn 
makea tbem also depend upon Him for tbeir continued 
existence and working ; and they continually receive 
from Him that whieh makes them bave any perfection ; 
but any imperfection tbat remams in tbeni com es from 
the essential and original linütation of tbe created 
tbing^ 

*^ U e. in A higher dagree. See Manaddogyf not© 61. 
" E. om ita /ort [yery]. 

" * There ia a greiit diflfürcncG botweeti the Way tn which men 
are .i'uat and th© way in which God is just; but it is mcr^ly 
a diflFerenoe iit degres. For God is perfectly luid entirely juat, and 
th© justice of ra©n Ib tningied with iiijustice, faults, and sina 
hecaüse of the imperfeetion of hum&n natura. Th© porfi'ctiona of 
God SF© infinit© and ours are limited. . . . Justice is notliing hui 
that which is in eonformity with wisdom and goodness taken 
together ; th© ©nd of goodness is the groatost good» but in order tn 
recognize this there h ne©d of wisdom^ which in nothing but tho 
knowledg© of th© good. In the same way, goodness ia nothing tut 
the incllnation to do good to all and to prevent ©yil^ unlesä it be 
necesaary in Order to secure a g realer good or to proben t a greater 
eviL Thus wisdom is in the understanding and goodness in the 
wilL And conaequontly Justice is in both. Power is anothcr 
thing ; but if it comes into play, it maltea the right become 
flütual and causes what ought to be really to ex ist, so far as the 
natura of thing» allows, Thia ia what God doea in the world/ 
M^itation sur h- mfion mmmune de la justice (MoUat, pp. 60, 6a \ 
Cf. Ön tfie Notfons qf Righi and Justice (1693^ p. 083. 

** Cf» ilmadology, § 43. This is a brief statcment of the tnain 
eontention of the Theodic^, in so far afj it endeavoura to ylndioato 
the goodneaa of God in fae« of th© ©T?il in th© world. God is the 
source of th© perfections of euch Monad^ because it is through Hia 
ehoioe of the best of all poaaible worlds that each Monod a<;tually 
exijstB and conttnnes in exiatenee* But every Mouad hoü somo 



PEINCIPLES OF NATÜRE AND GRACE 417 



10. It follows from the supreme perfection of God 
that in producing the universe He has chosen the best 
possible plan, in which there is the greatest variety 
along with the greatest order ; ground, place, time being 
as well arranged as possible the greatest effect pro- 
duced by the simplest ways ; the most power, know- 
ledge, happiness and goodness in created things that the 
universe allowed*®. For as all possible things in the 
understanding of God claim existence in proportion to 
their perfections, the result of all these Claims must be 
the most perfect actual world that is possible. And 
apart from this it would not be possible to give a reason 
why things have gone thus rather than otherwise 

11. The supreme wisdom of God led Him to choose 
specially the Ums of motion which are most fitting and 
which are most in conformity with abstract or meta- 
physical reasons. There is conserved the same quantity 
of total and absolute force, or of activity [adion], also 
the same quantity of relative force or of reaction, and 
finally the same quantity of force of direction^^ Further, 

essential, inalienable imperfection ; otherwise it would be indis- 
tinguishable from God. And God cannot change the essence of 
any Monad, as it is in the 'region of ideas,' which is His under- 
standing. He can merely create and support, or withhold His 
creation and preservation. 

Cf. ültimate OriginaHon of Things, pp. 340 sqq. 
*« Cf. Monadologyy §§ 55-58. " Cf. Monadologyy §§53 and 54. 
Every System or aggregate of bodies has a total absolute force, 
1. e. a total force belonging to the System as a completely indepen- 
dent System — a total force calculated on the supposition that there 
are no other total forces in relation to it, which might increase or 
diminish it. The whole matter of the universe is such a System, 
and consequently its total absolute force remains always the 
same. But total absolute force is always made up of two partial 
forces, i. e. forces which belong to the parts of the aggregate or 
System. These partial forces are (i) * relative force* or * force of 
reaction,' which is the force involved in the mutual action and 
reaction of the bodies constituting the System or aggregate, i. e. its 
internal action, and (2) 'force of direction,* which is the foroe 
involved in the external action of the System. Cf. Introduction, 
Part iii. pp. 89 sqq. See also ExplanaÜon of tke New System, note 30. 



4l8 PRINCIFLES OF NATITRE AND GRACE 



action is alwaya equal to reaction, and the whol© eifeet 
is always equivalent to its füll cause. And it is remark- 
able [mrprenant] that by the sole consideration of efficient 
musßs or of matter it was imposaible to explain these 
lawB of motioii which have been diacovered in out Urne 
and of which a part has been discovered by myself. 
Vor I haye found that we must have recourae to ßnal 
causes, and that these laws are depeudent not upon the 
principU of mcessiiify hke the truths of logicj arithmetie, 
and geometiy, but upon the primiple of fitness [con- 
vemncejf that is to aay, upon the choice of wisdom. And 
this is one of the most affective and remarkable proofs 
of the existeuce of God for thoae who ean go deeply into 
I theae thinga 

12. Again, it follows from the perfection of the Su* 
preiae Author not only that the order of the whole 
univei-se is the most perfect that can be, bnt also that 
each living miiTor repreaenting the univers© ac cor ding 
to its point of vieWj that is to aay, each Monaäj each 
substantial centre, muat have its perceptiona and its 
desirea [ajopetits] as thoroughly well-ordered as is com- 
patible with all the reat, Whenco it also follows that 
souls, that is to say, the most dominant Monads, or 
rather animals tliemselves cannot fail to awake again 

*' The Iäws of aetuai *concpete' mütif>ii caiiaot be dudueed a priori 
imder tho law of eontratiiction ; but a knowledgie of them involTOB 
a röferonce to exp«ri©nc^* As a rcault of this refßreuce to «xperiGntje 
we are compcdlöd to conceive body^ not aa mpre eict ei'n, all ty of part 
indifferent to motion, but as something wliich alwaya baa a/ixrcfl of 
its own, Thus bodles are ultimately or really (aa d ist inet from 
phenomenallj) independent forc^is (Monads), wbich düfer from one 
another endlessly but are yet in such harmoay that they form 
one pörfec;tlj regulär ayat^m, the lawa of which we naii diacorer 
and State. Such a System could never have come into exiateaee 
^ of itself,' by a law of blind necesaity^ indifferent to good and evO, 
lik© the principle of eontradiotion. An all-wiso, nll-povYerful and 
infinit^ly goud God must hare choseti thia systei^ &s the heet 
among all p^jasible aystema. Cf MmaddogU) 5 51. 

^ omits, themselves.* 



PRINCIPLES OF NATÜKE AND GRACE 419 



from the condition of Stupor into which death or some 
other accident may put them 

13. For all is regulated inthings, once for all, with as 
much Order and mutual connexion as possible, since 
supreme wisdom and goodness can act only with perfect 
harmony. The present is big with the future, the future 
might be read in the past, the distant is expressed in the 
near. We might get to know the beauty of the universe 
in each soul, if we could unfold all that is enfolded in 
it and that is perceptibly developed only through time. 

^ Conscious Monads may for a time fall into imconsciousness ; 
but that they should remain permanently in that condition would 
be ägainst the general order of things. For the tendency of all 
created Monads is to advance to higher perceptions. In this 
advance each Monad is essentially limited to some extent ; but 
apart from this essential limitation, which is independent of the 
will of Qod, no other permanent limitation is imposed. Thus, if 
a Monad has once been conscious, it may be conscious again, for 
manifestly it is not essentidUy limited to the unconscious state. And 
it must some day be conscious again, for the world is the best of all 
possible worlds,. not merely on the whole but as regards each of 
its part% which is equivalent to saying that the world is so con- 
structed that each of the Monads constituting it shall rise to the 
highest point of perfection (i. e. of perception and appetition) which 
its essential limitations allow. Leibniz elsewhere speaks of the 
world in terms which, with slight alteration, he would apply to 
the individual soul. * You are right in saying that our globe ought 
to have been a kind of Paradise, and I add that, if that is so, it 
can quite well become one yet, and it may have drawn back in 
order to make a better leap forward.' Lettre ä Bmrguet (17 15) (E. 
731 a ; G. iii. 578). Cf. Letlare touchant ce qui est independant des Sens 
et de la Mattere (170a) (G. vi. 507) : *Always when we penetrate 
into the depths of any things, we find in them the most beautiful 
order that could be desired, even beyond what we imagined, as all 
those who have gone deeply into the sciences are aware; and 
accordingly we may hold that the same is the case as regards all 
other things, and that not only do immaterial substances always 
continue to exist but their lives, their progress and their changes 
also are regulated so as to attain a certain end, or rather to 
approach it more and more, as asymptotes do. And although we 
sometimes fall back, like lines which have bends in them, advance 
none the less prevails in the end and gets the victory.' Cf New 
Essaysj Introduction, note 74. 

£62 



420 PRINCrPLES OF NATUBE AKD GßACE 



But as each distinct perception of the soul includeö an 
infinite number of confused perceptions, which involve 
the whole universe, the soul itself knows the things of 
which it has perception, only in so far aa it Ims distinct 
and heightened [or unveiled] perceptions of them ; and 
it hfls perfection in proportion to its distinct perceptions, 
Each soul knowa the infinite, knows all, but canfuaedly ; 
as when I walk on the sea-shore and hear the great noise 
th.B sea makes, I hear the particular sounds which come 
from the particular waves and wliich niake up the total 
sound, but I do not diseriminate them from one another* 
Our confused perceptions are the reault of the impressions 
which the whole universe makes upon us. It is the same 
with each Monad God alone has a distinct knowledge 
of all, for He is the source of all. It has been very well 
Said that as a centre He is eyerywhere, but His circum- 
ference is nowhere for everything is immediÄtely pre- 
sent to Hirn without any distance from this centre. 

14. Äs regards the rational soul or mind [Te^U], there is 
hl it aomething more than in the Monads oreyen in mare 
[simple] Souls ^\ It is not only a muTor of the universe 
of created beings, but also an image of the Deity. The 
mind [Ve^frit] has not merely a perception of the works 
of God, but it is even capable of producing something 
which resembles them, although in miniature* For, to 
say nathing of the wonders of di-eams, in which we 

E. roadö r^tet'^; G. reads rewlees, Ke-vs^ees (withotit tlio utt^ual 
atrcents) loolta lik© a älip of the pen and rehvSes is ©Isewhere used 
in a similar conneiion. Cf. MonadolofjUi & =5- 
Cf. Monadology^ 60 atld 6i. 
'* ' The World i& an infinite spher«, of which the tientre is evety- 
where, the cirfjumference nowhere.' Piiacal, PensSeSj L (Havet'a &d., 
p, i\ Hövet trflees tlie phrajje to Habelaiü (bk. iii. ch. 13 \ thence 
to G^erfion and Bonaventura, and ultimately to Vincent de Beauvaia 
(early in the thirteenth contury) who attribiites* it to Empedocles^ 
It is not in any writing of Erapedoclos now known» See Ha^et'a 
Fmcolf PP- 17 sqq. 

'The MoDads* her« meana bare or unconscioua Monads, whlle 
*mere souls' meani oonrcious bohIb, which ate not self-conscious. 



PKINCIPLES OF NATÜRE AND GRACE 42I 

inyent without trouble (but also without Willing it) *• 
things which, in our waking hours, we should have to 
think long in order to hit upon, our soul is architectonic 
also in its yoluntary activities and, discovering the 
scientific prindples in accoixlance with which Grod has 
ordered things {pondere, mensura, numero, &c.)% it 
imitates, in its own province and in the little world in 
which it is allowed to act, what God does in the great 
World 

15. It is for this reason that all spirits [esprits], whether 
of men or of angels [genies], entering in virtue of reason 
and of eternal truths into a kind of fellowship with God, 
are members of the City of God, that is to say, of the 
most perfect state, formed and govemed by the greatest 
and best of monarchs : in which there is no crime with- 
out punishment, no good action without a proportionate 
reward, and in short as much yirtue and happiness as 
is possible ; and this, not by any interference with the 
course of nature, as if what God prepares for souls were 
to disturb the laws of bodies, but by the very order of 
natural things, in virtue of the harmony pre-established 
£rom all time between the realms of nature and of graoe, 
between God as Architect and God as Monarch, so that 
nature itself ^ leads to grace, and grace, by the use it makes 
of nature, brings it to perfection 

16. Thus although reason cannot make known to us 
the details of the great future (which are reserved for 
revelation), we can be assured by this same reason that 
things are made in a way which exceeds our desires. 

* E. reads sans en avoir meme la volonte^ * without even Willing it.' 
G. (from whom I translate) has mais atcssi sans en avoir la volonte, 
^ Sed omnia in mensura, et^ywmero etpondere disposuisHs, A quotation 



(frequently used in Leibniz's time) from theViügate, JB^ qfWisdom, 
ch. II, V. 21. * But by measure and number and weight Thou didst 
Order all things' (R. V. ch. 11, v. 20). The phrase pondere, numero, 
mensura occurs in the remains of Ulpian, InsAit, bk. i, fragment iii. 
»• Cf. Monadology, § 82. 
»• E. omits 'itsell' 

Cf. Monadology, §§ 84-89. 




4^2 PRINCIPLES OF JiTATURE AND GBACE 



Fuither, as God is the most perfect and most happy and 
tonBoquently the most lovable of substances, and aa 
tjmuim pure Jove consists in the state in whieh we find 
plfnasure in the perfections and the felicity of the heloved, 
this loye is sure to us tlie greatest pleasure of whicli 
we are capahle^ when God is its ohject 

i^. And it 19 easy to love God as we ought, if we know 
Hirn as I have just said For although God cannot be 
perceived by our externa! senses. He is nom the less very 
lovable aad He gives very gi-eat pleasiira We Bee how 
much pleasure honours give to men, althoui-h they do 
not eonsiet in anything that appeals to the external 
senses. Martyra and fanatics (though the emotion of the 
latter is ill-governed} ahow how much influenae mental 
pleasure [Je plamr de Ve^mf] can have ; and, what ia more, 
even the pleasures of sense are really in teilet tual plea- 
surea eonfusedly known^^ Music charma u3, although 
its beauty consista only in the harmonies [üQmenances] of 
nnmbers and in the connting f of which we are unconsciouB 
hut which neverthelesa the soul does rnake) of the beats 
or vibrationa of aounding bodies^ which beats or vibrations 
tjome together at definite iiitervals. The pleasure w*hich 
sight finda in good proportions is of the same nature ; 
and the pleasures caused by the other sensea wül be 
found to aniount to much the siime thing, although we 
may not be able to explain it so distinctly". 

** i.e. ^ dialntereyted ' love. See Mmadofogy^ | 90, note t42. 

* God iä ]ovt) [cAariTas], which is knowii by lovo [amor] aad i» 
löved in b«ing known,' Nicholas of Cu&n, EzütoHmt:^ ex Sermanibus^ 
10, 188 b. 

For Ben 36 is confng&d perception* Cf. Intrctdüction, Part 
iii, p. 125. 

Leibniz does not mean, some of his eritics (e»g. Kirchmanii) 
,seem to have though t, that the pleasure wö havo in muaic or in 
painting ia entirely a matter of the senses. What hö wanta to 
f?how is that even th© s^nae-elomönt in artiatic pkasure is really 
of an intellectu^d kind, and thiia he does by ehowing that it 
dependg upon an unrecognized perception of proportion, nieaaar« 
or rhjthm» He elsewhore üalls it *ft hidd^n [omüM] arithmetie ^ 
(G. iy. 550* 



PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GRACE 423 



1 8. It may even be said that from this time forth the 
love of God enables us to enjoy a foretaste of future 
felicity. And although this love is disinterested, it con- 
stitutes by itself our greatest good and interest, even 
though we may not seek these in it and though we may 
consider only the pleasure it gives without regard to the 
advantage it brings ; for it gives us perfect confidence in 
the goodness of our Author and Master, which produces 
real tranquillity of mind, not as in the case of the Stoics, 
who forcibly school themselves to patience, but through 
a present content which also assures to us a future happi- 
ness^^ And besides the present pleasure it affords, 
nothing can be of more advantage for the future than this 
love of God, for it fulfils our expectations also and leads 
US in the way of supreme happiness, because in virtue 
of the perfect order that is established in the universe, 

*There is as much difference between genuine morality 
ImorcUe] and that of the Stoics and Epicureans, as there is between 
joy and patience ; for their tranquillity was founded only upon 
necessity, while ours should be founded upon the perfection and 
the beauty of things, upon our own felicity.* Theodicee, § 254 ; 
E. 580 b ; ö. vi. 268. * What is called Fatum Sioicum was not so 
black as it is painted. It did not keep men from looking after 
their affairs ; but it tended to give them tranquillity as regard; 
events, through the consideration of their necessity, which makes 
our anxieties and regrets useless. . . . The teachings of the Stoics 
(and perhaps also of some famous philosophers of our own time), 
being confined to this supposed necessity, can only secure a forced 
patience ; instead of which our Lord inspires us with more sublime 
thoughts and teaches us even the way to have content, when He 
assures us that as God is perfectly good and wise and takes all 
under His care, so as not even to neglect a hair of our heads 
our confidence in Him ought to be complete; so that we should 
see, if we were able to comprehend it, that it is impossible even 
to desire anything better (either absolutely or for ourselves) than 
what He does. It is as if we were to say to men : "Do your duty 
and be content with what comes of it, not only because you 
cannot resist Bivine providence or the nature of things (which 
would be enough to make us tratiguü, but not to make us content) 
but also because you have to do with a good Master." And this 
might be called Faium Christianum,' Theodicee, Pröface, E. 470b;./ 
G. vi. 30. 



4^4 PRINCIPLES OF NATURE AND GKACE 



eveiything m done m well as poaaible both for th© 
generäl good and also for the greatest individual good of 
those whö believe in it and who aro satisfied with th(% 
Divin© governmentp And this belief and satisfaction 
must inevitably be the characteristic^of those who have 
learned to love the Source of all good ^. It is tme that 
aupreme felicity {by whatevar heatific viswn^ or knowledge 
of God, it may be accompanied) can never be complete, 
because God, being infinite, cannot be entirely known "l 
Thua our happinesa will never consist (and it is right 
that it shonld not consist ) in complete enjoyment, which 
would leave nothing more to be desirod and wonld m^kt^ 
our mind [esprit] stnpid ; bnt it must consist in a per- 
petual progresa to new pleasures and new perfeetiona 

^ We ought alwaya to content witb the order of the paat, 
h&GQXim it ia in conformity with the absolut© will of God, whi<ih 
wo know through what hm come to pnss j but we must try to 
iTiako the futuro, so far as it depends upon us» in conformity with 
the presnmptiye will of God or His commandments^ to adom our 
Sparta and to lahour at doing good, yöt without vexing ourselve« 
when success do«8 not come to us, in the firm beli^f that Grod will 
he able to find the mögt Atting season in wkich to ntake chang^a 
for the better, Thoso who are not content with the Order of things 
cannot flatter themselvea that they love God aa they ougbt' 
Lettre ä Amauid (1690) (Q. ii. 136 ; E. 108 a). 

^ According to Leibni^'s System, if a Monad wer© to know God 
entirölyi ifc would he God and would thus ceaae to he itself, whioh 
ia imposgible. Yet Leibniz regards the relation of men to God && 
so close that he calla them * littlö goda, aubject to the great God/ 
I^etire ä ArnatUd ^1687) (G» ii. 125). Cf, Nicholas of Gusa, JPacoMfone* 
ex Sermonibus, 3t, tB8 a j ^To be able always morü and more to 
underatand (to conform oneself to the Creator) withont end, is the 
likencsa of eternal wiadom,' 

' Felicity is to peraona what perfeetion is to beinga.* Paper 
witliout a title (r686) (G. iv- 46a). Gf. 




rection is to teinga.' Jfaper ^ 



INDEX 



Abstractions rightly used are not 

errors, 37.9. 
Achilles and the tortoise, 81 n. 
Action moirice, 92. 
Activity essential to substance, 

901» 325» 397. 
Adamson (R.) on Fichte, 180 n, 
183 n. 

Agrippa von Nettesheim, 403 n. 
Albertus Magnus, 260 n, 302. 
Algebra, its connexion with geo- 

metry, 76; relation to other 

Sciences, 80. 
Alphabet of human thoughts, 85. 
Aisted, 376 n. 

Angelus 8ilesius (Joannes), 384 n. 

Animals, birth and death of, 115, 
259, 413; indestructibility and 
immortality of, 262, 306, 374; 
resuBcitation of, 2 24 n, 306 ; ac- 
cording to Descartes, are mere 
machines, 52 ; according to 
Leibniz, not mere machines, 
300 ; animals incomparably 
greater than ours may exist, 
ii4n, Ii6n; organs of animals 
in relation to perception, 231 ; 
organic body of, 353 ; souls of, 
400 ; nature of animal con- 
sciousness, 232, 322, 364, 412: 

Animal spirits, 314 n. 

Anselm. 2177. 

d^rirtmia, 35 n, 94 sqq. 

Apperception, in Leibniz's sense, 
34, 1 21 ; Locke's view, 367 sqq. ; 
distiuction between appercep- 
tio^ and perception, 126 sqq., 
411. See also Perception. 

Appetition defined, 33, 35, 226, 
407; degrees of, 51, 138; not 



necessarily conscious, 35 ; a 
result of the piinciple of suf- 
ficient reason, 71. 

Aquinas, 243 n ; on sensible 
species, 219 n ; on antecedent 
and consequent will of God, 
270 n ; on souls of lower 
animals, 302 ; on the motions 
of the planets, &c., 382 n ; his 
explanation of * eminent,' 238 n. 

Aristotle, 32, 155, 238 n, 255 n, 
308, 358 n, 378 n ; in relation 
to Leibniz, 229 n; his ethics, 
293 n ; his description of place, 
353 ; on the t<ibula rasa, 360 n ; 
on the motion of the skies, 
382 n. 

Amauld and Leibniz, 6, 298 n. 
Association of ideas, 232 n. 
Astraea, 64 n. 

Atomism, 23, 26, 31; Leibniz's 
relation to, 29, 30, 159; 
Atomism of Descai-tes and 
Locke, 124. 

Atoms, 223 n; Leibniz*s early 
liking for atoms and the void, 
32 ; his criticism of atoms, &c., 
218 n, 310, 335, 370, 385 ; 
metaphysical atoms, 33 n ; 
atoms of substance = Monads, 

33 3". 
Attraction (immediate) from a 

distance, 389. 
Attributes to be distinguished 

from modifications, 394. 
Aug^stine, 207 ; Civitas Dei, 

267 n. 

Automata, 254, 264 n; Monads are 
automata, 229 ; soul a spiritual 
automaton, 315. 



426 



INDEX 



Averroes, 383 n. 

Axioms inay require prooF, 59. 

Bacon, John, 26011, 302, 303 n. 

Bayle, Pierre, 226, 23611, 375; 
on pre-established harmony, 
349 n ; on multiplicity in the 
Monad, 272. 

Beautiful, definition of, 286 n. • 

Becoming, principle of, 82. 

Bellarmine (Cardinal), 401 n. 

Benevolence, 285 n. 

Bemier, Fran9oiB, 335. 

Birth of an organism, not absolute, 
115 ; birth and death, 259, 413. 

Body not a sabstance, 98 n ; the 
mechanical cause of substance, 
107; in flux like a river, 97, 
114, 258, 262 n; without soul 
unreal, iii; is sours point of 
view, 112, 248 n; is momentary 
mind, 230 n; each body affected 
byallothers, 113 n, 224 n, 251; 
infinite division of bodies, 237 ; 
reason forthe existence of bodies, 
3 24 n. See also Matter and Soul. 

Boineburg, 4. 

Bossuet and Leibniz, 11 ; and 

Fdnelon, 269 n. 
Boutroux, E., 234 n. 
Boyle, Robert, 7, 370. 
Brahe, Tycho, 318 n. 
Bruno, Giordano, 34, 57 n. 
Buddeus, 38. 
Buffon, 198. 

Cabbalists, 155 n. 

Calculating machines of Leibniz 

and Pascal, 6. 
Calculation, every paralogism an 

error of, 85. 
Calculus, discovery of the differen- 

tial, 7 ; infinitesimal, 80 sqq. ; 

logical, 84 sqq. 
Campanella, 155. 
Cardano, Girohuno, 155, 403 n. 
Carlyle, Thomas, 388 n. 
Cameades, 284. 

Cartesians on the souls of the lower 
animals, &;c., 411 ; imperfection 
of theirview of perception, 224. 
See also Descartes. 

Cause, Leibniz's view of, 204 sqq. ; 



First Cause, 137; cause and effect 
an ideal relatiou, 106, 245 n ; effi- 
cient and final causes, 107, 108 n, 
205, 238 n, 263, 268 n, 409, 
418 ; Kant on final causes, 176 ; 
Lotzens view, 193 ; the world a 
System of final causes, 107. 
Cavalieri, 76 n. 

Cell-theory of physiology, 198, 
257 n. 

Centripetal powers, 389. 
Charity, 284. 

Choice of God among possible 

universes, 66, 174. 
Christianity in relation to natural 

law and the law of nations, 295. 
Christiem V of Deninark, 347. 
Churches, projects for reconcilia- 

tion of, 5, II, 119 n. 
City of Gfod, 267, 293, 316, 421. 
Clarke and Leibniz on Space and 

time, 102 n, 104 n. 
Cleanthes, 243 n. 
Clocks illustration of pre-estab* 

lished harmony, 45, 331 ; 

Foucher*8 use of, 320 ; Geu- 

lincx's use of, 43, 331 n. 
Codex Juris Gentium DipUmor- 

ticus, 281. 
Cogito ergo 8«m,Leibniz'8 Gritidsm 

«f, 55. 

Cohesion of matter, 386. 

Compossibility, explaxiation of, 64 ; 
is sufficient reason, 64 ; in rela- 
tion to Elant^s position, 1 74. See 
also Possible. 

Compounds not real substances, 
96 n, 97, 109, 310, 330. 

Conception and perception, views 
of Kant and Leibniz, 171. 

Concours ordinaire of God, 43. 

Conduct, the end of, 146. 

ConsciousnesB not essen tial to 
perception, 34; not dependent 
on organic structure, 321. 

Contingent truths, 57, 134, 243; 
demand an infinite analysis, 61 ; 
their final reason to be sought 
in God, 63. See also Truths. 

Continuity, law of, 37, 38, 83, 
223 n, 376; applied to motion 
and thought, 130; an applica- 
tion of sufficient reason, 71. 



INDEX 



427 



Continaous and indivisible, pro- 
blem of their reconciliation, 
21 sqq. 

Contradiction, principle of, 58 sqq., 
235 ; a principle of exclusion, 
67; inadeqaacy of, 60 ; relation 
to Bufficient reason, 66, 187 ; 
according to Leibniz and Kant, 
172 sqq. ; according to Schopen- 
hauer, 184 ; according to Leib-' 
niz and Lotze, iq6 ; itn conse- 
quences in Leibniz's philosophy, 
68. See also Snfficient reason. 

Conway, Countess of, 155. 

Gopemicus, 318 n. 

Cordemoi, 43 n,.3io n. 

Created beings pregnant with their 
future States, 44 n, 231, 373, 
419 ; imperfections of, 240, 250, 
416. See Monads. 

Creation, emanation and falgura- 
tion, 243 n. 

Cyrus, Störy of, 290. 

Death, meaning of, 115, 259, 413 ; 

is a sleep, 374. 
De Diaeta quoted, 308 n. 
Democritus, 155, 219 n, 306, 307 n, 

352. 

Demonstration, 56 n. 

Descartes, 43 n, 155, 243 n, 352 ; 
Leibniz^s dissatisfaction with 
his philosophy, 8, 9 ; Leibniz's 
criticisms of, 54 n ; Descartes's 
view of matter, 86 ; in relation 
to transabstantiation, 5 ; his 
views of matter and mind re- 
jected by Leibniz, 27, 128 sqq.; 
his proofs of the existence of 
God criticized by Leibniz, 275 ; 
his views on the immortality of 
the Boul criticized by Leibniz, 
225 n; Descartes and Leibniz 
on secondary qualities, &c., 375, 
376 n ; on the seat of the soul, 
314 n ; Descartes's theory of 
knowledge, 122; his view of per- 
ception, 224 ; clear and distinct 
ideas,' 48 ; self-consciousness, 
52 ; principle of contradiction, 
58 ; eternal traths, 242 n ; 
possible things, 64 n ; thinking 
and extended substance, 42 ; 



animals, 52 ; animal spirits, 
314 n ; analytical geometry, 77 ; 
conservation of motion, 86 sqq., 
88 n, 264 n, 327 ; nature of 
substance, 25 ; Sensation, 52 ; 
soul and body, 263, 311 ; inten- 
tional species, 2 20 n ; on the 
meaning of * eminent * and 
* formal,' 238 n ; method of 
doubt, 24 ; vortex hypothesis, 
378 n ; Descartes's use of the 
idea of cause, 160 ; of the idea 
of God, i6i ; attitude towards 
earlier thought, 152, 157 ; aflTec- 
tation of ignorauce, 152 n; rela- 
tion to Gassendi, 303 n ; Locke, 
1 24 n; R^gis, 305 n ; Spinoza, 24. 

Desire, instinctive, 138. 

Development and envelopment, 

"5, 259. 307» 374 414- 
Diderot inpraise of Leibniz, 17. 
Dillmann on Leibniz, 156 n; on 

rinculum substantiale, 119 n. 
Du Boia-Reymond, 37 n, 93 n, 

199 n. 

Duns Scotus, 243 n, 358 n. 

Eckhart, Leibniz's secretary, 16, 
17- 

Eduction of forms, 260 n. 

Egypt, Leibniz's project for the 
conquest of, 5. 

Einpirical knowledge, 52, 233, 364, 
365, 412. 

Enlightenment, value of, 149. 

Entelechies, 50, 159, 221 n, 229, 
301 ; in matter, 94 n, 96 ; of 
Compound subatances, iio; dis- 
tinguisbed from souls, 230. 

Entia mentalia and semi-men- 
talia, 101. 

Epicurus, 264 n. 

Equity, 287. 

Erdmann on Leibniz's view of 
Space and time, loi ; on the 
vinculum suhstantiale, 119 n. 

Ernest, Landgraf of Hesse-Rhein- 
fela, 298 n. 

Essences or possibilities, 241 n ; 
tend to existence, 247, 340, 342 ; 
essence and existence, 66. 

Eternal and necessary truths, 57, 
1 20, 233, 363 ; conditional, 60 n. 



428 



INDEX 



206 ; mi dependent m. the will 

of God ia the region of, 341, 543. 
See «Ibo Truths. 

Ethics of Leibniz, 137 sqq, 

Eugene, Prince, 315, 405. 

EüTer fi ciiticiem of Leibiu^ 255 n, 

EvUj ongin of, »40 d ; problem of, 
34Ö fiqg., 41 6 n - ieadfl to greater 
good, 349 ; evil of indiTiduaLa 
not to be justiläed by good of 

i?3!rpi£i?tai*on. of tht New jSystem, 

Eiteneion, elemeni» of, 3391 not 
th© eSBBnca of DOÄtter, aS, 94» 

Fttct and reaaon, pTopositionis of, 

306. 
Facultas^ 388. 
i'it£Hm Stoi<!utn, 423 
3?celiag jm elemeot m evetry per- 

oeption, 139. 
FiSnelon and Eoosnet, 2 70 n* 
Fernei, 26011. 

Fidite, 253 u i on tlie spirituality 
of tbe umverse^ 207 n ; influGDce 
üf Leibuiz upou, 178 eqq. ; 
Fiühte'fi Ego and lieibniz's 
Monad, rSo i Fiobte &Eid Kant, 
178 aqq, 

FituBBH or cboice of Ihe beat, 243 ; 

degreea öf perfectioü^ 347. 
Fludd, Robert, 402* 
Fluid, perfecta duee mit edüt, 3^5, 

3SÖ. 

FoutenelLej 309 u. 

Force, natioti of , 91 , 300 n j conaer- 
Yation of, 90 sqq., 327^ 417 ; dis- 
umt from Scholas tic poiency, 
91 n ; eae^ntial to matter^ 94 ; 
a form of appetition, ja6n; 
development ut Leibniz's viewB 
regardiug, 351 j dieiinction be- 
tween abaoiute oud difectmg 
force, 53Bn; total and partial, 
417. 

FüPceg proportional to Squares of 

velocitles, 92, 
Fornasi accidentalj 157; eubstan- 

tial» loän, 1190, J 5Ö tiqq. ; 

Tojected at firat by Leibnia, 3 ; 

r^-iotrixluced by Leibniz, 159, 



301 ; origin and duration of, 
359 eqq* ; forma in matterj 94 n ; 
indiviaiülej 302* 

Foucber, Simon, 319, 320; Leib 
niz^a commenta on bia diapote 
witb HartBüeker, 334 aqq. 

Freedom, Leibniz*s view of, I4I ; 
degreea of, includinj^ necesaity, 
J45 ; freedom and deterraina- 
* tion, 343 t is apootaneity and 
inteUigence, 145 ; liighest free* 
dojn accompanied by most per- 
fect knowlodge, 146. 

Fqlgnraiiona of the Bmnitj, 243^ 

Galen, 314 n, 

üaeaendi, 303 n, 319, 352, 

(xenus, diätinction between phy- 
aical or real and logitsü or ideal, 
394sq'l. ^ ^ 

Geometrical relations not nierely 
quantitative, 77. 

Geometry, aynthetio and analytic, 
75 1 connesiun witb algobra, 
76 ; analytical goometry of 
Üescartefi, 77. 

Geulincx, 312 n, 367 n ; use of tlie 
clotika illuätration, 43, 331 ti. 

God, idea of, in JJeaüartes's syatem, 
161 ■ acoordbig to Leibni* and 
Deacaitea, 57 ; moonsistency of 
Leibniz'a aocoiint of, 175» 1 77 J 
proof of Hia esüatence, 343 ; 
ontological proof, according to 
Deacarteaj ki:jpiiioza and Leibpiz^ 
374 aqq» i Couniological proüt, 
33911; proof from pre-eslab- 
liabed haruiony, 202, 316, 418 ; 
Kant on the proofiSj 173 ; Gotl 
tbe ultimate sufficient teaäon of 
thinga, 66, 238, 339, 415; tbe 
sourotä büth of ea^ienoea and 
exietencesj 241, 343 ; the ulti- 
mate reality^ 13Ü ; tU& relatiou 
to the World, 257 n, 344, 416 ; 
to otber Monaat^ 34311, 
366, 304 \ God «ot the oiüy 
Bpirit, 385 n; * asaistanoe * of 
God, 43 ; love of God, 148, 286, 
432, 433 ; Ebj perfection, 240 ; 
Mis antecedetit and consequeut 
will, 370, 424 n ; Hjb justice 
coiupared with human jusüoe, 



INDEX 



416 n ; His underBtanding the 
region of etemal truths, 66, 
241, 343 ; His pwBibility un- 
limited, 24011; His power, 
knowledge and will, 244; His 
choice among possible universes, 
66, 174 ; His centre every where, 
circumference nowhere, 420 ; 
without body, 259 ; vision of all 
things in God, 53 n ; things not 
modes of Grod, I37n; ethical 
iinportance of the idea of God, 
293. 

Good and evil, relative terms, 146. 
Green, T. H., on Leibniz and 

Kant, 168 n, 172 n. 
Grotius, 288, 293 n. 
Gahraner, 37. 

HappinesB, 287 n; is a perpetaal 

progreas to new perfections, 424 ; 

nothing more true than, 350. 
Hartmann, E., 199. 
Hartsoeker, 305 n ; Leibniz's com- 

ments on his dispute with 

Fouoher, 334 sqq. 
Hegel, 34 ; his Solution of the 

dualism in Leibniz, 186 sqq. ; 

shows that contradiction pre- 

supposes sufficient reason, 187 ; 

view of self-consciousness, 189, 

190 ; his ' notion ' and Leibniz's 

Monad, 188. 
Herbart, 220 n; his 'reals' and 

Leibniz's Monads, 185 ; mathe- 

matical methods in psychology, 

186. 
Herder, 198. 
Hermetics, 155 n. 
Hermolaus Barbarus, 245. 
Hippocrates, 251, 260 n, 373 ; on 

the indestructibility of animals, 

308. 

Hobbes, 264 n ; influenae upon 
Leibniz, 7 ; definition of space, 

lOI. 

Huygens, 332 n ; intercourse with 
Leibniz, 6 ; pendulum experi- 
ment, 45 n, 332. 

Hypotheses, uses of, 325. 

Ideas, views of Descartes and 
Leibniz regarding dear and 



429 

distinct, 48 ; deamess and dis- 
tinctness not the sole criteria of 
truth, 55 sqq. ; innate ideas, 
233 n, 360 sqq. ; illustrated by 
block of veined marble, 131, 
366 ; views of Descartes, Locke 
and Leibniz regarding innate 
ideas, 125; region of ideas in 
understanding of God, 66, 241, 
343 ; symbolizing of ideas, 85. 

Identity, principle of, see Contra- 
diction. Identity of the indi- 
vidual, how constituted, 133 n, 
373 ; iiot determined by time 
and place, 377 n ; physical and 
moral identity, 258 n. 

Ignava ratio, 399 n. 

Immortality of the soul, 1 16, 225 n, 
259 sqq.. 316, 383, 401 sqq. ; 
of the rational soul, 116, 307; 
in relation to ethics, 292, 293 n. 

Impenetrability, 94 sqq. 

Impulse in matter and bodies, 387, 
388. 

Indeterminism, error of, 143. 
Indifference of equilibrium, 375. 
Indiscemibles, identity of, 36, 222, 

369 n, 377; an application of 

sufficient reason, 71. 
Indivisible Clements, how can they 

form acontinuum, 21 sqq. 
Inertia of body, 95, 240. 
Infinite, different meanings of, 

255 

Infinitely little, 79. 
Infinitesimals, 81 ; a Virtual re- 

cognition of the principle of 

Becoming, 82. 
Infinity, notion introduced into 

geometry, 75 ; degrees of, 414 n. 
Ir^uxus physicm, 42, 46, 219 n, 

333- 

Justice, definition of, 148, 283 ; 
universal, 287 sqq., 294; com- 
mutative, 287 sqq.; distributive, 
287 sqq. ; conti^butive, 289 n ; 
Aristotle's sub-divisions of par- 
ticular justice, 287 n ; arith- 
metical and geometrical equality 
in justice, 290 n; Divine and 
human justice differ only in 
degree, 291 n, 416 n. 



43^ 



INDEX 



Kant, relation to Leibniz, 168 
Hqq. ; bis own view of hie relation 
to LdbialiSy aoS sqq.; Kant and 
Leibolz on p^pception and con- 
ceptiüii, 171 j Kant*s thing-iQ- 
itself in relationto Loibniz, 175 ; 
Kant'ü KiiaunderBtanding of 
LeibriiK, 163 n ; be nitftunder- 

, atanda Jjeibnia s view of Bpncc, 
i2ini big oriticiiim of Leibniz, 
16^ n; Kant and Wolff^ 168; 
Kant received problem of spa^e 
in Wolffa form, 169 ; develop- 
ment of Kontra view of epa^, 
170 ; Kant on intenßive quan- 
tity, 2 2Q n ^ on the ontülo^eal 
proof of the exietenße of Gud, 
377, 173 ; fn tlie relation of 
God to tbe world, 177 j on final 
{^uBeBj &c., 176. 

Kepler'e fntroduction of thenotion 
of inlmity intn geometry^ 75. 

Ker of Kersland, j6. 

Kircbniann, 359 n. 

Knowledge, Leibniz's tbeory of, 
I2l Bqq« ; how dependenL onbis 
main prineiplee, 133 aqq* ^ know- 
leüge at onc« innats and oxpcri- 
entialf 136. 

Knut^enj 168. 

Language, pliilosophical, 85 sqq. 

Law, popitive Divine, 296. 

LEiBNiSGjboybood, t ; early ßtudies, 
l j 2 ; uniTer&ity life^ 2 : gradua- 
tion tbeaes^ 3; oonnexiim witb 
Boineburg, 4 ; residetie« in 
Nümbürg, 4; eecaietary to a 
sodety of Roaicrucinna, 4 ; in 
the flerviee of the Archbishop of 
Mainz, 4; residente at Frank- 
fort, 4 ; projecta of Church 
re- Union, 5^ 11; reeidence in 
Paris, 5 ; visit to London, 7 ; 
mtercour«^ with Huygena, 6; 
atndy of higher matbematica, 6 ; 
invented a LaJcuL*tjng macbinf', 
6 ; reaBon for svritTiig in Pi-encbj 
6 ; advncated nse of German for 
philoBopliicalwritingjö; relation 
to Hobbee, 7 ; interconrsa witb 
Boyle, 7 j discovery of the Dif- 
ferent-ial Calcolus, 7 ; atudy and 



translation of Plato, o ; ac- 
qnaintanee with Tachirnnausen, 
9 ; Newton and the Calculu», 8 i 
pL'Taonal relattotis with Spinoza^ 
9, lo ; librarian to t!ie Duke of 
Brunawiük, 8 ; residenc« in 
Hanover, i J ; Visit to Kome, 1 1 ; 
firat publioation of hiB philoso- 
phical Bystem, 13 ; growth of 
bi» syatem, 12 ; writing and 
publication o^Nmuenux Eami»t 
I3t 355 J TMoiiiütiet 14; Mb 
eorreiipotidence, 1 4 ; foundiDg of 
ftcadt;mie*i, 14, 15; intercourae 
with PetertheGreatj Charles VI, 
and Princjß Eugene, 15; anffers 
from prejudices of George I, J5 ; 
defitb and funeral^ 16 - personal 
eharaeteristica, 16, 17 ; prinoipal 
works and editinnfi^ 18 sqq^ 
LsiBNiz, three qhief conceptiona of 
bis metapliyöic. 47, 48 ; logicaL 
principleB of bis philoBophy, 58 
&qq, ; bis view of aelf-conacii»ua- 
neaa, 53, 120* 128, 133. 2^411; 
Im ethicB, 137 sqq* ; psychology 
of voHtion, 142 H ; loi^ic, 206 
sqq. ; theory of klaowledge, I3I 
eq[|. ; his mathenrntic* in relation 
tü big philosophy^ 74 flqq. ; anti- 
cipation of tranaformation of 
energy ^ 93 Ti ; optiniJ^,66, 1 47 u, 

3481 271. 345 n^Vy 4^7^ 4H; 
on the ontological prouf of tlie 
eri atence nf God, 2 7 5 *iq q . j hold» 
that matter <*annot thmk, 400 ; 
intereat in microseopy, 356 n ; 
eclecticiam, 154» 155 i fore- 
ßbadows the qridcal apirit, 154 ; 
carly rejection of subatantval 
forma, 3 ; bis account of hia 
early pbiloöüpbical views, 399 
sqq. ; gruwth of bis viewB re- 
garding force and motion, 351 ; 
mtaunder^ftood by bis discipte«, 
163 i accnaed of borrowingdodkfl 
iUustration from Geulincx, 43, 
— relation to Plato and Aristoäe, 
35R n, 229 n ; to earlier thinking, 
i^i sqq.j ; diBBatiafaction 
with Deacartefl^fl pbiloBopby, S ; 
differeni^e from Descartes re- 
garding clear and distiuci idBaa, 



INDEX 



48 n ; Leibniz and Descartes on 
secondary qaalitaes, &c., 375, 
37611; criticism of Spinoza's 
Mhics, 24 n ; Leibniz and 
Spinoza on empirical knowledge, 
70 ; relations to Newton, 8, 80 ; 
correspoudence with Glarke, 
102 n, 104 n ; discussion with 
Bayle on maltiplicity in the 
Monad, 272 ; Leibniz^s account 
of bis relatiou to Locke, 357 
sqq.; criticisms of Locke, 13; 
criticism of the tabula rasa, 
122 n, 369 ; via media between 
Descartes and Locke, 123; on 
the controversy between Locke 
and Stillingfleet, 398 sqq. ; re- 
lation to Kant, 168 sqq., 208 
sqq. ; Kant's discussion of 
Leibniz^s flrst principles, 208 ; 
relation to Fichte, 178 sqq. ; to 
Schopenhauer, 183 ; to Herbart, 
184; to Hegel, 186 ; to Lotze, 
190 sqq. 

Lemoine on the vineulum suh- 

stantiale, 119 n. 
Lessing, 198. 

Leuwenhoek, 256 n, 260 n, 305 n. 
Liberty of indifference does not 

exist, 141 sqq. 
Life everywbere in nature, 105, 

109, 112, 256,309,409. 
Limitation, necessity of, 340 n. 
Limitations of created things, 240, 

250, 416, 419 n. 
Limits, mathematical points are, 

28, 29. 

Locke, 36 n ; his Essay, 355 sqq. ; 
Leibniz's relation to and criti- 
cism of, 13, 123, 357 sqq.; 
Locke's theory of knowledge, 
122 ; his view that mind may 
exist without thought, opposed 
by Leibniz, 129 ; his account of 
* uneasiness,' 140 ; his account 
of virtue criticised, 149 n ; on 
the immortality of the soul, 
383 n ; on the immateriality of 
the soul, 402 ; holds that matter 
may think, 392, 395 ; Locke and 
Descartes, 1 24 n ; Locke and 
Stillingfleet, 387 sqq. 

Logic of Leibniz, 206 sqq. ; 



43^ 

Leibniz's early interest in logic, 
2. 

Lotze, 1 14 n ; rehition to Leibniz, 
194 sqq.; criticism of Leib- 
niz, 195 sqq. ; on innate ideas, 
126 n; on mechanism, 192; 
his monadology, 194 ; teleolo^, 
193; relation to Herbart, 191 ; 
on Hegel, 190, 192. 

Loub^re, Simon de la, 3(^7. 

Louis XIV, 5. 

Love, disinterested as dlstinct 
from selfish, 148, 269, 285 ; 
Divine, 286, 423. 

Machines of nature are machines 
throughout, 254, 309 ; have an 
infinity of organs, 309. 

Mainz, Archbishop of, employs 
Leibniz, 4. 

Malebranche, 305 n, 312; inter- 
course with Leibniz, 6 ; sense 
in which Leibniz agrees with 
him, 53 n ; he might approve 
the pre-established harmony, 
44 n. 

Malpighi, 39 n, 256 n, 260 n, 305 n. 

Materia primae 95 ; and materia 
secunda, 1 10 ; possessed by 
every created Monad, 97. 

Materia secunda, 96, 258 ; an 
aggregation, 97, 300 ; a mere 
phenomenon, 97 ; in flux like a 
river, 97, 114, 258, 262 n ; dis- 
tinct from substance, 96 n. 

Mathematics in relation to Leib- 
niz*8 philosophy, 74; Divine 
mathematics, 342 ; mathematical 
points, 311. 

Matter, Leibniz's theory of, 93 
sqq. ; not mere extension, 28, 
94 ; a mere aggregate, 300 ; in- 
finitely divided as well as infln- 
itely divisible, 39, 237, 255, 335 ; 
living throughout, 256; cohesion 
of, 386 ; primary and secondary 
quiJities, 100 ; inseparable from 
mind, iii, 128; can matter 
think ? 390 sqq. ; miraculous 
exaltation of matter, 401 ; Des- 
cartes's view of matter, 86. 

Mechanical philosophy, 158. 

Mechanism, Divine and human, 



43^ 



INDEX 



proilace perceptioD^ 327, 39^1 

MeÜBBUB, 25g iij 308» 

Memory the sign of con^ionHncisa, 

230 ti; inÄnimaU, 233^ 332, 364, 

412. 

MetamorplioHis in comjiound sab- 

Btance, 114» ^S^i 30?^ 41 4* 
Melivphyaical law» in näturG, 344, 
MetempBjchoaiBin*dmiidble, 1 14* 

304, 4M* 

M icroflcopy in Leibniz'^H time, 2 5 6 n . 

Milton quoted, 404 

Mind alwaja tbinka, 129, 369 sqq. ; 
likeded to veined mwbk, 131, 
566. See also Soul« (mtlünal). 

Miradea of reation, natnre full ofj 
J54H. 

Molinöa, Miguel de» 384 n. 

Monads, lÜHtory of the term, 34 ; 
account of, 30 sqq., 317 sqq. , 406 
äqq. ; th« otily real existenceH, 
97 I infinite in nnmber, 37 ; an 
infinite series, 37 • compared to 
ordinateä of a curve^ 37 33 t 
their production, 243 ; creation 
and annihilation, 219 ; iDgener- 
able and impemharble^ 36, 115, 
2 iS, 302* 407 ; qitalitiea of, 220 ; 
must bave bath perception and 
appetition, 33 ; have tio parts, 
217 äqq.j 407 ; not in space, 22 1 q ; 
not p^ärceived hy the sensea, 
407 ni Bpontaneitjr of, 35, 50, 
274. 313; are incorporeaJ ftutt>- 
mala, 229, 315, 408 ; present of 
eftch Mdnad big with its f uture, 

44^1^ 373i 4^9; 

ideas innatej 125 ; it» Belf-iden» 
tity not Btatic but dynamic, 
69 ; continuaily unfolding or 
Hufolding itBelf, 113; MonaJü 
have no windowß, 219 ; mntual 
«scludvenessj 36, 219; each as 
independent ab if tbere existed 
only God and iteelf^ 313; meta- 
pbysical atoine, atoma of aub- 
etance, of nature^ Slc,^ 33 i^t & ; 
metapbyaicalpointss, 3 1 1 j centres 
or eoncentrationa of tbe world, 
70, 407 ■ cbangea in Mosad^^ 40 



aqq., 222 »qq. ; corTelativity of 
theirc!iiiii£es, 41 ; müttiplicity in 
the Motiad, 324 n^ 326, 272^ 407 ; 
Monads as ii^ing mirrora of the 
uni worfle, 36, 41, 253, 409 ; 
variously repreaent or iniplicitly 
contain tbe whoie univerae, 50, 
248, 42Ü \ each repreaeatB moat 
difitinotly it8 own body, 353 ; 
elementä in Monada, 345 ; eaoh a 
concreto unity of soul and body, 

' 109 ; activity and p8*»mty 
of, 105, 245, 246^ 317 ; inäuenee 
one another ideally, 42, 45, 105^ 
246 ; their mutual ftgreement, 
313 aqq, ; their interrelation not 
to be realiified by aense or ima- 
giiiation, 46 ; diSierooccB among 
Monads, 4g, 55 ; degrees of per- 
ception, 410 ; three gradea of 
created Monads, (^o, 239 sqq*, 
409 sqq, ; each higher grad*^ has 
charricteristica of Tower, 53 ; iin- 
perfectiona of Monads, 240, 250, 
416 ; theirprogresw tcwapds per- 
feciion, 419 n ; dominant Monad, 
109 sqq., 253 n, 357, 408; 
Monadä in relation to Fichte*« 
* Ego,* r8o ; to Herbart*« ' realH,' 
i«5 ; fco Hegels * notifju,' 188. 
See alao Sonla. 

M<madoloffyt time and clrctim- 
stances of ita compoBition, 215 ; 
relation to Fri^iciplfji of Nai«rf 
and Grace, 315^405 ; analysia of, 
2 1 6 - Kantus discusKLon of , 209. 

Monas Monaxlunif 57, 189, 

Montaigne, 372 n ; on indeter- 
miniam, 1440. 

More, Henry, 155. 

Motion, Lpeibniz's Triew of, 89 ; 
developiiient of L<sibni!t*ß viewö, 
351 ; relativity of motion and 
reat, 89 sqq. ; conBervation of 
direetionj 93? 264, 33 7^ 41 7 ; Des- 
cartea^a view of motion, 86 sqq. ; 
he maintaina ita cuTiaervation, 
87, 264 11 ; that H h tioi merely 
relative to reat, S8 ; and that ita 
dir eeti Ollis Tariuble, Sg; lawa of 
motion, acooriling to Bescarte« 
and Leibniz, 327, 528, 353, 417; 
abeolute and relative motioa, 



iin)Ex 



433 



3171 31 S ; absordity of swiftest 

posflible motion, 275. 
Müller, Johannes, 192, 198. 
Müller, Otto F., 163 n. 

Natura naiurans and natura 

naturata, 162. 
Nature and grace, realms of, 268, 

421. 

Necessary and etemal tniths, 56, 
120, 233, 363 ; necessary and 
oontingent truths, 134, 340 ; 
their £fference compared to that 
of commensurable and incom- 
mensorable numbers, 61 n. 

Necessity, different kinds of, 339 ; 
metaphysioal and physical, 342 ; 
metaphysical and moral, 67, 145, 

247 n, 277 ; necessity an infin- 
itely small degree of freedom, 
145 ; necessity and fitness, 418. 

New Essays, circmnstances of 
writing, &c., 13, 355. 

New System, 297. 

Newton on tbe relations between 
geometrical figures, 82 ; on 
attraction, &c., 388; view of 
Space, 102 n ; relation to Leib- 
niz as regards the Infinitesimal 
Calculns, 8, 80. 

Nicholas of Ousa, 32 n, 34n, 222 n, 

248 n, 250 n, 255 n, 267 n, 424 n. 
Nizolius, Leibniz's essay on, 6. 
Nolen, £)., quoted, 65 n ; on Leib- 

niz and Kant, 1 78 n. 
Number, 329. 

Occasionalism, 43, 46, 333; de- 
scribed and criticised, 312 ; 
Leibniz's criticism of, 44. 

Occult qualities, 157, 389 n, 399, 
403- 

Optimism of Leibniz, 66, 248, 271, 

345 ^qq-> 4J^7> 424; ^« Tnoml 

optimism, 147 n. 
Organic and inorganic, natnre of 

the distinotion between, iii ; 

organic beings between man and 

God, i2on. 
Organism, conception of, 31, 253 

sqq. ; pervades nature, 105, 109, 

112, 256, 309, 409; organisms 

al way s come from seeds, 2 60, 41 3. 



Ovid, 390 n. 

Paracelsas, 403 n. 

Parmenides, 155 n, 259 n, 308. 

Pascal, 420 n; on mathematical 
infinity, 77 n. 

Perception, its nature according 
to Leibniz, 33, 135 sqq., 224, 370, 
407 ; equivsJent to multiplicity 
inuniiy, 35; not tö be explained 
by mechanism, 227, 397, 400 ; 
degrees of perception, 51 n, 231, 
410 ; not necessarily conscious, 
34, 231, 370, 411; unconscious 
is Symbol of corresponding con- 
scious perception, 47 ; confosed, 
clear, an d distinct perception, 48, 
49) * never without feeling, 
139 > perceptions always leave 
traces, 133 n, 373; likened to 
projection in perspective, 136 ; 
periodicity in perceptions, 374 n ; 
perception andapperception, 1 26 
sqq., 411; petites perceptions, 
131 sqq., 230, 370 sqq. ; percep- 
tion and conception, views of 
Kant and Leibniz, 171. 

Perfection, meaning of, according 
to Leibniz, 249, 340 ; continual 
progress of the world in, 419 n. 

Peripatetio philosophy, 156 sqq. 

Pfleiderer, Edmund, 43. 

Phenomena hene fundata, 98 sqq., 
118 ; compared to rainbow, 100 ; 
their reality different from that 
of substance, 99 n; how distin- 
guished from phenomena of 
dreams, 99. 

Philosophy, fanatical or barbarous, 
402, 403. 

Piety, 287 sqq^, 291. 

Place, meaning of, 203 ; according 
to Aristotle, 353. 

Plant-animals, 38. 

Plato, 34 n, 155, 261 n; world of 
ideas, 241 n ; doctrine of remi- 
niscence, 131, 359 n; Leibniz's 
view of, 368. 

Pleasure and pain, 139 sqq.; to 
some extent in every soul, 140 ; 
pleasure instinctively sought by 
every soul, 141, 146, 285; un- 
broken pleasure begets loathing, 

f 



434 



INDEX 



348, 424 ; jirtiitio pUoettre ii 

intellecMiftl, 422, 
P^^tiTfi.conception oftbeworld aa, 

40, 251, 3Sä,40S. See y acutim. 
PHny, 306, 307 u, 
Plotiaii», 1 55 Tj. 
Plutarch» Ä52 
Pneumatiesj 376, 

Pöinta, metaptysioal, niathema- 
Ucal a.Tid phyaical, 311 ; mathe- 
m^iticiil pointa are Umiis, iS, ^9. 

Poixet, 57, 243. 

Pope, I9S, 25711, 3491». 

Poflsible, tie&nition of, 63 ; poaaible 
and composeible, 64, 340 sqc[. 

PoBBibk thitiga. Soe Essenoee. 

Fravfh'catum itmt suhjecfGj 61 n, 

Pre-establiBhed hannonj, 39 aqq., 
246, 363, 374 sqq., 409, 431 ; 
first mentiuned byLeibaiz, 326 i 
calied a liypothesiB of agrea- 
mentB, 315 ; compared with 
Scholaatic anri Ocoftsionali&t 
tbeorie^j 43» 44i 333 ^ i^xplained 
by a special inetanoe^ 200 ; 
advantages of^ 323; k proof uf 
the existciice of God^ 302, 316, 
418 ; clocka and cboir» illufitra- 
tiona of, 45, 47, 331 ; might be 
appi-üved by Mfllebranchet 44 n ; 
Kantus account of, 209 sqq. 
Preformation, 260, 412 eqq, 
Preaeiit liig with the futiire and 
laden With the past, 44 a, 231, 

373*419^ 
Preservation ia a csontinual erea- 

tion, 44 244 n. 
Principli^^ of Natur e and ofBrace 

in relation to the Mmtad^i&ff^^ 

215, 405 ßqq, 
PtogrtBaion, cuntierTatioti of th& 

quantity of, 338, 
Propoeitioua, cat^gorical and hypo- 

thefcical, 306 ; import of, 207. 
Puffendarf, 293 n. 
Pythagoras, ^4 n ; Pythagorcan 

viewa, 15 5 n. 

Qualities, intrinsic atid extrinsiei 
322 n; occiilt, 157, 38911, 399, 
403. See Snbstance. 

Quantity, mtenaive and exteuBiye, 



»20 n; 'afigligible/ 79 j Leib- 
mz'a sharp digtincticm between 
quandty and quality, 221 n; 
quantitative unity, 7B, 3e« Sub- 
atancie. 

Rainbow similfi for phenmn^Twn 

ben6 fumfatum, 100. 
R^oti j meanmg of, i3o; reason 

and imagination, «932, 365 ; 

reaaon and fact, propoBitiona of, 

20<> ; ultimate reaäon of thiiigF, 

66, 33S, 337, 339, 415. See Suf^ 

fieient K^ason. 
Beaeotiing, trutbß of, 57, 33g. 
Reflexion, s/sta of^ 56, 334, 413 ; 

ideas of, 366» 

305 ^■ 

BeLativity, how Leibnd^ tries to 

avoid, 135 uqq. 
Eeprcsetitation the essenee of the 

relation betwe^n whole and 

part, 3a. See Perception. 
Reisistatice a passive force, 95. 
Eesuscitation of animals, 334 

306. 

Rewarda and puniahmente, 26g, 

304, 381, 421. 
Riedel, 0., on Knut, 178 n. 
Right, düctrine of, 3S2 ; precepts 

of, 388 ; degi-eea of natutai 

Right, 387 sqq. ; volon^y 

Right, 395. 
Eorariug, 327. 

Ruaicrucianj», Leibni^'a co&nesdon 
with, 4, 

Samiatian aalt-mme«) 346. 
Scaliger, Juliaa Caesar^ 3ÖI. 
Scepties, 155. 

Sdheliing on Leibnii, 1 79 ti ; on 
the Telaiion betf^een Leibuix 
and Fichte, 1 S 2 . 

Schiller, 19S n, 268 n. 

Scholastjcismj Leibniz fiuda value 
in, 156 ; Scholaatic potencj 
distinct from force, 91 n, 133 n. 

Schopenhauer in relation to Leib- 
tiiz and Fichte, 1S3- 

Schwann, 198* 

Self-conaeioumesi more than 
merely self-cona]Rien.t, 59 ^ im- 
pli^B ccttscionBneBa of objeete, 



INDEX 



435 



135 ; Leibniz^s view of, 53, 120, 
128, 133, 23411; Descartes's 
view of, 52 ; difference between 
Descartea and Leibnis, 54 ; 
Fichte*8 view, 181 ; Hegers 
view, 189, 190. 

Self-consistency, if real, mußt 
have grounds, 59. 

Self-love the ground of all our 
actione, 148 ; disinterested in 
Proportion as it is enlightened, 
148; Belf-love and the love of 
God, 423. 

Semi-pleasures and semi-pains, 
140. 

Sensation is confused perception, 
125, 372 ; necessary to thought 
but not the essence of it, 362 n ; 
according to Descartea, is purely 
physical aod mechanical, 52. 

Sense-experience not the source 
of all truth, 134, 361 sqq. ; gives 
only particolar truths, 362 ; 
views of Locke and Leibniz 
regarding, 134. 

Sense-qnalities are occult qualities, 
362 n ; clear but not diatinct, 
372 n. 

Series, infinite, 78 sqq. 

Sigwart, H. C. W., 45 n. 

Sin and virtue, 269. 

Sophia Charlotte,Queen of Prussia, 

14, IS- 
Souls, class of Monads called, 51, 
410 ; distinguisbed from ente- 
lechies, 230; indivisible, 302; 
spontaneity of, 274, 313 ; infi- 
nite complexity of, 252 ; each 
has some perception of all things, 
113 n; souls and atoms, differ- 
ence between the changes in, 
223 n ; seat of the soul, 314, 
315 n ; soul likened to an animal 
masician, 273 ; the final cause 
of Bubstance, 107 ; souls all in- 
stinctively seek pleasure, 141, 
146; origin and duration of, 
259 sqq. ; transcreation of, 1 1 7 n ; 
traduction of, 260 n ; indestructi- 
bility and immortality of, 116, 
225 n, 259 sqq., 316, 383, 401 
sqq. ; souls cannot remain per- 
manently unconscious, 230, 374, 

F 



4x9 ; utterly forget nothing, 
252 n. See Monad^. 

Souls, rational, or spirits, 51, 233, 
265, 413 ; creation of, 117, 265 ; 
personal immortality of, 307 ; 
like small divinities, 266, 304, 
424 n; are partes totales, 349; 
relation to God, 266, 293, 349, 
420 ; to other souls and Monads, 
116 sqq., 121, 172 n, 266, 303, 
410, 412. 

Soul and body, relations between, 
42, 258, 262 sqq., 311 sqq., 323, 
331 sqq., 408 ; Descartes's com- 
plete Separation between, 42, 
263 ; mutual independence of, 
334 n ; souls never entirely sepa- 
rate from bodies, 105, 225, 258, 
380 ; souls act as if there were 
no bodies, 264 ; how soul isoon- 
scious of body, 200; soul not 
perfectly conscious of what 
happeus in body, 1 1 2 n. 

Space, independent reality of, 
contrary to principle of suf- 
ficient reason, 102 sqq. ; empty 
Space an abstraction, 102 ; for- 
mation of the idea of space, 
202 sqq. ; Leibniz's theory of, 
loi sqq. ; Kant on space, 169 
sqq., 221 n ; Wolff's view, 
168 sqq. 

Speeles, sensible, 219. 

Spermatozoa, 261. 

Spinoza, 31, 106 n, 155 n, 219 n, 
230 n, 239 n^ 244 n, 399 n ; 
view of substance, 22 ; use of 
the idea of cause, 162 ; on 
possible things, 64 n ; his cona- 
tits, 71 n; Leibniz's criticism, 
24 n, 276; correspondence and 
intercourse with Leibniz, 9 ; 
Spinoza and Leibniz on empi- 
rical knowledge, 70 ; relation 
to Bescartes, 24 ; Spinoza* s 
philosophy ruled by the prin- 
ciple of oontradiction, 58. 

Spirit, universal, 239 n. 

Spirits. See Souls, rational. 

Stallo, 92 n, 93 IV 

Stein, Ludwig, 34 n, 43 n. 

Stillingfleet and Locke, 387 sqq. ; 
on the question whether matter 

f 2 



436 



INDEX 



can think, 390 ; Stillingfleet 
charges Locke with incon- 
sistency, 392. 

Stoics, 155 n, 343 n ; vp6\rppis, 
360 ; Stoic patience compared 
with Christian, 423 n. 

Substance, Leibniz's view of, 27; 
development of Leibniz's view, 
12; Unit of, 30; unity of, 
98 n ; cannot be without activity, 
90 n, 325, 397; analogous to the 
human soul, 159 ; all substances 
potentially self-conscions, 128 ; 
qualities of substances not arbi- 
tearily given by God, 399 ; spon- 
taneity of, 33, 200, 204, 313; 
inter - relation of substances, 
summary of Leibniz's view, 
106 n; mutual action of sub- 
stances, 317 ; extension not the 
essence of material substance, 
28, 94; Leibniz on Descartes^s 
theory of material substance, 
27 ; Descartes's account of sub- 
stance, 25 ; Spinoza^s theory, 22. 

Substance, Compound, 109; unity 
of, 96, 118, 310, 330; a mere 
aggregate, 310, 330 ; inter- 
relations of Compound sub- 
stances, 251 ; dasses of organic 
Compound substances, 1 20 ; 
changesin, 113, 258,414; simple 
and Compound substance, iio, 
217» 330» 406. 

Substance, simple, 27 ; variety in, 
223. See Monads. 

Sufiicient reason, principle of, 
61 n, 62, 235, 414 sqq.; out- 
side the sequence of contingent 
things, 238, 338,415 ; synonyms 
for, 235 n; consequences in the 
philosophy of Leibniz, 69 ; rela- 
tion to principle of contradic- 
tion, 66, 164, 187 ; Descartes and 
Spinoza^ 160, 163; Leibniz and 
Kant on the relation between 
contradiction and sufiicient 
reason, 172 sqq.; Schopenhauer, 
184; Hegel, 187; Lotze, 196. 

Swammerdam, 2^6 n, 305 n. 

Swift quoted, 414 n. 

Symbolizing of ideas, 85 ; of 
thought, 137; of whole by part. 



33 ; mutual symbolizing of 
things, 251 n. 
Symbols, thinking and reasoning 
in, 147. 

Tabula rasa, 124 n, 360 sqq.; 
Leibniz^s criticism of, 1 22 n, 369. 

Tendency or impulse, lowest de- 
gree of appetition, 138; tenden- 
cies to action, 1 23 n ; tendencies 
to motion in all things, 90. 

Tetens, 139 n. 

Thdodic6e, 215, 216, 240 n, 337, 
416 n ; writing and publication 
of, 14. 

Thomasius, Jacob, 3. " 
Thought, self-sufiicienoy of, 136. 
Time, Leibniz*s theory of, loi ; 

empty time an abstraction, 102 ; 

its independent reality contrary 

to principle of sufficient reason, 

103. 

Toland, John, 2 26 n. 
Toletus, 157. 

Traction of matter inadmissible, 
386. 

Traduction of souls, 260 n. 

Transmigration of souls. See 
Metempsycbosis. 

Transubstantiation, 119; in rela- 
tion to Oartesian and Leibnitian 
views of substance, 5. 

Trinity, doctrine of, 244 n. 

Truth, two kinds of, 57, 134, 235 
sqq.; nothing more agreeable 
than truth, 350. 

Truths, analysis of, 236 sqq. ; of 
fact, 57 ; truths of fact require 
an infinite analysis, to obtain 
sufficient reason, 61, 237; con- 
tingent truths, 57, 134, 243; 
relation between necessary and 
contingent, 61 n, 134, 340 ; 
necessary truths not dependent 
on the senses, 363. 

Tschimhausen*s account of Leib- 
niz, 9. 

ülpian, 288 n, 421 n. 
Unconsciousness, 230, 374, 411. 
Uneasiness, Locke and Leibniz on, 

140, 142 n, 375. 
Unit of substance, 30; no real 



INDEX 



437 



whole without real ünits, 33, 
217, 300 sqq., 310, 406. 
XJuity, quantitative and geome- 
trical, 78 ; mechanical and 
organic, 321 ; dominant unity 
of the universe, 337. See Sub- 
stance. 

Universe, continual progress of, 
350, 419 n ; contains nothing 
fsJlow, sterile or chaotic, 257 ; 
infinite number of possible 
nniverses, 65, 116 n, 247. 

Unum per acddem and unum per 
86, 97 n, 98 n, 118. 

d'Urfe, Honor^, 65 n. 

Vacuum, impossibility of, 72 n, 

257 385,408. 
Van Helmont, F, Mercure, 34 n, 

155- 

Van Helmont, J. B., 403 n. 
Vinculum gubstantiale, 118. 
Virgil, 373 n. 

VirtualiU in Leibniz's sense, 
367 n. 

Virtue, definition of, 383 n. 
Vis Viva, 93. 

Void. See Atoms and Vacnnm. 
Volition not abs'olutely necessi- 

tated, 144; Leibniz*s psycho- 

logy of, 142 n. 

Wallace, W., 185 n. 

Weigel, Erhard, 3. 

Weigel, Valentine, 384 n. 

Weismann, 198 n. 

Whole and parts, problem of, 22 ; 



dynamic relation between, 31 ; 
relation of representation, 32 ; 
their relation nnder the principle 
of contradiotion, 68 ; Descartes^s 
presupposition regarding, 26 ; 
Atomist yiew, 26. 

Will or self-conscioas desire, 138 ; 
frequently acts from a sufficient, 
not necessitating, reason, 145 ; 
Willing to will, 142, 144 n. See 
Freedom. 

Windelband, 149. 

Wisdom defined, 287. 

WolfF, Christian, philosophy of, 
164 sqq.; relation to Leib- 
niz, 165 ; misunderstanding of 
Leibniz, 46 n ; his point of view 
Cartesian, x66, 167 ; combination 
of Monadology with Atomism, 
166; optimism, 168; teleology, 
167; view of Space, 168 sqq.; 
relation to Kant, 168. 

Words like algebraic Symbols, 147. 

World entirely in each of its parte, 
50 n ; receptivity of, 341 ; its 
physical and moral perfection, 
345 ; best of all possible worlds, 
66,248,371,345,417; infinity of 
worlds, 65, 1 16 n, 347 ; infinity 
of worlds of living beings in 
each particle of matter, 256. 

Xenophon, 290. 

Zeller, 43 n. 

Zopyra or semina aetemitatis, 
361. 



THB END 



OXFORD 

PRINTE D AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
BY HORACB HART, H.A. 
PRINTER TO THE UNIVBRSITY 



WORKS PUBLISHED 

AT THE 

CLARENDON PRESS, OXFORD. 



Bacon. Novtim Organum. Edited, with Introduction, 
Notes, &c., by T. Fowler, D.D. Second Edition, 8vo, 15J. 

Berkeley. The Works of George Berkeley, D.D., 

formerly Bishop of Cloyne ; including many of bis writings hitherto 
unpublished. With Prefaces, Annotations, and an Account of bis Life 
and Pbilosophy, by A. Campbell Fräser, Hon. D.C.L. and LL.D. 
4 vob. 8vo, £2 i8j. 

The Life, Letters, separately, i6j. 

Selections. With Introduction and Notes. For the 

use of Students in the Universities. By the same Editor. Fourtk 
Edition. Crown Svo, 8j. 6^/. 

Bosanquet. Logic ; or, The Morphology of Knowledge. 

By B. Bosanquet, M.A. Svo, 2Ij. 

British Moralists. Selections from Writers principally 

of the Eighteenth Century. Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, M.A. 
2 vols. Crown Svo, i8j. 

Butler. The Works of Bishop Butler. Edited by the 

Right Hon. W. E. Gladstone. 2 vols. Medium Svo, £\ 8j. ; or in 
crown Svo, loj. 6^/. 

Fowler. The Elements of Deductive Logic, designed 

mainly for the use of Junior Students in the Universities. By T. Fowler, 
D.D. Tenth Edition, with a Collection of Examples. Extra fcap. 
Svo, 1$, 6d. 

The Elements of Inductive Logic, designed mainly 

for the use of Students in the Universities. SixtA Edition. Extra 
fcap. Svo, 6s, 

Logic ; Deductive and Inductive, combined in a single 

volume. Extra fcap. Svo, 'js. 6d, 

Fowler and Wilson. The Principles of Morals. By T. 

Fowler, D.D., and J. M. Wilson, B.D. Svo, 145. 

Green. Prolegomena to Ethics. By T. H. Green, M.A. 

Edited by A. C. Bradley, M.A. Third Edition. Svo, 12s, 6d. 



Works Published at the Clarendon Press, Oxford. 



Hegel. The Logic of Hegel ; translated from the Encyclo- 

paedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With Prolegomena to the Study 
of Hegers Logic and Philosophy. By William Wallace, MJl,, 
LL.D. Second Edition^ Revised and Augmented. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, 
los, 6d. each. 

Hegel's Philosophy of Mind. Translated from the Encyclo- 
paedia of the Philosophical Sciences. With Five Inttoductory Essays. 
By William Wallace, M.A., LL.D. Crown 8vo, lor. 6d, 

Hume's Treatise of Human Nattire. Reprinted from the 

Original Edition in Three Volumes, and edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, 
M.A. Second Ediii<m. Crown 8vo, 8j. 

Enquiry conceming the Human Understanding» 

and an Enquiry conceming the Principles of Morals. Edited by L. A. 
• Selby-Bigge, M.A. Crown 8vo, 7^. 6d, 

Locke. An Essay conceming Human Understanding. 

By John Locke. CoUated and Annotated with Prolegomena, Bio- 
graphical, Critical, and Historical, by A. Campbell Fräser, Hon. 
D.C.L. and LL.D. 3 vols. 8vo, £1 I3j. 

Locke's Conduct of the Understanding. Edited by T. 

FOWLER, D.D. Third Edition. Extra fcap. 8vo, 2s, 6d. 

Lotze's Logic, in Three Books ; of Thought, of Investigation, 
and of Knowledge. English Translation ; edited by B. Bosanquet, 
M.A. Second Edition, 2 vols. Crown 8vo, 1 2S. 

MetaphysiCy in Three Books; Ontology, Cosmology, 

and Psychology. English Translation; edited by B. Bosanquet, 
M.A. Second Edition, 2 vols. Crown 8vo, 12s, 

Martineau. Types of Ethical Theory. By James 

Marti NE AU, D.D. Third Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, 15J. 

A Study of Religion : its Sources and Contents. 

Second Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo, 1 5^. 



AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 

LONDON : HENRY FROWDE 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE, AMEN CORNER, E.C. 



CLARENDON PRESS. OXFORD. 
SELECT LIST OF STANDARD WORKS. 



DI0TI0NABIB8 

LAW 

HIBTORY, BIOGRAPHT, BTO. 



.pagei 



PniLOSOPHT, LOGIO, BTO. 
PHY8ICAL SCIBNCB, BTO. 



.page6 
• >• 7 



1. DICTIONARIES. 

A NEW ENGLISH DICTIONARY 
ON HISTORICAL PRINCIPLES, 
Founded mainly on the maUriah colUcted hy the Phüologieal Society, 
Imperial 4to. 

EDITED BY DR MUERÄ.Y. 
Pbbsbnt Statb of thb Wobk. 

By Dr. Mub&at Half-morooco 

By Dr. MuiutAT Half-morooco 

By Dr. Mubkat and Dr. Bbadlet Half-morooeo 
By Dr. Bbadlet Half-morooco 



Vol, I. 
Vol. II. 
Vol. III. 
VoL IV. 
Vol. V. 



A, B 

O 
D, 1D 

H— K 



By Dr. Mub&at 



Vol. VI. Ii— N By Dr. Bbadlet 



Vol. VTL O, P By Dr. Mubbat 



Vol. VIII. Q— 8 By Mr. Gbaigie 



Half-morocco 

Ii-Iiap 

Iiap-Iioiaurely • . . 
Iioisurenesa-Iiief . . 
^ Iiief-Iiock .... 
IfOok-Iiyyn .... 
M-Mandragon . . . 
Mandragora-Matter . 
^Matter-Mesnalty . . 
/O-Onomastie • . . 
Onomaatical-Outing . 
Onljet-OByat • . . 
- P-Pargeted .... 
Pargeter-Pennachad . 
Pennage-Pfennig 
\ Ph-Piper . , 

Q 

B-Beaotive . . 
• Beaotively-Bee 
Bee-Beign . . 
^Beign-Beserve . 
The remainder of the work is in active preparation. 
VoIb. IX, X will oontain S-Z with some supplemental matter. 
Orders can be given through any bookseller for the delivery of the remainder of 
the work in complete Voltmei or in Half-voUimes or in Seetions or in Parts, 

HALF-VOLUMES. The price of half-volnmes, bound, with straight-grained 
persian leather back, oloth sides, gilt top, is £i 7«. 6d, each, or £16 io#. for the 
twelve now ready, namely, A, B, C-Oomm., Comm.-Czech, D, E, F, 6, H, I-K, 
L, 0-Pf. 

SECTIO NS. A Single Section of 64 pages at a#. 6d, or a double Section of ia8 
pages at 5«. is issued quarterly. 

PARTS. A Part (which is generally the equivalent of five Single Sections 
and is priced at 12«. 6d.) is issued whenever ready. 

Nearly all the Parts and Sections in which Volumes I-V were first issued are 
still obtainable in the original Covers. 

FORTHCOMING ISSÜE, October i, 1906. N-Niche, by Mr. Cbaiqib. 

Oxford : Olarendon Pran. London : Hbnbt Fbowde, Amen Goroer, B.O. 



r 

Jo 


$* 


d. 


s 


Zfl 


6 


fl 


Ifl 


6 


fl 


Ifl 


6 


fl 


Ifl 


6 


fl 


Ifl 


6 





fl 


6 





5 








fl 


6 





5 








5 








5 








5 








5 








5 








5 








fl 


6 





5 








5 








5 








5 








fl 


6 





5 








5 








a 


6 





5 






2 



ENGLISH AND ROMAN LA W. 



A Hebrew and English Lezioon of the Old Testament, with 

an Appendix oontaining the Biblioal Aramaio, based on the Thesaurus 
and Lezicon of Gesenius, by F. Brown, S. R. Driyer, and 0. A. Briggs. 
Small 4to, clotb, 34«. net. Parts I-XI, 2s. 6d. each. Part XII, completing 
the work, 55. 

Thesaurus Syriaous : collegemnt Quatrem^re, Bernstein, Lorsbach, 

Amoldi, Agrell, Field, Roediger: edidit R. Payne Smith, S.T.P. VoL I 

(Fase. I-V), sm. foL, 5Z. 5«. Vol. II, oompletion (Fase. VI-X), 81. 8«. 
A Compendious Syriao Diotionary, found^ upon the above. 

Edited by Mrs. Margoliouth. Small 4to, complete, 63«. naf. Part lY, 

155. neu FariA I-III can no Umger he supplied. 

A Diotionary of the Dialects of Vernacular Syriao as spoken 

by the Eastem Syrians of Kurdistan, North- West Persia, and the Piain 

of Mosul. By A. J. Maclean. Small 4to, 15s. 
An English-Swahili Diotionary. By A. C. Madan. Second EdiHon, 

Revised, Extra fcap. 8yo, 75. 6d. net. 
Swahili-English Diotionary. By A. C. Madan. Extra fcap. 8yo. 

7«. 6d, net, 

A Sanskrit-English Diotionary. Etymologically and Philologically 
arranged, with special reference to cognate Indo-European Languages. 
By Sir M. Monier- Williams. Neu? Edition. Cloth, beyeUed edges, 
32. 138. 6d.; half-morocco, 4!. 4s. 

A Greek-English Lezioon. By H. G. Liddell and Robert Scott. 
Eighth Edition, Revieed, 4to. il, i6s. 

An Etymologioal Diotionary of the English Language, ar- 
ranged on an Historical Basis. ByW.W.Skeat. I%trd Editüm. 4to. 2U4S. 

A Middle-English Diotionary. By F. H. Stratmann. A new 
edition, by H. Bradley. 4to, half-morocoo. i2. iis. 6d, 

The Student's Diotionary of Anglo-Saxon. By H. Sweet. Small 
4to. Bs. 6d. net. 

An Anglo-Saxon Diotionary, based on the MS. coUectionB of the 

late J. Bosworth. Edited and enlarged by T. N. Toller. Parts I-in. 

A-SÄR. 4to, stiff Covers, 15«. each. Part IV, SÄR-SWlDRIAN. 

Stiff Covers, 8s. 6d. Part IV, § a, SWi)>-SNEL-YTMEST, 18«. 6d. 
An loelandio-English Diotionary, based on the MS. ooUections of 

the late R. Oleasby. Enlarged and oompletedby G. Vigfüsson. 4to. 32. 7s. 

2. LAW. 



Anson. Principlea of the 

English Lato ^ ConJbraetj and ^ Agency 
in its Relation to Contrcui. By Sir 
W.R. Anson. Eleventh Edition, 8to. 
108. 6d. 

Anson. Law and Cuatom of 

the Constituiion, 2 vols. 8yo. 
Part I. Parliament Ed. 3. i as. 6d, 
Part IL The Crown. Second Ed. 148. 
[Out of print.] 

Bryoe. Studies in History and 



Jurisprudenee, 2 Vols. 8vo. By the 
Right Hon. J. Bryce, M.P. 2$b. net. 

Digby. An Introdwtian to 

the History qf the Law qf Real Pnperiy, 
By Sir Kenelm E. Digby. tyth 
Edition, 8yo. la«. 6d. 

Gtrueber. Lex Aquüia. By 

Erwin Grueber. 8vo. los. 6d. 

Gk>udy. Von Jhering's Law 

in Daüy Life. Translated by H. 
Goudy. Crown 8yo. 3s. 6d. neL 



QjUofdl GUrendon Pren. 



LAIV. 



3 



Hall. Internatumal Law. By 

W.E.Hall. FifthBdiHm. Revised 
by J, B. Atlay, 8vo. ai«. net, 

' A TreatiaeontheForeign 

Powers and Jurisdiction o/th» British 
Croum, 8yo. los. 6d, 

Holland. Elements of JuriS' 

prudenee, By T. E. HoUand. Tenth 
Edition (1906). 8yo. ios. 6d. 

Studiea in InternationdL 

Law, Syo. ios. 6d. 

Qentüia, Älbericiy De 

Iure Belli Lihri Tres, Small 4to, 
leather back. 21s. 

The Institutee of Jus- 

tinian, Second Ed, Fcap. 8yo. 5s. 

The European Concert 

in ihe Eastem Question, a collection 
of treaties and other public acts. 
Svo. I2S. 6d. 

Holland and Shadwell. Sdect 

TiÜesfrom the Digest of Justinian. By 
T. E. Holland and 0. L. Shadwell. 
Syo. 148. Also in Parts, paper 
coYers — I. Introductory Titles. 
2s. 6d. IL Family Law. is. III. 
Property Law. as. 6d, TV, Law of 
Obligations (No. i),3s. 6d, (No. 2), 
48. 6d, 

Ilbert. 77ie Government of 

India. By Sir C. Ilbert. Syo, 
leather back. 21s. [Out of print.] 

Legidative Forms and 

Methods, Syo, leather back. 16«. 

Jenks. Modem Land Law. 

By Edward Jenks. Syo. 15s. 
Jenkyns. British ' Rule and 

Jurisdiction heyond the Seas. By Sir H. 
Jenkyns. 8 yo, leather back. 16s, net, 

Markby. Elements of Law 

considered Ufith r^erence to Princ^les qf 
General Juritprudenee, By Sir W. 
Markby. Sixth Edition. 8yo. 12s. 6(2. 

An Introduction to 

Hindu and Mohammedan Law, for the 
use of Students. Syo. 68. net. 



Moyle. Imperatoris lus- 

tiniani InstituJtifM'um Libri Q^attuor, 
with Introductionsy Commentaryi 
Excarsus and Translation. By J. B. 
Moyle. Fowrth Edition, 2yo1s. 8yo. 
Vol. L 165. Vol. IL 65. 

Contract of Sole in the 

Civil Law. Syo. ios. 6d. 

Follook and Wright. An 

Essay on Possession in the Common Law, 
By Sir F. Pollock and Sir R. S. 
Wright. Syo. 8s. 6d. 

Foste. Qaii Institutionum 

Juris Civilis Commentarii QtuMuor ; er, 
Elements of Roman Law by Gaius. 
With a Translation and Commen- 
tary by E. Poste. Fourth EdiHon, 
roYised and enlarged, by E. A. 
Whittuck, with Historical Intro- 
duction by A. H. J. Greenidge. 
Svo. i6s. net. 

Badcliffe and Miles. Gases 

Illustrating the Principles qfthe Law of 
Torts. By F. R. Y. Radcliffe and 
J. 0. Miies. Syo. 12s. 6d. net 

Sohm. The Institutes, A 

Text-book of the History and 
System of Roman Private Law. 
By R. Sohm. Translated by J. C. 
Ledlie. Second Edition, Syo. iSs. 

Stokes. The AngUhlndian 

Codes. By Whitley Stokes. 

VoL L Substantive Law. Syo. 30s. 

VoL IL Adjeotive Law. Svo, 35s. 
First and Seoond Supplements to 

theaboYe,iSS7-iS9i. Svo. 6«.6<l. 
Separately, No.i, 2s.M. ; No. 2, 48.6d, 

Yonng. Gorps de Droit Otto- 

manRecueü des Codes, LoiSj Reglements, 
Ordonnances et Actes lesplus imporicmts 
du Droit interieur, et Iftiudes sur le 
Droit coutumier de VEmpire Ottonian, 
Par George Young. Part I (Vols. 
I-UT), cloth, 2I. 17s. 6d. net; paper 
Covers, 2I. 12s. 6d, net, published. 
Part II (Vols. IV-VII), cloth, 
Ii. I7s.n«^; paper Covers, il,iis.6d. 
The complete Parts I and II sepa- 
rately, will each cost 2I. 12s. 6d, net 
in paper covers, or 2I, 17s. 6d, net 
in oloth. 



London t HmiT Fbowdi, Amen Corner, E.O. 



4 



HISTORY, BIOGRAPHY, ETC. 



8. HISTOBY, B: 
Asser. Life of King Alfred^ 

together with the Annais of St. 
Neots, erroneously ascribed to 
Asser. Edited with Introduction 
and Commentary by W. H . Steven- 
son, a Yols. Crown 8vo. 1 28. neL 

Aubrey. ' Brief LiveSy chiefly 

Coniemporariesy wt do¥m by John 
Aubrey, between fhe Tecars 1669 and 
1696. Edited by A. Clark. With 
Facsimiles. 2 yols. Svo. 25s. 

Ballard. The Domeeday Bor- 

oughs, By Adolphus Ballard. 8yo. 
With four Plans. 6«. 6d. net, 

Barnard. Companion to Eng- 

li8h Eistory {Middle Agee). With 97 
niustrations. Edited by F. P. 
Barnard. Crown 8yo. 8«. 6d, net 

BoBwelPs Life of Samuel 

Johnson. Edited by G. B. Hill. In 
siz Yolumes, med. 8yo. With Por- 
traits and P]acsimiles. Quarter- 
roan, lUios.net; cloth, 2I. 2s, net 

Bright. Chapters of EarVu 

EngUsh Church Eistory. By W. 
Bright. Third Edition. Svo. 12«. 

Bryoe. Studies in History 

and Jurisprudence. By J. Bryoe. 
a Yols. 8yo. 255. net. 
Butler. The Arab Conquest 

ofEgypt and the last thirty years ofthe 
Roman Dominion. By A. J. Butler. 
With Mapsand Plans. 8yo. i6s.net. 

Chambers. Tlie Mediaeval 

Stage, By E. K. Chambers. With 
twoillustrations. a vols. 8yo. 2^s.net. 

Clarendon's History of the 

Reb^ion and Civü Ware in England. 
Re-edited by W. D. Macray. 6 vols. 
Crown 8yo. 2I. 5«. 

Fisher. Studiea in Napole- 

ofnxe Statesmanship, — Oermany. By 
H. A. L. Fisher, With four Maps. 
8yo. las. 6d. net 

Freeman. ITie History of 

Sieüyßrom Oie Earliest Times. 
Yols. I and II. 8Yo,cloth. aZ.as. 



DOBAPHY, ETC. 

VoL IIL The Athenian and 
Carthaginian Invasions. 34s. 

VoL IV. Tyranny of Dionysios 
to the Death of Agathoklte. 
Edited by A. J. Eyancu ai#. 

Freeman. The Reign of 

WUHam Rufiis and the Accessüm qf 
Henry the First By £. A. Freeman. 
a yols. 8yo. i2. 16s. 

Gardiner. Hie ConstitutioncU 

Doeuments qf the Puritan Beoolutton, 
i6a8-i66o. By 8. R. Gardiner. 
Second Edition. Crown 8yo. 109. 6d. 

Greene. The Plays and Poems 

of Robert Greene. Edited with 
a Collotype and 7 Facsimiles by J. 
C. Collins. a yols. 8yo. i8s. net. 

Gross. The Qüd Merchant; 
a Contributionto British Municipal 
History. ByC. Gross, ayols. 8yo, 
leather back. 2j^. 

Hill. Sources for Oreek 

Eistory between the Fersian and Pdopon- 
nesianWars. Oolleoted and arranged 
by G. F. Hill. Svo. los. 6d. 

Hodgkin. Italy and her In- 

vaders. With Plates & Maps. 8 vols. 
8yo. ByT. Hodgkin. Vols. I-II.4as. 
V0IS.III-IV. 36«. V0I8.V-VI. 36«. 
Vols. Vll-Vm. 24s. 

HoUis. TheMasai;theirLan- 

giioge and FoUdore. By A. C. Hollis. 
With Introduction by Sir Charles 
Eliot. 8yo, with a; full-page Plates 
of niustrations, and a Map. 149. net 

Johnson. Letters of Samuel 

Johnson, LL.D. CoUeeted and Edited 
by G. Birkbeck Hill, a toIs. Syo, 
leather back, 24s.net; cloth, 21s.net 

J ohnsonianMiscellanies. 

2 yols. 8yo, leather back, 24B. net ; 
cloth, 21«. net. 

Lives ofthe Poets. With a 

Memoir of Dr. Birkbeck Hill, by his 
nephew, H. S. Scott, and a füll 
Index. 3 yols. 8yo, leather back, 
42«. net; cloth, 36«. net. 



Oxford: Olazwidon Fzom. 



HISTORY, BIOGRAPH Y, ETC. 



5 



Eingsford. Ghronide8 of Lon- 
don, Edited, withintroduotion and 
Notes, by C. L. Kingsford. 8vo. 
los. 6d. net, 

Kitohin. A Hiatory of France. 

ByG.W.Kitchin. Insvols. Cr.Svo, 
each lo«. 6d. Vol. 1. to 1453. Vol. 
II. 1453-1624. Vol. III. 1624-1793. 

Kyd, The Works of Thomas 

Kyd, Edited with Introduction, 
Notes, and Facsimiles, by F. S. Boas. 
8vo. 15«. net, 

Legg. Sdect Documents Illus- 
trative of the History qf the French 
Revolution, The Conatituent AssemUy, 
Edited by L. G. Wickham Leoo. 
a Yols. Crown 8vo. 128, net. 

Lewis {Sir G. Cornewall). 

An Eseay on fhe Qwemmmt De- 
pendeneies. Edited by 0. P. Lucas. 
Syo, leather back. 14s, 

Lucas. The Canadian War 

0/ 181 2. By C, P. Lucas. With 
Maps. Svo. 1 28, 6d. net, 

Historical Oeography of 

the Britieh Coloniee, With Maps. 
Cr, Svo. 

The Origin and Qrowth of the 
Engliah CoUmies and qf their 
System of Oovernment, By H. E. 
Egerton. 28. 6d, Also in binding 
uniform with the Series. 3«. 6d, 
Vol.I. The Mediterranean and 
Eastem Colonies (exclusive of 
India). Second ed., revised 
to iQoiS, by R. E. Stubbs. 5s. 
Vol. II. The West Indian Colo- 
nies. Second edition, revised 
to 1 905, by C . Atchley . 75 . 6(2. 
Vol. III. West Africa. Second 
Edition, revised to the end of 
1899, by H. E. Egerton. 7«. 6d, 
Vol. IV. South and East Africa. 
Hist. and Geographica!. g8,6d, 
Or, Part I, Historical, 6«. 6d, ; 
Part II, Geographica!, 38. 6d, 
Vol. V. The History of Canada 
(Part I, New France), 6«. 

Ludlow. The Memoire of 

Edmund Ludlow, Lieutenant'Qenerdl of 
the Horee in the Army qf the Common- 



u)eaithqfEngland,i62$-i6';f2. Edited 
by C. H. Firth. a vols. 36s. 
Lyly, TheWorksofJohnLyly, 

Coüected and edited, with facsim- 
ües, by R. W. Bond. In 3 vols. 
Svo, uniform with Kyd, 42«, net, 

Meiriman. Life arid Letters of 

Thomae Oromioett, With a Portrait 
and Facsimile. By R. B. Merriman, 
2 vols. Svo. 185. net 

Morris. The WeLsh Wars of 

Edward I. With a Map. By J. E. 
Morris. Svo. 9s. 6d. net. 

Oman. Ä History ofthePenin- 

sularWar, 6 vols. Svo. With Maps, 
Plans, and Portraits. By C. Oman. 
Vol. 1, 1S07-1S09. 145. net. Vol. II, 
Jan.-Sept., 1S09 (S^om the Battie 
of Corunna to the end of the Tala- 
vera Campaign). 145. net, 

The Oreat Bevolt 0/1381, 

With two Maps. Svo. 8«. 6d, net 

Fayne. History of the New 

World ealled Ameriea, By E. J. 
Payne. Svo. 
Vol. I, containing The Diseovery 

and Ahoriginal America, i8#. 
Vol. II, Aboriffinal America (con- 
claded), 14s. 

Plummer. The Life and Times 

of Alfred the Oreat, By Charles 
Plummer. Crown Svo. 5«. net 

Foole. Historical Atlas of 

Modem Europe from the dedine of the 
Roman Empire, Edited by R. L. 
Poole. 52. 155. 6d. net. Each Map 
separately, is. 6d. net 

Frothero. Sdect Statutes and 

other ConsHtutional Document8j tUustra- 
Uve of the Reigne of Elisabeth and 
Jameel. Edited by G. W. Prothero. 
Cr. Svo. Edition 2, los, 6d, 

Bamsay(Sir J.H.). Lancaster 

and York (a.D. 1399-14S5). a vols. 
Svo. With Index. 37«. 6d, 

Bamsay (W. M.). The Cities 

and Bishoprics of Phrygia. Vol. I. 
Part I. The Lycos Valley and 
South- WesternPhrygia. RoyalSvo. 
I S«. net. VoL I. Part IL West and 
West-Centrai Phiygia. 21«. nei. 



London : HBintT Fbowdb, Amen Ooroer, S.O. 



6 



PHILOSOPHY, LOGIC, ETC. 



Bänke. A History of Eng- 

Umdf principaüy in the Swmieenth 
Cmtury. By L. von Ranke. Trans- 
lated ander the saperintendence of 
G. W. Kitchin and C. W. Boase. 
6yol8. 8vo. 63«. 
Bevised Index, separately, u, 

Uhfa. Stvdies in the Arthur- 

ian Legend, ByJ.Rh^s. 8yo. 12s. 6(2. 

Gdtic Folklore: Welsh and 

Manx. Bythesame. 2Vols. 8vo. 21«. 

Sanday. ISacred Sites of the 

Gosels. ByW. Sanday. Withmany 
illustrations, including drawings 
of theTemple by Paul Waterhouse. 
8vo. 13s. 6d, net. 

Soacoario. De Necessariis 

ObservanHis Scaccarii Dialogua, Com- 
monly called Dialogus de Scaccario. 
Edited by A. Hughes, C. G. Orump, 
and G. Johnson. 8yo. 125. 6d, neL 

Smith'8 Lectures on Justice^ 

Policej Revenue and Arme. Edited, 
with Introduction and Notes, by 
Edwin Oannan. Svo. los. 6d, net. 

Wealth of Nations. 

With Notes, byJ.E.Thorold Rogers. 
2 vols. Svo. 21«. 

Smith (V.A.). The Early His- 
tory oflndia, from 600 B,C. to the Mu- 
hammadan Conquest, including the 



Invasion of Alexander fhe Qreat By 
V. A. Smith. Svo, with Maps and 
other Dlustrations. 148. net 

Stubbs. Select Charters avd 

other laustrations 0/ English ConsUtu- 
tioneU History , firom the EarUee* Times 
to the Reign if Edward I. Arranged 
and edited by W. Stubbs. EighJOi 
Edition. Crown Svo. 8s. 6d. 

ITie Constitutional His- 
tory of England, in ita Origin and 
Development, Library Edition, 3 vols. 
Demy Svo. aZ. 8s. 
Also in 3 vols. orown Svo. 1 2s. eaeh. 

Seventeen Lectures on 

the study qf MediaefMÜ and Modem 
History and kindred subjeds, Crown 
Svo. Third Edition. Bs. 6d, 

Registrvm Sacrvm 

Anglieanum, Sm.4to. Ed. 2. ios,6d. 
Vigfüsson and Powell. Ori- 

gines Islandicae. A Collection of 
the more important Sagas and other 
Native Writings relating to the 
Settlement and Early History of 
Iceland. Edited and translated 
by G. Vigfüsson and F. York Powell. 
2 vols. Svo. 42s. nef. 

Vinogradoff. Vülainage in 
England. Essays in English Medi- 
aeval History. ByPaulVinogradofE. 
Svo, leather back. 16s. 



4. PHILOSOPHT, LOGIC, ETC. 



Baoon. Novum Organvm. 

Edited, with Introduction, Notes, 
&c, by T. Fowler. Sewnd Edition. 
Svo. 15s. 

Berkeley. The Works of 

George Berkeley , D.D., formerly Bishop 
(ff Cloyne; including many of his vjrit- 
ings hit?ierto unpublished. With Pre- 
faces, Annotations, Appendices, 
and an Account of his Life, by A. C. 
Fräser. NewEd. 4vols.,cr.8vo. 24s. 

The Life and Letters. 

By A. Campbell Fräser. Svo. i6s. 
Bosanquet. Logic; or, the 

Morphology qf KnouOedge. By B. 
Bosanquet. Svo. a is. 



Butler. The Works of Joseph 

BuOer^D.CL. Edited by the Right 
Hon. W. E. Gladstone. a vola. 
Medium Svo. 14s. each. 
Campagnao. The Cambridge 

Flatonists, Selections from the writ- 
ings of B.Whichcote, J. Smith, and 
N. Culverwel,with Introduction by 
E.T. Campagnao. Cr. Svo. 6s. 6d. mL 
Fowler, Logic; Deduotive and 
Inductive, combined in a Single 
volume. Extra feap. Svo. 7«. 6<l. 
Separately, DeducUve, 3s. 6d. ; 
Inductive, 6s. 

Fowler and Wilson. The 
Prindples qfMorala, By T. Fowler, 
and J. M. Wilson. Svo. 14s. 



Oxford : Clarendon ProM. 



% 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE, ETC. 



7 



Green. ProlegomenatoEthics. 

By T. H. Green. Edited by A. C. 
Bradley. FwrthEd. Cr. 8vo. 7s. 6d. 

Hegel. The Logic of Hegd. 

Translated from the Encydopaadia 
ofthePhiloflophical Sciences. With 
Prolegomena to the Study of HegeFs 
Logic and Philosophy. ByW. Wal- 
lace. SeoondEdiHon^ReoiaedandAuff- 
mented. avola. Or.Syo. io<.6(i.each. 

Hegers Phüosophy of Mind. 

Translated from the Encyclopaedia 
of the Philosophical Sciences. With 
Pive Introductory Essays. By W. 
Wallace. Orown 8yo. los, 6d. 

Hume'B Treatise of Hvman 

Nature. Edited, with Analytical 
IndeXybyL. A.Selby-Bigge. Second 
Edition, Crown 8yo. 6s. net 

Enquiry conceming 

the Human ünderstanding, Edited 
by L. A. Selby-Bigge. Seeond Edition, 
Crown 8vo. 6s. net, 

Joachim. Essay an the Ifature 

qfTruth. By H. H.Joachim. 8vo. 
6«. net. 

Joseph. Introductionto Logic, 

By H.W. B.Joseph. 8vo. 6d.net. 

Leibniz. The Monadology and 

olher PhiUaophical WriHngs, Trans- 
lated, with Introduction and Notes, 
by R. Latta. Crown 8yo. 8s. 6d. 

5. FHTSICAL 
Chambers. A Handbook of 

Deecriptive and Practical Astronomy, 

By G. F. Chambers . Fourth Edition, 

in 3 vols. Demy 8vo. 

Yol. I. The Sun, Planets, and 
Comets. ais. Vol. II. Instru- 
ments and Practical Astronomy. 
ais. Vol. HL The Starry Heav- 
ens. 14s. 

De Bary. Comparative Ana- 

tomy the VegetaHve Organa <if the 
Phanerogame and F^ns, By Dr. A. 
de Bary. Translated by F. O. 
Bower and D. H. Scott. Royal 8yo, 
morocco back, 34s. net; oloth, 2 is. net. 



Locke. An Essay Concem- 
ing Human ünderstanding, By John 
Locke. CoUated and Annotated 
by A. C. Fräser. 2 vols. 8vo. i/. las. 

Lotze's Logic, in Three Bocks 

— of Thought, of Investigation, and 
of Knowledge. English Transla- 
tion ; editeid by B. Bosanquet. 
Second Edition, 2 vols. Cr. 8vo. las. 

Metaphysic, in Three 

Books— Ontology, Cosmology, and 
Psychology. English Translation ; 
edited by B. Bosanquet. Second 
Edition, 2 vols. Cr. 8vo. i as. 

Martineau. Types of Ethical 

Theory, By James Martineau. Third 
Edition, a vols. Cr. 8yo. 15 s. 

A Study of Religion : 

its Soureeaand Contents, Second Edition. 
2 vols. Cr. 8vo. 15s. 

BashdaU. The Theory of Good 

and Evü. By H. Rashdall. 8vo. 
a vols. In the Press, 

Selby-Bigge. British Moral- 

ists, Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge. 
avols. Crown 8vo. 12s.net. 

Spinoza. A Study in the 

Ethica of Spinoza, By Harold H. 
Joachim. 8vo. los. 6d, net. 

Wallace. Lectures and Essays 

on Natural Theobgy and Ethics, By 
W. Wallace. Edited, with Bio- 
graphical Introduction, byE.Caird. 
8vo, with Portrait. las. 6d, 

SCIENCE, ETC. 
De Bary. Comparative Mor- 

phology and Biology of Fungi, Mycetouoa 
and Bacteria, By Dr. A. de Bary. 
Translated by H. E. F. Garnsey. 
Bevised by Lsaac Bayley Balfour. 
Royal 8vo, morocco back, a4s. net; 
cloth, ais. net. 

De Bary. Lectureson Bacteria, 

By Dr. A. de Bary. Second Improoed 
Edition. Translated and revised by 
I. B. Balfour. Cr. 8vo. 5s. net. 

Ewart. On the Physics and 

Physiology of Proioplasmie Streaming 
in Planta. ByA.J. Ewart. With 17 
illustrations. Royal 8vo. Ss, 6d.net, 



London : HnrxT Faowpi, Axaon Qgmer, B.C. 



8 



PHYSICAL SCIENCE, ETC. 



Fischer. The Stractwre and 

FuMctUms of Baänria. By Alfred 
Fischer. Translated into English 
by A. C. Jones. Royal 8vo. With 
Twenty-nine Woodcuts. 7«. 6d. neU 

Goebel. Outlinea of Classifi- 

coHon and Special Morphäogy qfPlants, 
By K. Goebel. Translated by 

H. E. F. Gamsey. Bevised by I. B. 
Balfour. Royal 8vo, morooco back, 
228, 6d. net; cloth, 20s. net 

Organography of FlarUSy 

e^peeiaUy ofthe Ärehegoniatae and Spar- 
mophyta, ByK. Goebel. Authorized 
English Edition, by I. B. Balfour. 
(a) morocco back ; (b) cloth. Part 1, 
General Organography. Royal 8vo, 
(a) 12«. net; (b) 10«. net Pt. II, 
(a) 248, net; (b) 21«. net. 

Knuth. Handbook of Flower 

Poüination: bosed upon Hermann 
Müüer's loork, ^The Fertilisation of 
Flowera ly InsectsJ' By Dr. Faid 
Knuth. Authorized English Edi- 
tion, by J.R.Ainsworth Davis. Vol. 

I. Introduction and Literature. 
Royal Svo, with 81 illustrations. 
Morocco back, 2 ^ «. net; cloth, 1 S«. net. 

Mercier. Criminal Respond- 

biUty, ByC. Mercier. 8yo. 'J8.6d.net, 

Miall and Hammond. The 

Strueture and Life^History of the 
Harleguin My (Chironomus), By L. C. 
Miall and A. R. Hammond. 8vo. 
With 130 illustrations. 7s. 6d. 

FfefBdT. The Phydology of 

Flante. Ä TretUiee upon ihe Metaboliam 
and Sources qf Energy in Plante. By 
W. Pfeffer. Second Edition, trans- 
lated and edited by A. J. Ewart. 
Royal Pvo. (a) morooco back ; (6) 
cloth. Vol. I, (a) 26«. net; (6) 23«. 
net VoL II, (a) 16«. net; (b) 14«. 
net. Vol. III (completing werk), 
(a) 218. net; (b) 18«. net. 

Frestwioh. Geology — Chemi- 

eal, Phyeicälf and Stratigraphiccd. By 
Sir J. Prestwich. a vols. Royal 
8vo. 6 IS. 



Sachs. Ä History of Botany. 

Translated by H. E. F. Gamsey. 
Revised by I. B. Balfour. Cr. 8yo. 
108, net, 

Schimi>er. Plant Geography 

upon a Physiotogical Basis. By Dr. 
A. F. W. Schimper. The Author- 
ized English Translation by W. R. 
Fisher, revised by P. Groom and 
I. B. Balfour. Royal Svo. With 
a photogravure portrait of Dr. 
Schimper, 5 collotypes, 4 maps, 
and 497 other illustrations. Mo- 
rocco back, 42«. net. 

Solms-Laabach. Fossü Bot- 

any. Boing an Introduction to Palaeo- 
phytology from the Standpoint ^f ihe 
BotanisL By H. Graf zu Solms- 
Laubach. Translated by H. E. F. 
Gamsey. Revised by I. B. Balfour. 
Royal 8yo, morocco back, 17s. net; 
cloth, 15s. net 

Suess. The Fa^e of the Earth 

(Das ÄnÜitz der Erde). By E. Suess. 
Authorized English translation, by 
H. B. C. Sollas, under the direction 
of W. J. Sollas. With many maps 
and illustrations. Vol. I, 25«. net; 
Vol. II, 25«. net 



OXFORD HISTOEY OF MUSIC. 

8vo. Edited byW.H.Hadow. Price 
15«. net each volume. 

I. The Polyphonic Period. Part I 
(Method of Musical Art, 330-1330). 
By H. E. Wooldridge. 

II. The Polyphonic Period. Part II. 
By H. E. Wooldridge. 

III. The Seventeenth Century. By Sir 
C. H. H. Parry. 

IV. The Age of Bach and Handel 
By J. A. Füller Maitland. 

V. The Viennese School. By W. H. 
Hadow. 

VI. The Bomantic Period, By E. 
Dannreuther. 



OXFORD 
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS 
LONDON, EDINBURGH, NEW YORK, AND TORONTO 
HENRY FROWDE 



