
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 





umj% w» ' «'sweidfcr'«fr 'g*!.;.' wi 




: 






THE 

MANDUKYOPANISHAD 



WITH 



GAUDAPADA'S KARIKAS 



AND THE 



BHASHYA OF S'ANKARA. 



• • >> • 



TRANSLATJED INTO ENGLISH 
BY 

MANILAL N. DVIVEDI. 



PRINTED FOR THE BOMBAY XHEO6OPHI0AL 
PUBLieATION FUND. 

BY 

TOOKARAM TATYA, F. T. S. 



1894. 



Price Two Rupees^ 



lAKPENTIBR 



7^/ [ 



PWNTBD AT THB "TATVA-VIVBOHAKA" PRESS. 



PBEFACE. 



Early in 1890, Col. H. S. Olcott, President of the Theoso- 
phical Society and Mr. Bertram Keightley, General Secretary 
of the Indian Section of the Theosophical Society, requested 
me to undertake the following translation of the M&ndOkya 
and the several commentaries accompanying the same. 
Dewan Bahadur S. Subramania Iyer of the Madras High 
Court had offered a handsome amount towards meeting the 
expenses of this work, and as I found that this gentleman as 
well as my friends Col. Olcott and Mr. Keightley were desirous 
that I should undertake the translation, I closed with the 
offer. I have used the M&ndtlkya, Bh&shya and E&rik&s as 
published in Mr. Apte's A'nand&s'rama Series, as the text of 
my translation. The Upanishad alone has been translated 
before by abler hands, but so far as I know the Bh&shya of 
B'ankara and the K&rik&s of Gaudap&da have not before 
been rendered into English. I am sure the M&ndtlkya will 
be much better understood in the light of these commentaries, 
and it will be proved ere long that the generous gentleman 
who conceived the idea of accomplishing this work has 
rendered valuable service to the cause of literature and philo- 
sophy in general. 

Baboda, 1 

„. „ ' I M. N. DVIVEDI. 

Slat May, 1894. 



} 



M94469 



introduction:. 



It is difficult to determine when each of the six well-known 
darianas or schools of Indian Philosophy came into promi- 
nence ; but it is easy to trace a consistent development of 
thought, as we progress from Gantama and KanMa to Kapila 
and Vy&sa. The esoteric doctrine of the Veda had given 
place to exoteric forms, culminating in the hard and fast rules 
of the Mtmdnsd^ generally known as the Piirvta-mimdnsd^ of 
Jaimini. The true philosophy, the real gnosis, capable of 
leading to immediate liberation, was, however, preserved intact 
in the Upanishads ; a reconciliation of whose various texts 
widely differing in meaning from one another, and a concise 
statement of the fundamental Upanishad-^octTvae, is the aim. 
-and object of the aphorisms of Vy^sa, known as the Veddnta- 
Sutras, or the aphorisms of the JJttara as opposed to the 
JPurva-mimdnsd. This Uttara-mimdnsd is the principal text 
of the Veddnta doctrine, nay of all religio-phildsophical 
teaching in India. To be able to set up a new school and 
secure any considerable following, a fresh thinker must show 
that his teaching, whatever it be, follows directly from the 
aphorisms of the Uttara-mimdnsd and is corroborated by the 
principal Upanishads and the Bhagatad-GUd, These three 
are called in technical language, the Prasthdnatraya ; and no 
one who does not connect his teaching with these has the 
right to be called a teacher, an dchdrya. The four principal 
schools of S'ankara, BAm^nuja, Madhva, and Vallabha, though 
opposed in their teachings one to the other, each claim the 
three Prastkdnas as their own. It is beside our purpose to 
prjonounce upon the relative merits of these different interpre- 
tations, but it is worthy of remark that, as between S'ankara 
R^m&nuja, an able scholar, Dr. Thibaut of Benares, gives* 

Introduation^TraQfllatioa of the VeddntorSutrdB^ << Sacred Books of th* 

8t» 



11 IKTKODUdnOK. 

the palm to the latter. Bat all the same be records it as \m 
emphatic opinion that if any of the interpreters of the Proi^ 
thdnas has fully understood and impartially explained the 
true philosophy of the ZT^TaTz/^^ao^ it is S'ankara and no one 
else. This has been the universal opinion of the best mind» 
of India, but I cite the authority of a European scholar to 
assure the reader that S'ankara can always be trusted, and 
with the most unreserved confidence, in his treatment of 
philosophical points and his explanations of the Upaniskad-^ 
doctrine. 

So much for the authorities we accept as our guides. Bet« 
ween the two Mimdnsds, both completely orthodox in th^ir 
teachings and modes of interpretation, there lie a number of 
minor schools of philosophy, allied in nearer or more remote 
degrees to the orthodox Vedic teaching, and setting up a new 
conception of the world, each for its own purpose. It is these 
with which we are chiefly concerned at the outset. For, the 
Advaitah nothing less than the synthesis of thought underlying' 
the different teachings of Indian Schools, and is truly that 
universal religion or philosophy which embraces within the 
ample folds of absolute unity the infinite variety of all 
shades of thinking. 

. The object of the minor schools, just alluded to, was none 
other than that of all philosophical research in general* 
They aimed at a theory of supreme ethics based on a, to 
them, rational conception of the universe. The latter ne- 
|;essarily included the department of physics as well as those 
ef psychology and metaphysics. In India that specialization 
of thought has never arisen, which, in Europe, constitutes 
each of these branches of research an entire and indepeur 
dent science by itself. Take any, the smallest work on Indiitn 
philosophy and you will find all these branches mixed up and 
woven into the treatment of the main subject. But this J I 
think, is due more to the Indian way of thinking than to any 
lack of accuracy or of the love of independent research. A dl 
thought was concentrated upon the one aim— knowledge of 



INTRODUCTION, HI 

6od and the way to fiaal liberation ; and every other depart- 
inent of research was followed only as a very subordinate, 
means to this end. Any department of knowledge severed 
Irom this general and all'-snpreme end had no interest for 
the Aryan mind. This want of specialization of thought 
should, therefore, not be construed as implying the beginning 
of philosophic thought ; for it will be no exaggeration to say 
that India has given to humanity the main outline at least of 
the whole of the philosophy and religion of the world. This 
may appear, to my Western readers an error of judgment, 
but it is no little consolation that in this instance at least, 
I err in good company. 

The first school which daims our attention is that of 
Kand.da known as the Vaiseihika school. This school teaches 
the atomic theory of the universe, and believes in the exis- 
tence of a personal creator, who sets the atoms in motion. 
The world of experience divides itself into substances, attri- 
butes, and actions, the only triad that really exists. These 
three exist by themselves, as also one in the other, by a 
number of relations called generic marks, differentia, and 
inseparable connection. Every substance has a generic mark 
and a specific difference, and the relation of substance with 
either of these as also with the attributes which make it what 
it is, is inseparable connection. The teaching of this school 
depends entirely on the realism of the highest genus — Ens 
(sattA) — a fiction endowed with existence and supposed to 
confer the same on the three fundamental categories — subs- 
tance, attribute and action. Though they define substance as 
that which is the substratum of attributes the Vaiheshikas 
Relieve in the independent existence of both the substratum 
and the attribute. 

. The human soul too i« a substance, the substratum of the 
attribute intelligence. The great soul (ihara — God) is dso 
jft-substance, the substratum of attributes such as omnipotence, 
omniscience, and the like. Knowledge is produced from the 
union of mind and soul, the former being in constant com- 



IV INTRODUCTIOir. 

munication with objects through the senses. The instriimeirM 
of knowledge are sensation, inference, analogy, and testimony* 
The ethics reared on these foundations consist of entire devo- 
tion to God, and the summum bonum is achieved when the 
sum of miseries inherent in the soul is annihilated once and 
for all. 

Gautama, the founder of the Nyaya philosophy, accepted 
the Physics and Ethics of Kanftda, and supplemented his 
theory by a metaphysic, the method and phraseology of which 
continue to govern the entire expression of subsequent Indian 
thought. In the opinion of Gautama, liberation can only 
be obtained through proper understanding of the categories, 
by careful analysis carried on with proper instruments of 
knowledge. These instruments of knowledge are four in 
number : Perception, Inference, Analogy, and Testimony. 
Perception may be right or wrong, and it may be direct, 
or indirect through memory. Direct perception may be 
immediate through one of the senses, or mediate through the 
object in direct touch with one of the senses. Inference 
is based on perception, and implies prior knowledge of the 
theory of causation. A cause is defined as that which is 
the invariable antecedent of an effect not otherwise possi- 
ble. Inference leads Gautama to the subject of logic in 
general, and he, in my opinion, has dealt with the subject in a 
manner at once exhaustive and complete. His rules of 
induction, the theory of deduction, and the important chapter 
on fallacies, can find nothing more than mere mention in this 
place. Inference leads to analogy which, however, is a 
separate instrument of knowledge, inasmuch as it leads 
immediately to the definite naming of a thing on simple 
remembrance of a previous resemblance. Testimony is know- 
ledge produced by the words of a trustworthy speaker. The 
theory of language, if theory it can be called, including 
among its chief features an explanation of the relation be- 
tween words and things, forms a part of this division of 
Nydya. It is all human testimony so far. The highest 
testimony is the word of the great Being, Herein lies tbe 



INTRODUOTIOK. V 

feiWtioti of Kanada and Gantama to the orthodoxy of the 
times. Gautama concludes his chapter on the instruments 
.of knowledge with the pertinent query whether the rightness 
.of an act of knowledge, say perception, is self-cognizable or 
not, and declares himself in favour of the latter alternative : 
for, says he, we know that a perception is right by reference to 
some previously known perception or action, i. e., by in- 
ference. This point is important to remember for the simple 
reason that the Advaita maintains the contrary opinion. 

A.n analysis of the universe carried on with these instru- 
ments of knowledge will point the way to right conduct 
leading to iinal liberation. 

Kapila, the founder of the atheistic Sdnkhya^ the third 
phase of thought which requires our attention, denied the 
physics of Kanada and made some important modifications in 
the psychology of Gautama. He took a step in advance 
towards the unitary conception of the universe, but he was 
not able completely to disentangle himself from the diflSculties 
of a kind of dualism with which he began. He regarded the 
whole of nature as essentially dual in character being made 
up of subject and object, which he called puruska and prakriti. 
The former, according to him, is a simple centre of conscious- 
ness, the latter a self-acting principle called primordial matter. 
Prakriti, properly speaking, is that condition of matter in 
which all its properties — Satva, Rajas, and Tamaa (passivity, 
energy, and grossness) — are held in a state of equilibrium. It 
is rajas which sets prakriti in action, being fired, as it 
were, by the mere presence of the purusha. The whole universe 
comes out of this primordial matter by a rigid process of 
evolution. Prakriti passes into mahat (cosmic mind) and 
ahankdra (cosmic individuality), which produce the subtile 
elements and the internal and external organs, ending finally 
-with the elements evolved from their subtile forms, and 
making up the variety of the universe, diflfering at every step 
in kind and degree. Purusha though ever inseparable from 
prakriti, stands au unaffected witness of the whole chain of 



VI INTRODUCTION. 

plienomeQa. There are of course as many purusAas as there 
are beings, for otherwise variety of experience will not be 
possible. Nature in itself is all bliss and order, what appears 
to the contrary is only a defect of the perceiving mind. If it 
were not so, says Kapila, one and the same thing cannot be 
good bad and indifferent to different persons looking at it in 
the same moment of time. The mind, that is, buddhi^ as they 
call it, (the microcosmic correspondence of mahat) is able 
to play the perceiver and knower only on account of the 
preponderance in it of satva^ which admits of a reflection of the 
purusha in close contact with it. This buddhi passes out to 
objects and takes the form of the thing to which it relates 
itself. This action of mind is called khydti by the Sdnkhya^, 
According as the original scUioa of bvddki shines in native 
purity or is overpowered by rajas or tamas^ it regards the 
knowledge thus received as agreeable or otherwise. Purusha 
being nearest buddhi takes these reflections in buddhi as 
affecting itself and feels happy or miserable. It is note«- 
worthy that this identification oi purusha with buddhi is simply 
false, an idea which will appear as adhydsa in the Adtaitay and 
will further be found expanded into the theory of illusion out 
and out. When buddhi so far clears itself of all dross as to 
be nothing but pure satva^ it transmits nothing in the form of 
misery or happiness to the purtcshtty with whom it then iden- 
tifies itself, if identification it can be called. The purusha is 
now entirely liberated from the bonds oiprakriti whose action 
has entirely ceased in regard to that particular purusha. 

That there is no place for a personal creator in this theory is 
obvious from this brief enumeration of its main conclusions. 
Hence the name, atheistic Sdnkhya; but this atheism is 
entirely different from the atheism of modern materialism 
which looks upon every claim of the subjective as so much 
superstition and ignorance. Atheism, in the ^n^%a-sense 
of the word, is widely shared by some of the foremost thin* 
kers of ancient India, chief among them by Buddha, Jains, 
and S'ankara. Indeed the whole of th^ Adtaita is, in this 
sense of the term, purely atheistic. All divine machinery 



rNTkODUOTIOm til 

being thus entirely set aside, Kapila naturally relied upon 
soul-evolution and the powers of nature as in themselves 
sufficient to account for the whole of experience. To Kapila, 
the division of the univei^se into substance, attribute, actiou, 
and certain relations, appeared radically faulty, for, said he, 
it is impossible to postulate existence ( sattd ) of anything 
beside substance. And the one substance of Kapila was 
Prakrits nature, having certain potentialities, and capable of 
evolving the whole of experience from itself. He endowed 
nature with a soul in his conception of puruskUy thought, 
whose presence in experience cannot be explained by any 
theory of organisation. In his psychology, too, Kapila took 
a step in advance of his predecessors in thought. To Kan&da 
and Gautama knowledge was possible only on the union of 
mind and soul; Kapila explained knowledge, which he calkd 
Khyatiy by the sole action of the former. And further, ac- 
cording to him, it was not an exact account of objects which 
the senses rendered to the mind in every act of perception; 
it was only a reflection of mind into nature which reflection 
returned to' itself as an objective perception. Though not 
denjring reality to the objective, Kapila insensibly drifted in 
his psychology to a kind of subjective idealism which it 
remained for a mind like S'ankara's to set right by an exhaus* 
tive analysis of nature and thought. 

Life according to nature is the keynote of Sdnkhyan ethics. 
The expression has to receive yet clearer meaning in the 
light shed by later developments of thought. The service 
Kapila rendered to the cause of philosophy by making sub- 
jective thought the proper centre of philosophic research 
entitles him to the gratitude of his successors, who, begin- 
ning where he left off, enriched philosophy by yet richer and 
grander achievements in the same line. 

A close follower of Kapila, but an independent thinker in 
tlie department of ontology and ethics, was Patanjali, the 
founder of the theidtic S^Ankhya^ or yb^a-system of philoso- 
phy. The main part of his teaching is occupied with a com- 



Vni lifTRODUCTION. 

plete cuumerafeion of certain ethical rules, subjective and 
objective. The central idea is, however, that of Kapila — the 
bringing o^buddhi into the condition of pnre satta. All the 
rules are proposed and discussed with this end in view, and 
several incidental circumstances pertaining to the occult are 
set forth with clear insight into those laws of psychology 
which are yet forbidden ground to modern science and meta- 
physics. Kapila's idea of " life according to nature " is thus 
forther developed by Patau jali whose service to philosophy- 
consists in his contributions to the department of practical 
ethics. In his conception of God Patanjali would appear to 
fall back on the idea of Gautama ; but inasmuch as he assigns 
his God no particular part in the evolution or government of 
the universe, and accepts the Sankkya theory of experience in 
totOf it is impossible to resist the conviction that Patanjali's * 
God was a mere fiction, invented for purposes of meditation 
with a view to concentration of mind. 

Before passing on to the Advaita philosophy of the Upani^ 
skads^ which m a word, is the synthesis of all thought, it is 
important to take note of a few anti-Br^hmanical schisms. 
"We need not take any notice of the Chdrmkas^ the solitary 
materialists of Indian philosophy, inasmuch as their specula* 
tions stand self-refuted in the light of other schools of 
thought ; more especially in that of the Jaina school, which 
clearly demonstrates the impossibility of accounting for 
thought and knowledge by any theory of material organisa- 
tion. The Jainas followers of the Jina or Arhat, agree witli 
the Sankhjas in totally denying the existence of a personal 
creator, and in entirely severing themselves from, and even 
opposing the influence of Vedic orthodoxy. But they taught 
in principle a philosophy of absolute relativity encompassing 
even the realms of absolute thought. The "relativity of 
knowledge " is an expression understood in so many diflerent 
senses by different thinkers, that it is necessary, to explain, 
as concisely as possible, what meaning the Jainas attached 
to it. Experience, they say, iB all real, but it exists and 
does not exist at the same time, for a thing exists in regard 



INTRODUCTION. IX 

to its own sabstancC) form, time and space, bnt does not 
exist at the same time, in regard to the substance, form, 
time and space of other things. Thus do things exist 
** somehow" (st/dd), as they say, and this philosophy is 
therefore called the SyMtada. The whole of experience is 
made up of substance and form, the former eternal, the latter 
changing every moment. The former they call dravya^ the 
latter paryibya^ and look upon the whole of experience as 
made up of draDya and paryaya. The most important contri- 
bution, however, of Jaina philosophy to the general philo- 
sophic thought of India is the great prominence it gave to 
the theory of ^arwa; and the way in which it accentuated 
the idea of universal brotherhood by extending the sphere of 
Jita to everything made of dravya and paryaya. It was 
reserved for the Advaita to scale the loftiest heights of thought 
and view the whole cosmos as one Jiva^ one absolute thought, 
^' one without a second,^' and thus to fuse the tie of brotherhood 
into the ever indissoluble unity of self without parts and 
without magnitude* 

The followers of the Buddha also are leaders of Anti-Br&h^ 
manical schisms. The Buddhistic philosophy is, on the one 
hand, reared on a theory of physics based on the atomic con- 
ception of the universe, and on the other on a very salutary 
1)asis of supreme ethics deduced from this physics, teaching 
the momentariness of all existence objective and subjective. 
The substantiality of the soul in the Nyaya — or even the 
Jaina — sense of the word is entirely denied, and the very 
conception of matter is made to imply the idea of spirit, the 
^kandhas moving in accordance with tanha (triskna) being 
made to account for the whole of experience, subjective and 
objective. Liberation, supreme bliss, consists in the entire 
<5essation of triskna. Jt is important to note in connection 
with this theory, as also that of the Jainas^ that though libera- 
tion be secured, the course of evolution must lead even the 
liberated to spheres higher and higher, and must make them 
indue time the creators or governors of whole planetary 
chains of worlds and systems. That a personal creator finds 



X IKTRODUCTION. 

no place in the Buddhistic teaching goes without saying. This, 
in brief, is the main outline of this phase of thought ; but 
wh^t interests a student of philosophy, as a connecting link 
between the Buddha and S'ankara, is the idealistic teaching 
of a sect of one of S'akyasimha's disciples. The VijUdrtavadins 
(believers in the ultimate reality of the Vijfidnaskandha alone) 
ignored the objective world altogether, and explained expe- 
rience only by the native activity of the Vijfidna-skandha 
(mind), acting under an eternal impulse. This subjective 
idealism is often confounded with the Mdyd-V&da of 
S'ankara and thftt great thinker is as often charged with 
having elaborated his theory of the Advatta out of the subjec- 
tive idealism of the Vij'hdnavdda. No error greater than this 
can be committed in the department of correct thinking ; for 
the Buddhist idealism differs as niuch from S^ankara's as that 
of Berkeley from Hegel's. The Admita is absolute idealism, 
extending from end to end and including subject, object and 
all in the all-embracing sweep of absolute Thought. 

It remains only to refer to the Pdrta-Mimdnsd of Jaimini. 
It has already been alluded to as that orthodox school of 
interpretation and ceremonial which places the summum bonum 
in literally carrying out all Vedic injunctions. All the other 
schools of thought diverged more or less from this stand- 
point of the Mimdnsd^ but none more completely than the 
three just reviewed. Even Kapila does not closely follow the 
lead of Jaimini for he deserts him when it suits his purpose 
to do so. The Uttara-Mimdnsd or Veddnta proper had 
thus a double duty to perform. It was to be shown that 
the Advaita was rationally a systematic and logical synthesis 
of all previous speculations, and lest in doing this it should, 
like Bvddhism or Jainism^ prove itself repulsive to the 
orthodox, it was also to be shown that this synthesis was 
directly derived from the most esoteric portion of the 
Veda — ^the Upaniskads. It is this double aspect of Veddnta^ 
teaching that has saved it from the obloquy of atheism, a 
title which it has otherwise richly earned from its emphatic 
denial of an extra-cosmic creator. But, further, the facts 



INTRODUCTION, XI 

of experience have also to be explained on the hypothesis 
..of absolute transcendentalism. The first principle accord- 
ingly of the method of the Advaita is to test every deduc- 
tion by reason, then check it by the words of the Veda^ 
and translate it in terms of experience. In other words, the 
Advaita is an a priori hypothesis whose value as philosophic 
truth is shown by its being in accord with reason, history and 
experience. Thus, we are brought fkce to face with the subr 
ject of this introduction and of the pages which follow it. 

In tracing our way through the vast field of Indian thought 
'to the all-illuminating landmark of the Advaita^ I have had a 
threefold object in view. First, it was necessary to show the 
existence of a rational interconnection between all the 
apparently scattered and even opposite schools of Indian 
thought, making it possible to arrange them as so many steps 
in the philosophical development of thought. More than 
this I do not claim \ for historically it is hopeless, a& yet, to 
determine in time the position of each of the ancient teacher^ 
or of their teachings either. In the second place, it was of the 
first importance that the real position and meaning of that 
phase of thought called the Advaita should be fully realized 
before beginning the study of a work which presents it in its 
ultimate and absolute form, so to speak. And thirdly, it was 
most essential to rebut, by presenting in a concise form, some 
of the main issues of ancient philosophic research, the charge 
that in our enthusiasm for the past we read modern thoughts 
into archaic writings. 

I have said that the Advaita is a Philosophy of t^e Abso^ 
lute. Is it, it may, however, be asked, possible to have 
anything like a Philosophy of the Absolute, notwithstanding 
the all-embracing power of relativity which meets us at 
every step ? And again is not materialism or agnosticism 
the last word alike of science and philosophy ? The Advaita 
returns an emphatic negative to these questions. Though 
relativity governs everything in the realm of experience, there 
is always a something which transcends experience and 



XU INTRODUCTION. 

relativity and whose being is implied in the very posibility 
of these. Knowledge, it is trne, consists of the data of ex- 
perience, but that knowledge is no knowledge at all in the 
Advaita sense of the word. What the Advaita esMs/fldna 
(ffnosis)^ generally translated by the word- knowledge for 
want of a better one, is not the knowledge which is received 
through the senses. It is that supreme knowledge which- 
ensues upon full self-realization, upon that recognition of the 
Absolute which proves the futility of all relativity, by in- 
cluding everything in one unutterable Thought. That where- 
by experience derives its being is the Absolute. I* is certainly 
not given to us by or from experience. If it were so, all 
generalization and synthetic knowledge of every description 
would be entirely impossible to the mind of man. Even as ta 
causation, supposing it for a moment to be something ob-' 
jectively existent, though experience may inform us as to the 
antecedents and consequence of certain phenomena, there 
would ever be wanting that nexus which invariably connecta 
the two and which cannot be given by any experience what- 
ever. It was the ignoring of this nexus of reason, ever in- 
dependent of experience, which led to that mode of thinking 
known as scepticism and to the consequent negation of all 
causality whatever ; the futility of which has, I think, been 
effectively shown by the powerful mind of Kant. And with 
scepticism falls not only this particular mode of thinking, but 
the conclusions of materialism in general. For thought, 
reason, the faculty or essence, which synthesises experience, 
is no result of material organization or chemical combination 
of any description. This nextis of reason, this transcendental 
faculty of synthetic thought, the very essence of being, is the 
point from which the Advaita starts, and proceeds to set forth 
a theory of absolute idealism never paralleled in the history of 
philosophy, except perhaps by the philosophy of the Absolute 
enunciated by the great German metaphysician Hegel. 

The famous formula of Descartes '^cogito ergo sum^' 
had dealt an effective blow to materialism in general and 
scepticism in particular. Kant, however, detected a fallacy 



INTRODUCTION. Xlil 

iu the argnment by showing that the ''cogito'' already implied 
the *' swrn/* and argued from this conclusion to his philosophy 
of transcendent Reason. The Advaita builds upon the truth 
of Kant's remark on the Cartesian formula, its theory of 
absolute unity of thought and being, in place of the duality 
which hampered the mind of Descartes and from which even 
Kant was not able entirely to free himself. 

And this explains to us the relation between the absolute 
and the relative. The Advaita does not say with Fichte that 
the " things-in-themselves" of Kant are mere shadows of a 
function of reason, nor with Schelling that mind yields its 
supremacy to nature in its perception of experience ; but it 
lays down with Hegel that the pritis of all reality is that 
absolute something which comprehends within itself every 
thought and every being. Thought implies being as the 
absolute implies the relative. Unity is inexpressible, but the 
very word implies duality, and posits a something as against 
itself till self-realization demolishes the illusion. Thought 
is being; both, in fact, are aspects, so to speak, of a something 
unique and one. Let us analyse any fact or thing of experi- 
ence. The analysis, if carried to the extremest limit, will 
stop at a something which is nothing without thought^ and 
is, at best, a compound, I may say, of thought and being. The 
Advaita is explicitly defined in this very phraseology by S'an- 
kara in his comments on the Sutras * of Vydsa. 

This transcendental essence or correlative of being is pre- 
sent in every existence, for existence itself implies it. It is 
that which is active in the consciousness of every sentient 
being, for it is the very essence of thought. Nay it is that 
which is implied in the very subsistence, position, being, of 
lifeless things and substances. The whole of experience, with 
its numberless variety, is but the mere functioning of the 

♦ The SAtraruns: ^^ dravMianascMddvbhyat^^* and S'ankara after ex- 
plaining it says that experience is impossible without dtman. He explicitly 
says vyatireJcer]ka abhdvah, which freely paraphrased means * experience is 
impossible without thought,' and that the cosmos is the Unit in this sense. 



XIV INTRODUCTION. 

Absolute, on its way to itself. Thought returns into thought, 
and creates a universe of subject and object in the 
process. Thus then is nothing without It. It is the very- 
source of all pleasure and bliss or happiness, for it 
is that which resolves all duality, the cause of evil, into 
unity. It is, therefore, roughly described as sat (existence) 
chit (knowledge, thought, consciousness, apperception) and 
dnanda (bliss). This is only a description, for really the 
Absolute is ever indescribable and beyond the reach of intel- 
ligeqce and speech. Everything reveals it, everything is the 
Absolute and yet apart from it. The spectrum of colours is 
perhaps the fittest illustration of this variety in unity. All 
the different rays of violet, indigo, blue, green, yellow, orange 
and red, appear to shade off, one into the other, till all become 
lost io the distinctionless purity of the white. And recent 
researches have shown that each of the simple colours is 
again made up of the same seven, which obey the same laws. 
The Absolute is that ray of pure white which is the synthesis of 
all variety and which is present in all forms. This Absolute 
essence of all being, ever without form or substance, is always 
present in all our acts of thinking, in the very idea of the 
" I " which connects itself with all we do and think. If we 
have any definite reliable knowledge in this world of illusion 
or relativity, it is of the one supreme fact that we exist, 
that "we are" or "I am," This it is which persists, 
which we can in no manner think away. It is, as will 
be seen, identical with the Absolute, being but a reflection 
in the microcosmos. This essence of being is therefor© 
that of which we are daily and hourly conscious, definitely 
sure, and perfectly convinced. It is, in fact, the last essence 
of things. To define, then, the last essence of things as 
the unknowable, as something never possible of apprehension, 
is, in my humble opinion, an entire misconception of the 
very nature of things. It is a statement of philosophy from 
the wrong end of the question. True that the Absolute 
is not given to us by experience, and from the stand- 
point of experience alone it is not possible. But the 



INTRODUCTION. XV 

unknowable is then a wrong woi'd to describe it, call it 
the impossible, the unthinkable, but to call it the un- 
knowable is only another way of disguising our ignorance 
of, or inability to explain, the very first principles of 
thought and reason. The unknowable is an empty idea, 
a mere word thrown forth as a bridge over that wide 
gulf which separates materialism from transcendentalism. 
And a very slender bridge it is. For it breaks when it is 
made to support the weight of dead matter on its Way to 
transcendental thought. No matter can thinks the unknow- 
able can never link itself with matter and make it think. 
■The agnostic mode of thought is oilly a result of that 
false system of mental philosophy which goes under the 
pretentious name of "physiological psychology", which 
vainly tries to translate thought in terms of nervous processes. 
This psychology derives all knowledge from sensation. It 
takes no note of, and makes no satisfactory attempt to explain, 
the why and wherefore of the sensation being perceived the 
very moment it is experienced. " Physiological psychology " 
ignores one of the two inseparable factors ef knowledge, sen- 
sation and a knowing self. It is impossible to adduce a single 
instance of knowledge, be it sensation, perception, imagina- 
tion, abstraction, or inference, which can be explained without 
reference to consciousness, thought, or awareness, so-called 
theories of "unconscious cerebration" and the like notwithstand- 
ing. Physiological psychology has yet to find out the nervous 
processes answering to acts of memory or the higher processes 
of abstract thinking. It is true that some nervous changes 
accompany all knowledgei, all psychological processes, but the 
mere concomitant or even the condition of a thing or result 
is not itself the thing or the result. It is evident then, that 
the thinking self which relates itself to all sensation is per- 
fectly intelligible, I mean its presence as an independent yet 
inseparable cause of all knowledge, as a something which 
binds together, which is, as it were, a Substratum of the varied 
experiences of an individual, is more than demonstrated in all 
acts of the mind.. 



XVI INTRODUCTION. 

This idea of ** self as the real subject of all experience in- 
volving intelligence, emotion, feeling, or will, is important 
to take note of ; inasmuch as the Advcuta wants only to enlarge 
upon it and expand a self into the self, merging individuality 
in Absolute Unity. This self is then plainly seen at work in 
all experience ; what we do not know, what we cannot satis- 
factorily analyse, is that something which is the cause of sensa- 
tion. Equally inexplicable is the mysterious relation between 
sensation and thought. In a certain sense both thought 
and sensation are unknowable, but the comparative certainty 
with which we know thought does not allow us to relegate it 
to the realm of the Unknowable, and rejoice over our theories 
of material organisation and chemical combination which 
have essentially nothing whatever to do with thought. It is 
rather the correlative of thought, i. ^., so-called matter, whicH 
is really unknowable, mysterious, all mAy& ; for it is difficult 
to maintain that mere extension can make an independent 
entity of what we call matter or experience. Kant's argu- 
ments to prpve the subjective nature of time, space, and causa- 
tion are too well-known to bear repetition here. That 
thought is the real source of all our experience is amply 
proved from the fact that the laws of experience, the several 
categories, as Kant calls them, would be impossible without 
thought. Sensation does not and cannot give them ; no ag6 
of experience could produce the generalization which leads to 
these laws, but with the help of thought. Even matter the 
substratum of sensation cannot be said to exist but through 
and for thought. All attempts to mix the two up lead to' 
false philosophy and stultify the very object of nature. 

The great crux of philosophy is to explain the possibility of 
experience, of sensation, from the stand-point of Absolute 
Thought. There are those who argue that the whole of 
experience is only a result of the subjective thought of 
every individual ; and there are those who, in opposition to 
these, maintain that the mind relates itself to mere shadows 
of " things-in-themselves, " noumena which never reveal 
themselves. But these two phases of idealism do not really 



INTRODUCTION. Xvii 

assist as to a solation of the problem at issue, inasmuch ' as 
subjective idealism would annihilate the possibility of all 
general knowledge, and objective idealism would fashion an 
external universe from mere shadows having existence in simple 
imagination. Kant's attempt to posit a mysterious thing-in- 
itself behind each phenomenon, as the canse that supplies 
the material to fill in the forms of mind, only evades the 
difficulty instead of explaining it 

-. An explanation has to be sought in Absolute Idealism. 
Mind, thought, reason, or dtman includes both subject and 
object in itself. In its attempts at self-realisation, it makes 
itself the cause (so to speak) of experience, of everything 
which appears as andtman, noTi^dtman* Hegel points out 
tjiat pure being is both thing and no-thing, the positive implies 
the negative. The idea of mind implies that of no-mind, 
dtman implies anoUman^ and self-realisation ensues only from 
experience based upon this assumed opposition. The process of 
self-realization is called in Advaita the adhydrapdpavada (the 
negation of something assumed for the time as opposed to the 
peal thing). The world of experience does not really exist, 
but dtman takes it {dropoi) as all andtman for its own 
purpose of self-realisation, which when fully accomplished 
(apavdda) shows everything as inseparably one. This is 
explained in the Advaita by a number of illustrations. Illus- 
tration, however, can throw but little light on the sphere of 
the Absolute. As a man sees his reflection in a mirror, and 
takes the reflection to be some other man forgetting his 
identity for the time, so does dtman look upon itself as the 
cause of dual experience. The mirror being broken the reali- 
zation of the identity is complete. The difference of dtman 
and andtman being demolished by knowledge, dtman^ the 
Absolute, is easily realized. What, it may be asked, stands 
in place of the mirror in the case of dtman ? The Advaita 
replies, ignorance, eternal ignorance, called Adhydsa^ to be 
explained more particularly later on. But here it will 
be enough to say that the very nature of thought re- 
(|uires logically that the positive must imply its negatives 
c 



XVUl INTRODUCTION. 

that Atman must imi^jr anatman^ for both put together 
ii^iake up the inexpressible Unit. Experience is possible only 
through the action of this Unit, through its progress to self- 
realization, in the manner just explained. 

The Advaita-Aheovj of perception is strictly in accord with 
this view. Perception does not follow upon, nor accompany, 
sensation produced by contact of the senses with external 
objects, as the Naiydyiks have it, or upon buddki relating 
itself to objects, i, e., upon hhyati^ as the Sdnkhyas put it. 
The Absolute, as it were, perceives itself and rises by degrees 
to self-realization. In any object dtman can perceive itself, 
and accomplish self-realigation in no time ; but this process 
is not as easy as it appears. Atman posits a non-dtman 
as against itself, and cognizes this xion^dtvian as it is 
reflected in dtman. To explain. An object is presented 
to the mind. The dtman, called chaitanya as the perceiving 
subject, within the mind {antahkdrancb), unites itself with the 
atman {^^ chaitanya, the objective dtman) in the object and 
realises itself in# the apparent non^dtman (the object per- 
cieved). If this '^perception of itself in what it supposes as 
objective existence is complete, self-realization ensues ; if in- 
complete the perception constitutes in itself an act of knowing 
such and such object (a form of andtman). The perception in 
the latter case is not of the object in itself, it is of the forna 
which the dtman takes in relation to the supposed object* 
This process of perception by an act of dtman externalising 
itself, so to speak, is called vrtti as opposed to the khyati of 
the Sdnkhyas. In khydti it is the satva of buddhi that per* 
ceives forms of prakrti, in vrtti it is dtman externalising it- 
self. In other words, khydti admits the existence of the ob- 
jective, vrtti does not. Khydti is a natural corollary of the 
theory of many purushas ; vrtti of that of one supreme purusha 
(Absolute dtman). It is thus easy to perceive the improve- 
ments in the psychology of Kapila made by Vy&sa and his 
followers, Gaudap^da, S'ankara and other expounders of the 
Advaitan It was necessary to make this improvement partly 
for taking a step in advance of the incomplete ethics of Kapila 



INTBODUCnON. XIX 

-^ft point which we may poetpone for future consideration — 
and partly for arriving, as will be seen, at a satisfactory 
explanation of perception. 

It may naturally be asked if dtman is one and universal, 
iand all perception is mere vrtti^ how account for the variety 
of mental experience ? The answer is plain after what has 
t)een said. In the Absolute, experience exists not ; as long as 
the Absolute sets up a relative as against itself experience does 
exist in all its variety. This depends on the degree of enlight- 
enment, on the point Up to which the distinction between 
dtman and andtman is supposed to be real. This is amply 
%orne out by the fact that the experience of every individual 
iand mind varies according to the degree of enlightenment it 
has received. 

According, then, to the admita-theory of perception it 
follows that the whole of experience is mere illusion, is 
merely imagination. It is only the logical opposite of 
dtman imagined in the very act of self-realization, which 
being accomplished, the inexpressible Absolute is fully recog- 
nised. This perception of andtman in dtman is adkydsa^ as 
explained before. What is adhydsa'i Adhydaa generally 
means false knowledge, but the point deserving notice is the 
way in which it arises. There are a number of theories to 
explain the mode of this kind of false knowledge, as to the 
nature of which all are more or less agreed. We shall con- 
tinue to describe perception by the Sdnkhya word khydti^ and 
to refer constantly in this discussion to the familiar illustra- 
tion of the snake in the rope. All are agreed upon the fact 
that the knowledge of the rope as snake is false, illusive. 
The point is how it arises. It will be convenient to demon- 
strate the adtaita-^Bitioxi at the beginning. The advaita" 
theory of adhydm is called anirvachantyakhydtivdda {^ih,^ 
theory of unaccountableness). 

In the first place how do we perceive the rope as rope or 
IIS any other thing whatever? The general theory of percep- 
tion tells us that the chetana of the perceiving subject, unites 



XX INTRODUCTION. 

itsfelf Vitli the chetana of the perceived object, and percep- 
tion ensues. If the rope is mistaken for a snake, owing to 
dimness of light, or some defect in the eye, or any other reason 
whatever, still an explanation of false knowledge ought to be 
found from within the limits of the said theory of perception. 
The avidydL or mAy6, (u e., andtman) always inseparable from 
dtman is present in even the smallest portion, if portion it can 
be called, of dtma% and consequently also in the subject as 
well as object-cA^^ana concerned in every act of perception. 
That such avidj/d is inseparable from dtman is only another 
form of expressing the logical axiom we have alluded to more 
than once. The positive implies its negative, all knowledge 
expressible or expressed in speech is of this nature, and pure 
dtman necessarily implies pure andtman which we call avidyd 
or mdyd. This avidyd in the Buhject-cketana in union with the 
ohjectr-cketanay while the rope perceived as " a something, " 
on account of dimness of light or sight, takes on the form of 
a snake and, as it were, projects or posits the form in the 
" something " which has been perceived by the union of the 
two cketanas. I say " as it were " because the substratum of 
the illusion — snake — is not the rope nor the form in which it 
is perceived, but the chetanu both subject and object, which 
welds into one in the act of perception. The avidyd insepara- 
ble from this chetana conditioned, on the one hand by the 
perceiving subject, and on the other by the perceived object, 
sends forth the snake or any similar form, and presents it as 
the object, in a manner which can in no way be accounted 
for. It is the very nature of avidyd to send forth illusions of 
any and every kind, and so long as we are not suflSciently 
enlightened as to the conditionless nature of absolute chetana 
we continue to be deluded by the creations of andtmd ot 
avidyd. This false knowledge then is produced we know 
definitely from what, in what, for what, but we are entirely 
in the dark as to the main question, the how of it. The 
modus operandi v& unaccountable, inexpressible. This theory 
is therefore aptly called the theory of unaccountablenesa 
{anirvackaniyakhydtivdda). 



INTRODUCTIOX. XXI 

It may naturally be asked what distinction is then left 
between true and false perception ? From the standpoint of 
the absolute, all perception short of absolute self-realization 
is false, and the perception of the rope as rope or a snake or 
a stick, is as much false as any other. The words "false " and 
" true " as applied to the snake and the rope in the illustra- 
tion we used in relation to experience, the whole of which from 
the absolute point of view is entirely false. All science, all 
causation and generalization, are possible in the domain of 
»t4y4— experience, — and are, of course, false in the absolute. 
That there are a thousand ways of explaining one and the same 
fact of nature is adduced by the Advaita as sure proof of the 
utter unreliableness of that which is called " truth " in ex- 
perience. The advaita therefore makes a distinction and di- 
vides truth into three kinds — PdramArthika^ the Absolute, 
Vyavakarika^ the relative, and PratibhAsika^V[iQ imaginary. 
Absolute Self-realization is ParamArtha; the region between 
the absolute and the relative is Pratibhciaa; simple imagination, 
and the realm of experience is Vyavahdra. Each of the 
latter two is real in its own province, but both are false in the 
third. So these three departments on the cosmic plane corres- 
pond to the three states of sleep, dream and waking on the 
individual plane. 

To the Unaccountableness-theory of the Advaita are opposed 
five others which try to explain the nature of false know- 
ledge in different ways. The first is called the Satkkyativdda. 
The particles constituting the rope, contain the particles 
of the snake as well, in themselves, and one or other of their 
forms becomes perceptible under proper conditions. This 
theory does not accord with the received facts of knowledge 
in general. When we know a thing as being such and such we 
necessarily discriminate it from other things, and assimilate it 
with certain others. In the very act of discrimination we refuse 
the object any nature other than the one actually perceived. 
While we perceive the rope we perceive it of course as not snake, 
not garland, not anything but rope. How in the very nature of 
such knowledge is it possible for the rope to change itself into 



XXll INTRODUCTION. 

a snake ? If this were possible we must certainly deSpaii^ of 
all knowledge, general knowledge whatever, and of the 
possibility of any regular experience such as we actually have. 

A second theory asserts the absolute falsity of all knowledge 
and experience. False knowledge has no substratum, nothing 
exists and experience is as much a chimera as dtman itself. 
This theory, called the amtkhydtimda^ carries its refutation on 
the very face of it. You cannot postulate an absolute nega- 
tion from end to end, for it would then be a merely abaurd 
proposition, inasmuch as the asserting subject is a patent 
positive existence. This theory is therefore entirely inconsis- 
tent with the facts of experience, and is based on an entire 
misconception of the nature of knowledge in general. 

A third explanation of experience is that of the subjective 
idealist — ^the mjnanavAdin. All objects are pre-existent in 
the subject in the form of vdsands (ideas)* These subjective 
ideas are supposed to exist externally as objects of experience. 
This is called the dtmakhydtivMa^ because the dtman^ which 
is all vijndna — ideas, — perceives itself beyond itself, of course 
falsely. Under dtmakhydti is included also the opposite 
theory of objective idealism. The word dtman in the com- 
pound dtmakhydti is capable of being interpreted as a noun 
and a pronoun. When it is interpreted as a noun it refers to 
the subject (a^w^a?^) and the word (JtoaMya^e means subjective 
idealism. When the word dtman refers to a pronoun, the 
compound means " perception of itself," mz,^ the object, and 
the same word expresses the theory of objective idealism. 
Objects dp exist, but ever beyond human knowledge like 
the noumena of Kant. What we perceive are only the 
phenomena, mere forms of these things, which forms are 
assimilated by the perceiving mind. Here it is evident, as 
suggested by Gaudap&da (verses 24 to 28, ch. iv), that 
objective idealism* demolishes the conclusions of subjective 

* CaUed hihy6iHhamjnA,na'fMa in opposition to the pure tijnAnavdda. 
Both these vAdins belong to Buddhism as do also the adyocates of the 
OBotkhyUifsAda described before. 



INTRODUCTION. XXUl 

idealism which again shares the same fate before Absolute 
Idealism — ^the theory of unaccountableness. If we see the 
mere shadows of objects the seer too must equally be a 
shadow, and so on ad infinitum till we are landed in absolute 
nihilism, or scepticism. The objects of experience are all 
there, the perceiving subject too is there, we only do not 
know how the former are produced in relation to the latter. 
This is the position of Absolute Idealism which looks upon the 
whole of experience as unaccountably present and yet nothing 
in itself. 

The fourth view is the one that is commonly received. It lays 
down that the rope being imperfectly perceived, such imperfect 
perception helps, through similarity etc., to awaken the me- 
mory of a past experience of some actual snake, and that this 
awakened memory of the snake is at once perceived as the 
*' snake in the rope. " This is called anyathdkhySitivdda^ the 
seeing one thing in place of another. This too does not hold 
water. That the perception — snake — could be only the 
previous memory of a snake now re-awakened into being, is 
not in accord with facts. For the false snake (in the rope) 
is of equal dimensions with the rope in relation with the eye, 
and not of the dimensions of the snake seen before, which it 
ought to be if the present perception were only a re-awaken- 
ing of the memory of some past snake. 

The fifth and last explanation of experience is that of the 
akkyativdda of the Mtmamsakas. It is held that knowledge, 
right or wrong, is after all a species of the genus knowledge, 
for otherwise it were impossible to say " I know this is false 
knowledge." Both, inasmuch as there are species of the same 
true genus, ought to be true in themselves. The rope is as 
true as the snake of our perception ;— the one as an object of 
direct perception, the other as an object of indirect perception, 
^iz.^i memory. This theory is a modification of the one preced- 
ing, but it differs from that in ignoring false knowledge alto- 
gether. (1) The two propositions that what we call false know- 
ledge is an act of true memory, and (3) that the object perceived 



XXIV INTRODUCTION. 

is perceived directly, are, two statements which we may grant 
for a moment as true. But how explain tae single percepr 
tion : " this is a snake," where there is no snake whatever, 
but a mere piece of rope ? We are, in this perception, not 
conscious of two mental processes, direct perception and 
memory, for simultaneous mental action is not possible ; and 
our only explanation of the single act of perception remains 
obviously to be found again in the theory of Unaccounta- 
bleness. 

The Advaita explains experience by what is called the 
anirvachaniyakhydti^ and leaves science to explain the laws of 
experience as it likes ; for from the stand-point of the 
Absolute everything other than itself is somehow existent in,, 
and of itself, but nothing real in itself. The aniwachaniya' 
hhydtivdda is of course difficult of compreheasion, and several 
writers on the Advaita have set forth a number of easy 
illustrations and theories to help the beginner to a proper 
understanding of that 'odda. Chief among these is the drki-- 
«r^2e/(^rfa, the theory that the world of experience is coeval and 
coextensive with perception. This is very near the anirva-^ 
chantyakhydtivdda ; it only puts the difficult logical position 
in homely language, by saying that things do not exist out of 
the sight of the seer. All perception is a mere process of 
(false) externalisation. This vdda therefore is pure idealism. 
Absolute Idealism, inasmuch as the driti is none other than 
the Absolute, dtman. The opposite theory is called srstidriti^ 
something akin to objective idealism. The world of experi- 
ence exists, and we perceive only the phenomena of this- 
world. Happiness or misery, is only a result of mental 
creation, it does not exists in the " objects-in-themselves '* 
(the real srsti). Things-in-themselves are all blissful, the 
creations of the mind produce misery and evil. This theory is 
not of course near to the Advaita theory of unaccountableness,- 
but it presents a view of things sufficient to lead the way to 
the last word of Advaita philosophy on the subject. The 
noumena are an unaccountable fiction and the whole world of 
experience exists, even according to this theory, in an un-- 



iu^coimtable manner. A third theory fn that of BinAdt and 
Pratiiimiai the origibal and its reflection, already explained 
in the illustration of the mirror. The Absolate is the originaU 
the non^absolnte the reflection, and experience, though pre- 
senting an innumerable variety of forms, is just like an oceaa 
or a lake reflecting the sun in a variety of forms andeolonrs 
in every ripple upon its surging bosom. Thei^ is unity in 
variety^ the Absolute being the real Unit. A fourth theory 
talks of the limited and limitless (dfHicAeAAedyivdehckAedaAa)^ 
the limitless being conditioned by imaginary limits.. Limits 
are of three kinds : those of time, those of space, and those 
of nature. The Absolute knows none of these, but the variety 
of experience is explicable on tbe theory of limits, of course 
imaginary and false. All that is required is to forget the 
three conditioi^ joi time, space, and nature, by reducing them 
to mere subjective forms^the very conditions of experience— 
»nd thus merging all variety in Unity, all relativity in the 
Absolute. The last is the theory of Ajdii^ non»evolution, as 
I propose to translate the wotd. The whole of erperience 
has never been evolved^ never been produced, it is simply 
0,nirtackaniya as are objects seen in dream. AjiU is the 
exact corollary of the anirvachaniyakhydtivAday and Gaudap&da 
has tried successfuly to explain it in his Kdriids on the 
MdndukyopamsAad. The very first axiom of ajdti is the 
negation of all causation : Absolute Idealism requires that 
it should be so. 

The phenomena of experience present themselves to our 
mind in certain relations and appear indeed to obey certain 
laws. They appear principally in the relation of sequence^ 
eo-existence, resemblance, and pure existence. Of these tbe 
most important is that of sequence or succession in time^ 
known as the law of causation. The coherence of sdentifio 
truth and the possibility of general knowledge depend oq the 
stability of this law. The cause of a thing is defined as an 
invariable antecedent^ but with all our knowledge we can 
never say with certainty what constitutes the ** invariable* 
ness^ef an antecedent sufficient to constitute it a "cause'* 

D 



ttVl H^TRODUCTIOK- j 

in all time tx) come. The whole of the experimental icnethoa 
of modern science, and .the theory of Induction to which ic 
appeals for a logical rationale of its existence as the only 
instrument of arriving at truth, is based only upon a theofjr 
of Probability. Every conclusion is only a probable cohclu*- 
Bion which the thousandth experiment or instance may 
upset in a moment* With this degree of certainty in our 
xsonclusion, and this limitedness of our psychic vision, we can . 
hardly be justified in calling anything the true cause of any | 
other thing. 

But again what is there in experience which warrants the 
conclusion that a certain thing or condition is the cause of 
a certain other thing or condition ? There is nothing in ex- 
perience which can give us the idea which invariably binds 
cause and effect to each other ; that idea of invariableness is 
given by the mind, experience only showing that certain 
events follow certain other events. 

This invariable relation is called samavdya in Sanskrit, and 
the AdDaita has emphatically denied the possible existence ) 
of any such relation. Because a certain thing or condition 1 
is antecedent to a certain consequent, you cannot say that 
there is any invariable relation between the two. This idea of | 
invariableness (samat^dya) is given by the mind, and is in 
fact a condition of the possibility of the relation between 
subject (mind) and object (experience), in other words, of the 
possibility of knowledge. Just as time and space are the 
very conditions of knowledge, so is this idea of invariableness, 
the essence of causation, another condition of knowledge. In 
fact Kant regards these three, time, space, and causation as 
the schema of the mind on its way to experience. Thus cau- 
sation reduces itself to a mere idea. But this is still 
subjective idealism, explained by Qaudapfi.da on the analogy 
of our dream-experience and the ideas of causation, time and 
space, we have in that condition. Absolute Idealism says, 
emphiatically, that there has from the beginning been nothing 
like experience which appears as sUch in -some unaccountabli 



INTRODUOTIOK. »fVl> 

^maoner^ and that therefore all idea of causation is simplj 
aut of the question. The very natnre of dtman implies an- 
dtman as has been repeatedly shown in the preceding pages, 
and experience is only the result of adhydsa^ necessary for 
i^a«<W2 on its way to self-realisation, which being accompli- 
shed, the Absolute shines in native bliss, characterless, distinc- 
tionless and free from the idea of all duality. 

The Advaita position of Absolute Idealism has so far been 
rendered sufficiently clear. I have done as much as lay in 
my power to present the doctrine in a form as clearly in- 
.telligible as possible. It remains only to say that the v^hole 
of Gaudapdda's Kdrika on the Mdndukya and the Bhdshya of 
S'ankara on either, is another exposition of the same doctrine 
in another manner and from a different stand-point. I am 
sure this short rSsume of the main conclusions elaborated 
on the lines of modern thought will prove itself of value to 
the unfamiliar reader of Gaudap^a. 

Some further explanation in detail of some of the points 
likely to occur to an intelligent reader of Gaudapfi.da and 
S'ankara may notj however, be out of place : — 

(1) In verse 14 chapter II, a distinction is made between 
waking and dream experience by stating that the former is 
cognizant of objects having relation to two points in time, and 
that the latter is cognizant of objects having relation to only 
one. A difficulty is hereupon suggested as to how the one 
experience could at all be like the other, thus calling in 
question the soundness of the argument about the futility of 
causation and the whole of experience based upon this simi- 
larity. It may appear that GaudapMa has made no attempt 
to face this difficulty save by mere assertions to the contrary. 
On close attention, however, to verse 14, it will' appear that he 
has suggested a reply in the words " the difference between 
them is not based on any other ground." The words '' other 
ground " are commented upon by S'knkara who explains that 
the circumstance that objects of waking experience answer 
to two points in time does not in itself constitute any fund«r 



xxf^ BfTRoiyiTCTiair* 

Inental gvonud of difference bet ween the two Hnds of experiene*^ 
for in dream objectt are seen to answer to two points im 
time. Henee if there is no '' other ground " than the circnii»tanee 
of answering to two points in time to mark off waking from 
dream experience, there is nothing to prevent the identity of 
the two soaght to be established hj Gbindap&da. 

Again, verse 14 follows close upon 13 in which GandapAda 
enunciates his theory of Absolute IdeaUsm in the plainest 
terms, and seeks to show in this subsequent verse (14th) the 
futility of causation and experience by pomting out that there 
is nothing to differentiate waking from dream-experience. 
As in dream there is nothing in the form of sensation, sense- 
knowledge, to act as the cause of the phenomena which are all 
produced without a cause, so to speak, so in waking experience 
the whole of our knowledge is a causeless fiction, a mere idea 
in the Absolute. To memory as the cause of dream-experi- 
ence the Advaita does not take ^ception, but it does not call 
it memory if or reasons given in the discussion on Anyatha- 
Khydtu The Admita calls it adhyasa^ the unaccountable 
action of anatman. The argument so far is certainly plain 
enough and a complete grasp of the meaning of ddhyasa and 
Anirvachaniya-khyAti will help a great deal in understanding 
the apparent obscurities of the text. 

(2) Verse 32, chapter II, is another knotty point likely 
to lead to some confusion of thought if not cleared up at the 
beginning. The argument ^ that duality is as unreal as the 
snake for which the rope is mistaken, is, for the sake of 
showing the line of argument, supposed by S'ankara to be 
met by the counter-argument that the rope ought equally to 
be unreal, and also dtman corresponding to the rope of the 
illustration. The answer which the great teacher makes to 
this counter-argument is put in the following words : ^'^ on the 
disappearance of the imaginations the unimagined residuum 
that persists is, for that very persistence, not an imagination, 
but the reality " ; and further on he adds '* the existence of 
the person imagining must be antecedent to the imagination* 



INTROPUCTIOW. XXI* 

And cK^ttherefiDre to be admitted as absolutely real." Tbi9 
put in plain language means that the rope is not imagination 
like the snake, relatively speaking. Every act of knowledge 
implies subject, object^ and instrument. If the imagination 
is Jhlse the substratum of the imagination an«t the person 
imagining must be real. In the domain of the relative this 
is conclusive, and it is not open to the objector to say that 
the rope too is mere imagination. But when we pass to the 
Absolute, then indeed the rope and everything included in 
experience share the same fate as the snake, and atman^ the 
Absolute, stands as the only reality — ^the rope of the illustra- 
tion. One cannot push this illustration to the extreme of 
saying that dtman too is unreal like the snake or the rope» 
for the obvious reason that in the very act of making the 
negation you assert the positive existence of the subject — dt- 
man. In short the opposite is quite inconceivable, and the 
" inconceivability of the opposite " is in this instance at least 
a trustworthy test of truth. This is the sum and substance 
of what S'ankara says in reply to the nihilitie argument. 
But a reference to our theory of Aninoachaniyakhydti will 
bear us out of the difficulty in the easiest manner. The sub- 
stratum of knowledge, or false knowledge as all experience 
is supposed to be, is the chetana in the subject combined with 
the chetana in the object. What is perceived as rope or snake 
is, through the action of avidyd^ inseparable from the chetana^ 
and is entirely false, as is proved when the chetana is realized 
in its completeness. But no amount of reasoning can prove 
that this chetana itself is nothing. The rope is of course as much 
unreal as the snake from the stand-point of the Absolute. It 
is only a result of the externalising tendency of avidyd in- 
separable from dtman whose entire realization is sufficient to 
show the futility of every thing besides itself. 

(3) In his comments on the next verse S'ankara has again 
adverted to the rationale of Absolute Idealism. He says " ob- 
jects are cc^nized by a subject in action not by one in simple 
siibsifitance." He means in these words to account for the 
possibility of experience ; but even as a simple psychological 



XXX INTRODUCTION. 

truth I do not know if the principle i^ incorrect. The snl^efc 
<mind) does not cognize sensation if it exercises itself in no way 
in the form of attention ; and even after a sensation is received, 
perception cannot ensue if the mind does not immediately 
refer the sensation to something external or internal. But 
this apart, the point which S'ankara wants to explain in these 
words is the possibility of experience. And indeed on the 
very first principles of psychology, sensation and perceptiou 
(the whole of experience) are possible when the subject is in 
motion, as just shown. According to S'ankara and the 
Veddnta in general a "subject in mere subistence" is the 
Absolute Atman, the Unconditioned. Such subject is certainly 
cognizant of nothing beside itself, for it is the Advaita^ one 
without a second. 

This position, however, need not necessarily contradict the 
general position of the Veddnta that the knower in all forms 
and conditions is none but dtman. For though in " simple 
subsistence " this dtman is cognizant of nothing, still in its 
steps to self-realization it reflects an andtman as against 
itself and actively cognizes it till self-realization fuses dtman 
and andtman into the Absolute Unit, the Ineffable Substance. 
That a subject in action should be cognizant of things besides 
itself, and not one in entire subsistence, is said with the view 
of explaining how, and by what steps, the Absolute returns to 
itself. S'ankara tries to set forth the steps of the process and 
winds up with the conclusion already enunciated in verse 32. 

(4) Another point, likely to be misunderstood, is the 
argument that dtman cannot be unreal, because incomprehen- 
sible, for we see its effects. This is advanced by S'ankara in 
his comments on verse 27, chapter III. It has been repea- 
tedly and emphatically asserted that causation is a mere 
chimera, and the statement that we know dtman by its effects 
is likely to lead at least to serious misunderstanding. 
By " effects " is here meant what we generally call experi- 
ence. That experience is somehow unaccountably possible 
in dtman has already been shown more than once. We 
generally regard sensation as the cause of knowledge or 



INTK0DUCTI02T. ^tXXV 

{reifception, and infer the existence of an external world of 
experience from our sense-impressions. In the anirvachu" 
niyakhydtivdda^ sensation is not regarded as the cause of 
perception, all that we. call sensation or perception is only 
the unaccountable action of avidyd inseparably latent in all 
ehetana whatever. Here then there is nothing like causation, 
I mean sensation as cause leading to perception as effect; 
and dtman^ or ehetana, is not the cause of the forms of ex- 
perience but only a substratum, for the time being. Hence 
In truth atman has nothing related to it as " effects.'' But 
the word has evidently been used by S'ankara in a metapho- 
rical sense, implying that all knowledge of every description can 
liot be possible if atman were not admitted as a something 
real. That this metaphorical sense of the word "effects'* 
is the one which S'ankara had in mind, and that he speaks of 
atman as cause in the sense of being but the substratum of 
illusion is rendered plain by the very word "substratum," 
which he uses in connection with atman a few lines further. 

The more clearly to explain this point, it will be convenient 
to explain the three planes of knowledge which the Advaita 
defines for the purpose of explaining experience. The plane 
of the Absolute is called Paramdrtha ; that of the imaginary, 
as of the snake in the rope, is called Pratibhasa. Experience 
is all Pratibhdsa — counter-reflection as the word literally 
means, that is, the counter-reflection of dtman viz., anatman. 
The third plane is that of Vyavahdra which though one with 
Pratibhdsa, being entirely of the nature of dream as already 
explained, is regarded as real, as the real world of experience 
by the grossly ignorant. To these three planes of knowledge 
correspond the three conditions of absolute rest (sle(?p), dream 
and waking. Pratibhdsa and Vyavahdra are false, and yet 
they exist through the counter-existence of dtman, viz,, an- 
dtman. Whence too it is plain the whole of experience may 
in a way be called the effect otdtmafi; may, in other words, be 
called that something which cannot exist except through 
dtman. In Advaita works such metaphorical use of language 
is very common, and to a student of Absolute Idealism it 



should present no difficnlty whate^r inasmuch ss i«i^ttif(« 
i« impossible without duality which is false from his standi* 
point.* 

(5) " Brahman is all thought." This is an expression we 
meet with at every step in the text and commentary. In 
verse 35, chapter III, and commentary, Brahman is declared 
to be all thought. A question naturally arises. If Brahman 
is all thought and if experience also is the result of mental 
action (t.e.^ thought) as is often asserted in the text and 
commentary, how can we say that experience is futile or 
false? The word "thought" as used of dtman is, however^ 
not to be understood as that which is the result of mental 
action. In the English language there is unfortunately no 
adequate word to denote anything higher than mind as the 
subject of thought, the very essence of thought or knowledge. 
I have used the word thought on the authority of Dr. Caird, 
as opposed to niatter, and belonging as an essential attribuic;^ 
so to speak, to dtman alone. In Sanskrit it is calle* jnAna^ 
whereas the result of mental action is eriTed Vichdrq 
AAank&ra^ Buddhi, and a ^number #f similar names nil 
implying jndna as a commatr substratum. I have thus 
used the word thoaght to denote that absolute antithesis 
of matter without which existence itself will be imposible. 
I have occasionally used the word "Sentiency" also, a^ 
suggested by my friend Mr. Bertram Keightley who 
has rendered me much important assistance in this direc^ 
tion. The word for mind in the Veddnta is Manas^ the 
thinker, or more commonly Antahkarana the inner sense of 
knowledge. With these explanations the difficulty must dis- 
appear. In all such expressions as ''Brahman is all thoi^ght," 
the word thought has nothing to do with what we nnderstand 
by the phrase * mental action*; nor do such expressions a» 

* This wiU raise a side-issae as to whether knowledgt is powible without 
language 7 The Advaita answers this query in the affirmative. Communioa* 
tion of knowledge is not possible without language hut Bimple thought iqf 
possible. 



INTRODUCnON. MXIU 

^Brahman is without mind ' (verse 37, chapter III), mean that 
Brahman is not thought in the above sense of the term* 

(6) We find mention made in several places (verse 1 1 , chapter 
IV, for example) of the attributes of dtman. How is it possible 
to say that Atnian, the characterless, has any attributes ? The 
expression " attributes of dtman " does not however imply a 
substratum and attributes contained in that substratum. The 
Veddnta distinctly maintains, in opposition to the NaiySiyikas^ 
that the thing and its attributes are not apart, the attributes 
make the thing which does not exist apart from, and out of them. 
This is quite in accord with the theory of Absolute Idealism. 
As there is nothing in the form of substratum apart from the 
attributes, so are the attributes nothing apart from the substra- 
tum. In other words, both are one and the same thing. Such 
expressions as "attributes of dtmarC^ are therefore only meta- 
phorical and are resorted to only for purposes of explanation. 

(7) The last but not the least point we may touch upon 
in this place is the materialistic position as opposed to the 
idealistic one examined in the five verses from 24 to 28> 
chapter IV. It is urged by the opponent that subjective 
inpressions cannot exist without objective causes ; and that 
the actual presence of pain and evil in our experience of 
things gives the lie direct to the theory of idealism. The 
writer at first meets these objections by accepting the 
position of the Vijndnavdda explained before under dtma" 
kkydM. By arguing (verses 26-27) that causation is only a 
subjective idea, he says that it does not exist in the objective* 
form which we give to it. The commentator begins by 
arguing that jars etc., which the opponent regards as the 
objective cause of subjective impressions, are themselves 
idthout a cause. That is to say, they have nothing to 
rest upon but the very subject which perceives them, and 
there is nothing to show that they have an independent 
existence out of it. We must again refer to the modern 
theories of sensation and perception. Perception is only a 
reference of our sensations to something external. The new- 



born child has no knowledge of this process. Sensations of 
Bonnd or tonch do not at first lead it to localise them in 
apace* It is obvious that hereditary tendency developed by 
force of environment teaches the child to localize its 
sensations. But we ought to examine the relation between 
sensation and perception a little further before turning this 
conclusion to any account. Sensation leads to perception of th^ 
objective world which in its turn is supposed to produce 
sensations. No doubt both sensation and perception , are 
modifications of the subject which is active in perception 
luid passive in sensation, so that there is no mistake in saying 
^fit the objective world is the cause of sensation. That 
perception should reveal to us an objective world which pro- 
duces sensations, the cause of perception, is simply arguing 
in a circle. And the way out of this circle is pointed out by 
the experience of a new-born child to which we have just 
alluded. It has no perception of the objective world, it has mere 
sensation^ and it learns to connect sensation with perception 
only by force of habit, it may be added right or wrong. The 
Advaita says it is the force of this wrong habit that teaches 
us to find a cause for our sensations beyond the subject : in 
fact the cause, if cause it can be called, is in the avidyA inse- 
parably present in every subject (chetana). This has already 
been explained more than once. It is plain then that experi- 
ence has nothing to rest upon but the very subject which 
perceives, and there is nothing to show that experience has 
any basis of independent existence out of it. Analyse any 
object, you cannot find, carrying your analysis to the infini- 
tesimal atom, anything at its base save an empty form and 
name plus the perceiving subject, but for which the name 
and form too will be nowhere. On this reasoning rests 
also the identity of cause and efi^ect maintained by the 
Adnaita. It is also necessary to remark en passant that 
extension and resistance, the two essential characteristics 
of matter, are regarded in Veddntic psychology as fastened 
on experience, on sensation, by the very nature of the 
perceiving subject, and also by the false theory of percep- 



iNTRODuqrioiir. xxw 

lion taught as by the force of heredity and habit. Time 
and space are as much the mere conditions, the schema^ 
of knowledge as causation itself. Thus all objective causes 
reduce themselves to the unaccountable action of the subject 
whose very nature is an inexhaustible storehouse of vdsands 
of every variety, perpetually externalising themselves, till 
full realization of the Absolute puts an end to their activity 
and all that results fix)m it by showing the subject as the All. 
If, on receiving a sensation, the subject were to refer itself 
not to anything in space, as it is by habit led to do, but to its 
own nature, the Advaita promises that it will receive enlightea- 
naent sufficient to show that the Absolute subject ( dtman ) 
shines within and without in its pure unity. This in brief 
'is the gist of what is urged by GJaudapfi,da and explained by 
S'ankara in the verses under consideration. Nothing more 
is now required to be said in explanation of the feeling of 
pain which the materialist assigns to an objective cause. 
This feeling too is part of the nature of the subject, and 
proves nothing in favour of the materialistic position. More- 
over if we refer to the SAnkhya theory of pleasure and pain, 
this point will appear in yet clearer light. All pleasure or 
pain belongs only to the subject (mind) says Kapila, for, if it 
belonged essentially to the object, the same object cannot be 
the cause of different and even divergent feelings to different 
persons. And as to objects of constant nature, the con- 
stancy is the very essence of the subject and therefore not 
a cause of pleasure or pain to the subject. 

The argument so far is based on what I call Subjective 
•Idealism — the Vijndna^vdda. GaudapMa goes with it so far, 
but abandons it the next moment, and proceeds to his theory 
of Absolute Idealism (verse 28). Just as external perception 
is shown to be false, so must internal, or what is generally 
called intra-organic perception, be equally false. The mind as"^ 
an object of perception and causing certain internal feelings 
or sensations is itself nothing but mere chetana^ at any rate a 
modification of it. All objective phenomena have been reduced 
to mental action which in its turn is as much a phenomenon 



XXXVl INtRODUCnOK. 

to the Absolute subject as external objects a^e tothe mind. Thw 
^oes the Ad'&aita argue to the Absolute. It defines « subject 
as that which, while perceiving phenomena, remains itself 
unaffected and unique. Thus the eye while perceiving 
phenomena of the objective world becomes the subject. 
But the eye in its turn becomes an object to the mind whidi 
perceives its different conditions and changes. The mind, 
made up of feeling, intelligence, and will, must become, &a 
account of this variety of its nature, an object of perception 
to something beyond. This is dtman^ all thought, distinction- 
less, and characterless, and therefore the last essence of 
knowledge, the Unconditioned Absolute. In this way the 
Absolute is shown to be the real substratum of all knowledge 
whatever, and as objects all reduce themselves to creations of 
the mind, the mind itself resolves into the Absolute containing 
within itself the germs of Avidya leading to AdhyAsa and ex- 
perience in general. Even modern science admits that the homo- 
geneous is unstable and must differentiate itself. The Advaita 
expresses the same fact by saying that the Absolute posits 
(adkydropa) the relative as against itself for purposes of self- 
realization. The mind, therefore, is only an idea in the 
Absolute on its way to self-realization and is as much unreal 
as the whole of objective experience. The steps of this evolu- 
tion may be studied from any elementary work like the 
Panchadasi. The point here aimed at is the certain convic- 
tion that you can never think beyond yourself, all your notions 
of evolution, or causation, imply the Absolute whose unaccount- 
able action is sufficient to explain all experience and causa- 
tion. Action, agent, causation, evolution, are all names quite 
inadequately used with reference to the Absolute ; they seem 
only to explain that abstract totality of possible moveable 
existences which we mean by the word Absolute. 

These explanations place the Adtaita theory of amrta^ 
thantya^khySiti in the clearest possible light, and emphatically 
bear out the main thesis of Gaudapftda, which we have styled 
Non-evolution, Aj&tu Where the whole of experience, includ- 
ing tmbject and object, pre-exists in the Absolute and becomes 



INTRODUCTION. XXXfll 

'manifest only as an idea merging nltimately into Absolute 
Unity, it is vain to speak of causation or evolution. But all 
the same the Advaita takes no exception to any theory of the 
physical universe ; for, from the stand-point of Param&rtha^ 
it will be only one more idea in the innumerable series of 
such appearing and disappearing in the Absolute. It does not 
here concern us to discuss the theory, only an hypothesis,* 
'Which the Advaita proposes by way of explaining the steps in 
the process of dimarCa progress through experience and retura 
into itself. For, from the Absolute stand-point of Gaudap&da, 
"" There is no dissolution, no creation, none in bondage, no 
pupilage, none desirous of liberation, none liberated — this is 
the Absolute Truth" (chapter II, verse 32). What the 
different Upaniahada and certain works on Veddnta describe 
as evolution is ^' only a means to the end," says Gaudap&da 
(chapter III, verse 15), — ^the end that is realization of 
Absolute Unity (abheda). 

This condition of abheda (non-separateness) is often referred 
to in the text as the Fourth. We have already seen that there 
are three planes of knowledge and three conditions of experience. 
The fourth is no plane nor any condition ; it is called the 
Fourth only by way of explanation, for it is none other than 
the negation of the three. This fourth condition is called 
turiydvaathdy the condition where the Absolute, Abheda^ is 
perfectly realized. That the fourth is the negation of the 
three does not imply the unreality of the fourth, for the 
Advaita holds with Hegel that the negative of any positive is 
also a positive. The text of the Mdnd^kya often speaks of 
this fourth and identifies it with Brahman^ Atmariy and lastly 
with the word Aum. The burden of this brief Upaniskad is 
an explanation of this monosyllable Aum. It is declared, 
after an analysis of the four parts of dtman and of the word 
Aum^ that both are the san^ Absolute, meaning that the word 
is a fit symbol of Brahman. This comparison has the object 
of showing that the word Aum is an embodiment of the 

* Readers hfiying an interest in the subject may purine it in my ''Monism 
or Advaitlsm?" 



XXXVm INTRODUCTIOK. 

essence of the whole of the Veda^ viz.^ Brahman, which a 
taught and described in its esoteric portions, the Upaniskads. 
And indeed it is impossible not t to admire the intelligence 
and power of concentrated thonght possessed by those who 
have thus tried to compress the whole essence of Vedic 
learning in a homely symbol of three letters. Well might 
the Brdhmanas use this very [pliable as the first and last 
word of every religious ceremony. The whole syllable, as 
every member of it, is endowed by GaudapMa with occult 
powers of the supremest character, and it is a fact that 
followers of the Advaita constantly keep up a sort of internal 
mental repetition of it enjoying the highest pleasure of 
mental ecstacy ensuing from this mystic practice. Let me say, 
in finishing these explanations, that the Kdrikds of Qaudapftda 
extend over four chapters. The first explains the text of the 
Mdndiikya ;t\ie second shows the illusive character of experience^ 
thus enunciating the position of Non-evolution or Absolute Idea- 
lism; the third expands the theory and establi&hes the Advaita 
position ; and the fourth completes the discussion by showing 
that all the difierent schemes of thought hold opinions mutu- 
ally destructive of one another and pointing to the Advaita 
theory of Non-evolution, which does not come into conflict 
with any of them, and which, therefore, is in short the real 
synthesis of all the different phases of thought. 

The Advaita is indeed the synthesis of all phases of thought 
and the enunciation of this position brings us near the con- 
cluding part of this introduction. We have seen how the 
Advaita meets the theory of the two Nydya% by refusing ta 
accept that sensation is the source of knowledge and that 
substance is separate from its attributes. Kapila no doubt 
had partially found out the mistake, but his dualism of Vrakrti 
and Puruaha was not the true interpretation of the facta 
of experience. It was false, because Prakrti as an external 
objective cause of evolution cannot be shown to exi&t, and 
Purusha as the unaffected witness of Prakrti cannot be 
shown to set it in motion. The psychology of Kanftda and 
Gautama had undergone considerable modifications at the 



INTRODUCTION. XXXIX 

hiaads of Kapila. His theory of kkyAti is the nearest 
approach to the modern theory of perception. But the 
Advaita does not accept this, and indeed cannot. For Prakrtiy 
the root of experiences, which depends for its very existence 
on d^tman (the Absolute), cannot be accepted as the cause of 
sensation leading to perception, or as the cause modifying 
buddhi in the theory oikhydii. This would be simply arguing 
in a circle as has been explained before. The Advaita 
therefore improves the theory of khydli into its own theory 
of vrttiy the theory that perception is mere externalization 
(false of course) of dtman^ not on account of sensation, but 
through the unaccountable action of anMman. 

This theory of knowledge must include some consideration 
of the instruments of knowledge. The Advaita recognises as 
many as six instruments of knowledge, four of which accord 
with those of the Naiy&yikas and the SdnkhyaSy only with some 
modification as to the manner in which they acquire knowledge. 
An incidental inquiry turns up at this point. Is right 
knowledge knowable as right knowledge at the very moment 
of receiving the knowledge ? In other words, do the instru- 
ments which acquire knowledge acquire also the knowledge 
that it is right ? The Naiyciyikas say that we have knowledge 
in the first instance, and we determine its character as right or 
wrong afterwards, by inference. The Advaita does not accept 
this position. All knowledge in Advaita philosophy is right 
knowledge and it is always known to be right in a direct 
manner, i. e.^ by the same instrument by which it is known as 
knowledge. But these questions do not concern us, inasmuch 
as they do not occur in the following pages : and I do not 
wish to lead the reader into the intricacies of this abstruse 
discussion. Let it be noted that Absolute Idealism, inasmuch 
as it must hold to the self-cognizability of the Absolute, regards 
all knowledge as right knowledge — false knowledge being 
nowhere. 

The Jaina theory of relativity can have no ground to stand 
upon if there is nothing Absolute behind it. ^or can the 



Xt INTRODUCTION. 

Buddhistic theory of momentary skandkas meet the fiujta of 
experience, for memory and general knowledge will not be : 
possible on account of the momentary nature of the subject 
{vijnAna-akandka). 

The Advaita thus asserts its claim to being that real syn- 
thesis of thought which Gaudap&da shows it to be ; nay 
more — ^by putting forth a theory of knowledge and experience 
at once the synthesis of all previous attempts in the same direc- 
tion and embracing the conclusions of all of them, as steps in 
the building up of the grand edifice of Absolute Philosophy. 

It remains to consider the practical utility of the various- 
theories of knowledge and experience. In other words, it 
remains to consider the ethical import of the different schools 
of thought ; for practical life is the real field for testing the 
merit of any Scheme thereof, by observing its practical influence 
on the ideal it sets up. The two Nyciyas place happiness 
in permanently freeing the soul from its qualities, the Sdinkhyas 
in " life according to nature " which is further amplified by 
the Yoga of Patanjali. The Mimansakas find the mmmum 
honum in carrying out the injunctions of the Veda. That the 
Mimamsa is out of question in a philosophical inquiry into the 
ethical end of existence is obvious. The Nydya teaches Bhakti 
as the sole means of securing peace and happiness under the 
grace of God. The soul becomes free from misery and lives in 
the grace of God, ever happy, and full of bliss, if it finds out 
the truth with the help of the method of dialectics taught 
in this school, and follows out the code of morals deduced 
from such knowledge. This ethic of duality is here, as every- 
where, the root of all the false theories of ethics ; and the 
doctrine of grace has, in its practical bearings, done the 
greatest harm to the eternal welfare of men by creating false 
distinctions of caste and religion, and by making it easy to 
play fast and loose with ethics and religion according to 
individual convenience. This was clearly seen by Kapila who 
began his theory of evolution with the preliminary that happi- 
ness and misery are all in the subject, not beyond or without 



iNTRODUCnOK'. * XM « 

it. The meauing^ of his " life according to nature" is only 
this, that the subject ( buddki according to him) must realise 
satva'^ndi live in satva^ when certainly all cause of misery and 
evil will be removed, and life according to nature will be fully 
realised. Patanjali has prescribed a number of rules with the 
object of reducing the process of acquiring this condition of 
satva to as mechanical a mode of living and thinking as 
I)08sible. This was certainly an advance on Nydya^ inasmuch 
as happiness was made to depend, not on any external 
causes, but on the light of the internal subject itself. 
But the real subject, the purusha:^ was left partly out of 
account, for though it was the subject of all fruition whatever 
including mokska, it was impossible for it to become free 
from prakrti^ the storehouse of rajas and tamas along with 
satva^ — ^with which it subsists in inseparable union. The 
idea of nature had therefore to be re-constructed. The Advaita 
shows that the theory of many puruskas is no correct reading 
of experience. Thought pervades nature, and the forms of 
experience are so many forms of universal Thought — ^mere 
ideas in the Absolute. Thus Prakrti and Purusha reduce 
themselves to absolute thought. On this improvement in the 
world-conception of Kapila followed a corresponding improve- 
ment in his idea of " life according to nature." Life accord- 
ing to nature henceforth meant life in complete self-realization 
in absolute Atman. The full import of this has yet to be seen* 
The Jaina idea of many j?m5 resembled Kapila's theory of 
mskia^ purushas. In Jaina philosophy every tangible thing 
had 2kjwa : and therefore every atom of this universe had 
equal claim to the kindness and love of every other atom.. 
This was called the ethics of ahirmd, universal love, but this 
love was yet the love between lover and loved, it was not 
Absolute Unity which is the very essence of love, and which 
is the ethical corollary of the Advaita-th^ovy of absolute 
itman. The ethics of the Buddha are in remarkable accord 
with those of the Advaita^ and, but for his anti-orthodox 
preaching, he would have been the first teacher of religion to 
ancient India. 

F 



xKi INTBODUCnON. 

The Adt>aita4heoTy leads to the ethics of universal unity — 
the essence of love — called abheda (non-separateness) by 
Oaudap&da, S'ankara, and other writers. Abheda is the keynote 
of Admita ethics. The enlightened forget all bAeda, and 
realise everything as the All. This need not mean that the 
realization of abheda leads entire cessation of activity or 
action, for one who has realised abheda is neither active nor 
inactive, he acts and yet does not act, as the Bhagavad-QUd 
puts it* For the only thing required is unlearning the false 
habit of localising all sensations in space, instead of referring 
them to the subject within. This practice leads to knowledge 
of &tman which is the same in all, and thus opens the way to 
that abheda which is realized even in the variety of active 
experience. He, who has realised this abheda^ has lost himself 
in the universe, in every thing and all things which make up 
the universe. He breathes with the breath of nature, sees 
with the eye of the All, and thinks with the thoughts of every 
being. He is the All. 

This is described in Advaita works by saying that moksha 
is attained by Jndna; that knowledge leads to liberation. 
This is often misunderstood as implying that theoretical know- 
ing of dtman and speculations regarding its nature and 
relation to experience, lead to mohsha^ place within reach the 
panacea of all misery and evil. But no mistake can be 
greater, or more ruinous in its consequences. Knowledge in 
Advaita philosophy does not mean theoretical, but practical 
knowledge. But even with this explanation the maxim, 
knowledge leads to moksha^ is not fully explained. This way 
of putting it implies that mohsha is a something to be 
acquired, something to be accomplished. But surely all 
the teaching of Absolute Idealism must be lost upon one 
who eannot avoid such obvious errors. Gaudap&da teaches 
the futility of all causation, and says in emphatic terms there 
is no liberation, no way to liberation, none liberated, and so on. 
All this means that from the stand-point of the Absolute 

* Chapter IV. 



IKTOODUCTION. xKtt 

eveiything is as it ought to be, eTerything is &tman and there- 
fore eternally mukta — ^liberated. What appears to the 
contrary in indiyidaal cases is the action of nnacconntable 
adhyasay of the false tendency to externalise sabjectiTe formfi^ 
TMb it is that requires to be done away with ; this it is that 
requires to be unlearnt. This can be done by proper jndtm; 
proper analytical understanding of the phenomena of the 
universe. That knowledge leads to mohha is therefore true 
in the sense- that full knowledge of the absolute substratum 
(adhisthdna) — <f^»2an— demolishes all obstacles in the way of 
complete realization of the native condition of dtman. Enow- 
ledge only shows as within oneself what was deemed to be lost, 
to be beyond grasp, and therefore beyond Self. 

And this liberation by knowledge is the aim of what i» 
called Rdjor'Yoga which consists in complete self-realizatioii^ 
following a thorough practical grasp of the analytical philo^ 
sophy of the Adtaita. The student must at first prepare him- 
self by sufficient mental development for this study, and 
begin practically with the four preliminary stages : viveka 
(discrimination of dtman and andtman^) tairdgya (renun- 
ciation), kamadisampatti (self-control and other cognate 
acquirements), and mumukshutd (desire for liberation). These 
have too often been described in almost all elementary works 
dn Veddnta and RdjorYoga to require more than mere 
mention in this place. After these are fully acquired the 
student should address himself to the study of the Advaita 
philosophy proper, under some practised teacher. This is called 
iravana. He should constantly think over what he learniep 
and acquire complete grasp of the truth, by finding satisfactory 
explanations of everything appearing to the contrary. This' 
iiB called mariana. This is followed by nididht/dsana^ complete 
absorption in the Truth without anything to distract. This 
is that knowledge which leads to moksha. 

There are other means also. Contemplation upon the real 
meaning of such Vedic texts as *' Thou art that " is pointed 
out as the way to moksha. Even Karma (formal religion) 



xliVf- nrrRODUCTioi^.. 

and Up&sand (devotion) are supposed by degrees to lead to^ 
the realization of the abheda tsLnght by the Advaita. But 
with these we are not concerned in this place. The point is 
to generate, by strong conviction, mental force sufficient to 
enable the student to grasp and realise the truth of the Acfvaita^ 
and dive deep into the altruistic meaning of Veddntic teach- 
ing. It is obviously patent that just as in its ontology and 
metaphysics the Advaita is the real synthesis of all thought, 
so in its theory of morals it is the true synthesis of all 
ethics. 

It is, indeed, in the ethical bearings of a doctrine that we 
get the real test of its truth. We have seen that the ethics 
of duality emphasise individuality and lead to selfishness ; 
that life according to nature but mitigates the din of the 
struggle for existence. It is reserved to the Advaita to pour 
oil over the tempestuous waters of turbulent passions and 
interests, and to fuse all distinctions of caste and colour, race 
and religion, kind and class, into the unity of selfless, supreme 
love. There has been no religion full of such toleration and 
over-flowing with such volume of positive love. 

The question of free-will and necessity may require consi- 
deration in this place. The Advaita declares itself in favour 
of free-will. But this position again requires explanation. 
When the whole of experience is reduced to the unaccount- 
able action of avidyd in chetana^ and when the highest ideal 
of happiness is knowledge or self-realization, it is easy to 
understand that the thinking subject is free to act up to this 
ideal by its own unimpeded action, and without the stimulus 
of motives. Self-consciousness is ever free in the widest 
sense of the term, for freedom is the very essence of self- 
consciousness. This, however, on the paramdrtha plane ; on 
the plane of vyavahdra^ where causation holds supreme sway^ 
free-will can have no place. Necessity along with experience 
might be reduced to a mere idea by an effort of jridna^ but in 
the domain of the relative, so long as it holds sway, it is not 
wrong to say that free-will has no place. . 



INTRODUCTION. Xlv 

The superiority of the Advaita is thus estabUshed on all 
hands, and I venture to say all modern theories of ethics,, 
whether derived from intuition or experience, cannot bear 
examination in the light of abkeda. The theory of the 
greatest good of the greatest number is met with a difficulty 
in lemine. What is the good ? This query opens up afresh 
the whole question of physics and metaphysics. The intui- 
tional theory of conscience would serve the purpose of sub- 
jective idealism, but would be of no use in the non-dualistic 
Advaita. The conscience-theory fails like the utilitarian 
theory to supply a universal standard of right. In the 
Advaita there is no doubt as to the moral standard — abheda^ 
self-realization, knowledge. These are all well-defined terms 
deduced from an accurately reasoned out theory of the cosmos. 
And moreover they are easy of reference, as being within 
reach of every individual consciousness. 

Natural selection and survival of the fittest are two opinions, 
derived from the evolution-hypothesis. They lead to the 
ethical theory of the materialistic " let-alonists," so to speak. 
It is really a theory not of the survival of the fittest iu the fierce 
struggle for existence, but of the survival of the strongest. It 
sets up mere force — blind animal force, strong self-will — as the 
moral standard of life, and preaches an ethics in accord with 
the proverb " every one for himself and the devil take the 
hindmost." This theory stands self-refuted inasmuch as it 
ignores the intellectual and emotional side of human nature, 
and emphasises mere individuality and selfishness — the bane 
of modern civilization. 

It may be argued that annihilation of individuality would 
deprive the world of some of the best springs of great action. 
This is only a question of opinion and possibilities, for the 
experiment in one of its aspects has never been, tried on any 
sufficient scale. The result of individuality and selfishness, 
in every great centre of civilization, amply shows itself in star- 
vation, crime, refinements of cruelty and vengence, hypocrisy 
and cant, which meet us in all directions. Altruism though 



xlvi INTRODUCTION. 

never observed on any wide national scale has shown the best 
results imaginable, wherever it has found its way in theory or 
practice. The modern socialistic movements, and all cognate 
schemes of nationalism, anarchism, and a number of other "isms" 
constitute the clearest commentary on the boasted civilization 
reared upon individuality and selfishness. Altruism has 
shown its effects at different times, up to the present date, in 
the history of the Indian nation ; and Altruism, or abheda^ the 
true outcome of Advaita philosophy, is the only way to esta- 
blish heaven upon earth, and ought to be the future religion 
of civilized mankind. 

M. N. DVIVEDI. 



SM MiNDUKYOPANiSEAD. 



THE COMMENTATOR'S BENEDICTION. 



Bow to eternal Brahman. 

I bow to thit Brafyman which, after having expe- 
rienced the gross by pervading throughout all objects 
with its rays — all immutable sentiency — ever present 
in the variety of the movable and immovable universe; 
and after having, again, digested within itself all 
creations of the internal organ of knowledge propelled 
by karma and avidyd ; sleeps ever sweetly, yet causing 
fruition to us through illusion ; and which is the 
Fourth (wherein the three — ^gross, subtile and causal — 
are held together), though ever one, all bliss and with* 
out beginning. 

May that which is the Fourth, and which, having 
as the wrdi experienced the mighty results of igno- 
rance and attachment, and then also the subtile ones 
called into being by the internal organ of knowledge, 
and enlightened by its own light ; and, lastly, having 
drawn all these by degrees within itself; (may this 
whidi) is (Mie, limitless, distinctionless, and character- 
less, protect us. 



'•*%-E ™rX)F THE MANDUKYA. 

L 

Aum is the word, all this is an explanation of its 
( meaning and power) past, present and future. All, 
indeed, is Aum\ even all that is beyond the triple 
conception of time. 

S'ANKARA'S COMMENTARY. 

From " Aum is the word," etc., is commenced this treatise 
of four chapters, embodying within itself the substance of the 
essence of the Vedanta. It is for this reason that a prelimi- 
nary statement of objects and reasons is dispensed with. 
They are the same as those for the general subject of the 
Ved&nta. However, one desirous of explaining this compen- 
dium ought not to pass them over. This compendium indirectly 
finds its specific relation, subject and object, in that it itself 
has an object in consequence of its being connected with the 
subject explaining the means of proper realisation ( of 
dtman.y The object is, however, thus clearly explained. 
As a sick man recovers the equilibrium of his health on the 
disappearance of the cause of disease, so atman being free from 
its (supposed) misery — the illusion of duality — will find its 

♦ Before any subject is expounded it is customary in Sanskrit writers to 
se^t forth the subject, object and relation of the work, as also to point out the 
class of readers to whom it is addressed. These four things in the present 
case are the same, generally speaking, as for all works on the philosophy of 
the Advaita. But the specific object of such a treatise is obvious, says the 
commentator, from the fact that the whole of this work treats of a 
subject closely connected with the means whereby proper realisation of 
^tm<{9» ensueis. 



s^aneAba's oommsntabt. 3 

owii eqmlibritim : the realisation of unity. The illnsion of 
duaUty being the result of ignorance, will be dispelled by pro- 
per knowledge ; and this at once explains the why and 
wherefore of this treatise. For, well says the S'ruti : " there 
alone one sees or knows another where there is anything like 
duality or the sense of separateness, but where all is dtrmny 
who should see whom, know wliom?" etc. 

The first chapter here, which deals chiefly with Vedic texts, 
and is undertaken for an explanation of the meaning of the 
word Aum, is useful as pointing the way to the proper realisa- 
tion of almoin. The second chapter demonstrates the futility 
of that illusion of duality on the dispelling whereof is realised 
the real unit, as the rope is realised on the spell of illusion 
which presents it as a snake being destroyed. The third 
establishes the substantiality of the Unit, disposing of all 
arguments to the contrary. The last chapter is devoted to 
showing the Advaita in its real form, by bringing into promi- 
nence the mutual opposition and consequent refutation of 
those schools of thought which maintain aught to the contrary. 

How an explanation ofu4z^m can help to the realisation of a^»iaw 
is now explained. " Aum is this ; " "This is the support ;" " One 
of pure desires should concentrate his mind upon dtman through 
Aum which is dtman ;" " Aum is Brahman ;" " The word — 
Aum — ^is all ;" these and a number of other texts clearly point 
out the usefulness of Aum in the process of realising dtman^ 
inasmuch as they declare that Aum, and Brahman or dtman are 
one and the same. As the Unit — dtman — is the substratum of 
prdm and other illusions of that kind, like the rope that is 
the substratum of the snake and other illusions of its kind, so 
is Aum the aubstratum or cause of the whole of the illusion of 
speech, produced by the iUiisions oiprdna^ etOt A^d this Aum 



icIxxMSicTOPAKisaAj)* 



\' 



is thus the same as dtman, for it is the word for Strnm. Th0 
illusion of prdna^ etc., subsisting in dtman^ can never exiafe 
unless it finds expression in some manner ; and this is possible 
only through words derived from Aum. And, indeed, the Sruti 
itself declares the impossibility of the existence of anything 
apart from verbal expression, for it says: "All is mere play 
of words;" " All this is of It, and is held together throughout 
by the string of speech or even by the cord of specific names;'' 
" All is rendered possible in experience only by words," aud 
the like. Hence well says our text: "All is the word," etc. 
The whole universe of experience, the thing requiring to be 
described by a name, can never exist except through being 
named, and as this naming can never proceed independently 
of Auniy all is Aum.* Even the highest — Brahman— ia realised 
by means of names, and is, therefore, the same as Aum. This 
treatise is, therefore, an explanation of this Aum which is none 
other than para- as well as apara-Brahman. The construction 
in the text is elliptical, and the whole sentence should be 
understood as having this meaning: that -42««» being nearest 
Brahmmi^ is the way to its realisation ; and it being so, this 
explanation, which is a clear exposition of the meaning of Aum^ 
is well begun with that object. Everything conditioned ordi- 
narily by the triple conditions of time, is all Brahmxin for 

* That things cannot exist except through being named, is not to be 
understood in the sense of knowledge of things being rendered possible 
through the knowledge of their names. The idealist position looks upon 
eyerything as only the manifestation of an idea having no content apart frofa 
the one Idea — Mnum — ^the All. Whence the Upamshads constantly say aU 
^ects are nothing bnt mere names, thus precluding aU idea of duality. The 
Adva/Ua maintains the identity of cause and effect and regards the diffeienoe 
between the two as merely nominal. Names, too, cannot exist ont of A'^m 
which is Brah/numy hence it is said names cannot exist apart from 4imm, and 
alio that Brahmtm is one with Awm. It is hopeless to expect predsion of 
^l^gli^ in idealistic stings, 






reascms already explamed. And even whateveir else is be^ 
yond the limit of time, and yet present in consciousness throngh 
its effects, such as the wcy^hrta, etc., which are ever uncondi- 
tioned by time, is also not apart from Aum. 



n. 

For all this is Brahman, this dtman is Brahman, 
and this dtman has four quarters (pddas). 

Though the name and the thing named are one, the preced- 
ing text has given prominence to the name alone. "All is the 
word Aum " is said with reference to the name as the more 
important of the two. But the way in which prominence has 
here been given to the thing named, shows that the name and 
the object named are not separable, i. e^ are on e. If this were 
not said, the circumstance that knowledge of a thing is 
dependent on the name of the thing, would appear to suggest 
that the one-ness of names and object is only metaphorical. 
The object of establishing the unity of things and names is 
none other than the possibility of doing away with both of 
them, by a single effort, thus simultaneously realising Brak- 
man as distinct from both. The same is expressed by saying 
furthei' on, " the pddas are the letters (of the word Aum) and 
the letters are the pddasJ^ With all this in view the text 
says, "for all this is BrahmanJ*^ That is to say, all that is 
declared to be Aum is Brahman. This Brahman is, however, 
described as inferentially possible, and the text therefore 
proceeds to say definitely that it is not at all inferentially 
existent, but directly present in all our cognitions. Hence 
it is observed "this dtman is Brahman^'* meaning by 
*^ this "that which is described as with font quaiters, and shown 



6 MiNDflrKYOPANISHAD. 

to be present in the very Ego, by accompanying the state- 
ment " this atman is BrahmatC^ with the significant gesture of 
placing the hand on the breast. This di,tman called Aum is para 
as well as apara^ and has four quarters, four feet, not indeed 
like those of a cow, but like the fractions of the coin called 
karshapana. The fourth is realised by merging the other three 
in it, in the order of the lower in the higher ; and the word 
quarter should, therefore, be understood as meaning only 
something serving as an instrument for the realisation of the 
fourth. Or the word foot ( quarter ) may be understood as 
something instrumental to the act, in the sense of that by. 
which motion* is rendered possible. 



m. 

The first quarter (foot) is Vais'vdnara whose sphere 
is the state of waking, who is cognisant of the objective, 
who has seven members, and nineteen mouths, and 
whose fruition consists of the gross. 

The text now begins to explain how Aum is made up of four 
quarters. Cognisant of the objective, i. e., conscious only of 
the objective, by the power of avidya. Seven members : the 
Sruti says of this dtman^ the vaiivdnara, that " the efiulgent 
region is his head, the all-enlightening sun his eye, the wind 
blowing in all directions his breath, the all-embracing dkdia 
his middle, water nourishing the production of corn, etc., his 
urinary organ, and the earth his feet." As this descrip- 
tion, however, is intended to complete a personification 
of the agnihdtray it may be added that the dJiava- 

* For let it be remembered that the word for ''(][iiarter '* io the Sfui9krif 
t^t hsy^Afh w)xich meaim "foot.'* 



tfANKABA'S (KMMBNOfARY. 7' 

niya agni is his mouth. These are the seven members. The 
nineteen months : the five bvddhindriyas ( internal senses), 
plus the five karmendriyas (external senses), pins the five 
breaths called prdna^ etc., and manas^ buddki^ chitta and ahan- 
kara. These are the nineteen mouths, that is to say, the 
avenues of knowledge and experience. The vaiivdnara has its 
experience limited to the gross plane, and its fruition, there- 
fore, consists of gross objects. It is called vaiivdnara 
because it leads (nara) all (viiva) in the same direction, viz.., 
enjoyment of the gross ; or because it means all (viiva) beings 
(nard); meaning that which is a collective name for all beings 
on the gross plane. Viivanara is the same as vaiivdnara 
only with more emphasis. As it is one with being, it is the 
first quarter. As all the other quarters are approached only 
through this, it is called the first.* It may be asked how, 
while speaking of the subjective self ( " this dtman is Brak- 
man " ) as made up of four quarters, the text has wandered 
into a description of the effulgent regions, etc., as his head, eyes, 
and so forth ? This, however, is no mistake, for the whole of 
the universe, including the subjective {ddhydtmika) as well as 
the superphysical {adhidaivika\ is referred to as made up or 
four quarters, beginning with this virdt^ the first. In other ^ 
words, the difference of subjective and objective is merely verbal, 
and therefore the unity of the whole is implied in this manner. 
And, indeed, in this way alone could the Unit be realised, on 
the disappearance of the illusion of duality ; and the sense of 
the texts saying " dtman is one in all" ; " all is in the one" ; 
" he who sees all in the Self"; etc., may also be thus fully justi- 

• This quarter is called first from the stand-point of experience, and not in 
the order of evolution. Our unenlightened intelligence is cognisant at first Of 
the gross, and then ascends by a process of strict analysis to the subtUe 
and the causaU 



8 ntiTsAKTOPilimjji* 

fied. Oth^^ise, thewordA^manirillbeimdewtoodonlfiiitht 
sense of that wUch is present in the subjective conscionsness 
of the Ego in every being, and thus room will be made for 
the thesis of the SAnkhya, which will not admit of the possibi- 
lity of the unity declared by the Srutis. And it is an admit- 
ted fact that the Upanishads point, in a body, to the unity of 
dtmom throughout the universe. For this reason the identity 
of tiie subjective self with the mr&t^ meant to be demonstrated 
by declaring the effulgent regions, etc.^ as the head imd other 
parts, is most necessary, and the words " seven memb^s," etc., 
are introduced clearly with this object. The S'rutiy too, implies 
this in the text, " Thy head shall fall " (if thou worshippest 
aught as separate from the All, and as complete in itself ). 
That vaiivAnara is said to be one with virSit is only with the 
object of implying similar unity of hiranyagarbha and taijasa 
on the subtile {sukshma) plane, and of avyAkrta and prdjna 
on the causal (Jcdrana) plane. This unity of all is declared in 
the Madhu'brdhmana as well ; for it is said there : " This is 
that which in the earth is the tejomaya^ the amrtarmyd 
purusha^ as well as also the subjective Ego," etc.* This is all 
very true, but it may be asked how the avydkrta is the same as 
the prdJTia ? This need not puzzle us, inasmuch as sleep (on 
the microcosmic plane) is the same as the avydkrta (on the 
macrocosmic plane), for there is nothing to distinguish the one 
from the other. Thus, then, it is clear that the illusion of dual- 
ity being over, unity is easily realised. 



♦ It is implied that by the cognition: "This is that ", predicable of 
virdtf taijasaiprajnOf the unity of the three, i, e,, of dtman, is at once establi* 
shed* 



s'ankara's commentary. '9 

IV. 

. The second quarter is the Taijasa whose region is 
dream, who is cogaizant only of the subjective, who has 
seven members and nineteen mouths, and whose frui- 
tion consists of the subtile. 

That whose sphere is dream is the one cognizant of dream. 
The intellect during the waking condition being assisted by 
numerous means, appears cognizant of objects as if external 
to itself, though essentially nothing else but mere play of the 
mind ; and stamps its corresponding impressions (derived from 
this experience) on the mind. Themindfull of these impressions^ 
like a variegated piece of cloth, re-enacts the whole of its wak- 
ing life (in dream) without the help of any external means, 
and entirely under the control of avidya and kama (ignorance 
and imagination). The Brkadaranyaha says the same thing : 
" (He sleeps) full of the impressions produced by the supremely 
varied experience of the waking condition (and experiences 
dreams)." And the Atharvana also lays down, with reference 
to the mind and its creations being all the objects cognized by 
the ever-present cognizer, that " all this in the mind (is cogni- 
zed by) the highest ever-effulgent " ; and adds " here the ever- 
effulgent experiences, its greatness." As the mind, in relation 
to the external senses, is the internal organ of percep- 
tion, its act of cognizing through intellect consisting of 
msana (the potentiality of impressions) is well des- 
cribed in the text calling the second quarter "cognizant 
only of the subjective." (The experiencer of the state of dream) 
is called taijasa^ because, it being entirely of the essence of 
light, becomes the cognizer of the mind (consisting entirely 
of msam and projecting itself into various shapes) irrespective 
of the objective. VHva (or vir&t} being cogni^a^t of the objec* 
2 



10 MANBftKYOPAIfflSHAD. 

tive, the mind externalizing itself as gross objects, is tlie 
object of fruition ; whereas here it is the object of fruition only 
in the form of vdsands. The experience of this condition is 
therefore rightly called experience of the subtile. The rest is 
common to this with the first quarter just described. This is 
the second quarter called taijasa. 



That is the state of deep sleep wherein the sleeper 
does not imagine anything, and does not see any dream. 
The third quarter therefore is the Prdjua^ whose 
sphere is (this) deep sleep, in whom all melts into onoi 
who is a mass all sentiency, who is all bliss, whose 
fruition is of bliss, and who is the way of sentiency ^to 
the objective). 

. The clauses " does not imagine anything, and does not see 
any dream", are put in for the purpose of defining the state of 
deep sleep as distinctly apart from that of wakingand dreaming; 
from which two, sleep, in the sense of not being awake to the 
Truth, is not absent. Or the intention of the clauses may be 
to simply mark out the condition of deep sleep from the other 
two, sleep in the sense of not being awake to the Truth, being 
common to all three. Wherein, that is to say, in which con- 
dition, or time, the sleeper does not indulge himself in any 
kind of imagination, nor see any dream. And it should indeed 
be so, for in deep sleep there is no possibility, as in the other 
two states, of dream or imagination in the form of taking a 
thing for what it is not. He who is cognizant only of the re- 
gion covered by deep sleep is one whose "sphere is deep sleep.' 
The whole of the phenomenon of duality, born simply of the 
action of the mind, is proper to the other two conditions. 



s'ankaba-« commektary. 11 

(And these two become welded in one, that is to say, are merged 
in their fontal source, without losing their respective individua- 
lity), as the day with the whole of its variety, is said, on the 
power of discrimination being suspended, to be lost in the 
darkness of night, without the said variety being at all obli- 
terated. (It need not be doubted that this state cannot be 
described as a mass all sentiency) for, this condition is so 
described on account of its being one of entire distinctionless- 
ness, and produced by the mingling together of that variety 
of consciousness which is present in the two states of waking 
And dream consisting solely of pure imaginations of the mind* 
As at night all becomes, as it were, one indiscriminate mass 
under the pall of darkness, so even is the prdjna "a 
mass all sentiency." The word " all " appropriately excludes 
the possibility of any other kind of consciousness. This third 
state is further described as " all bliss," for, the mind being 
free from the trouble consequent on its action of imagining 
the variety of subject and object, is, so far, in bliss. We say 
" so far," for, this bliss is not absolute ; it is like that negative 
45ondition of happiness which implies freedom from unhappi- 
nes8» This condition is entirely free from trouble, and is there- 
fore one in which " fruition is of Wiss." The S^rutt also says 
" this is the highest bliss." 

The prajna is farther called " the way of sentiency (to the 
objective)," because it is the way to a cognition of the experi- 
ence of dream and waking. Or, as it is sentiency or thought alone 
that enables the prdjna to experience the other two states, it is 
•indeed the vehicle of sentiency in its so-called act of cognizing 
4Jie different conditions. Th^ prajna is called prajna^ because 
it know^ the past and future as well ; and it is fitly called all- 
knowing, even while asleep, in consequence of its being 
such before. For the word prdjna may mean that whose form 



12 MANDfiKYOPANlSHAD. 

is all sentiency pnre and simple, as distinguished from that of 
the other two which admits of variety. This prajna, is the 
third quarter. 

VL 

This is the Lord of all, this is all-knowing, this is 
the antarydmiuy this is the source of all — the origin 
and final resort of all beings. 

This in its native form (i, e., sentiency pure and simple — 
chaitanya) is the Lord of all (Isvara), that is to say, the gover- 
nor of the whole of the physical and superphysical universe. 
Isvara, in any other form than this, as others maintain, is 
not possible.* The S^ruti too lays down the same when it says 
" Oh good one I Sentient being is being because of satJ^ This 
(pure prdjna as livara) is the knower of all, being in 
air beings and all conditions. Hence he is called all- 
knowing. He is antaryamin^ i. e., the governor of all 
beings from within. He it is that is the source of all, for from 
him proceeds the varied universe, as described before. This 
being so, he is also the origin as well as the final resort of 
all beings. 

Tra/ns. Note, The first six s'lokas of the Upanishad form a distinct section 
upon which Gandap^a then comments as a whole. 

GAUDAPADA— KARIKA. 

1. Vidvaiske who is all-pervading and cognizant of the 
objective ; Taijasa is he who is cognizant of the subjective ; 
and Prajna is he who is a mass all sentiency ; — it is indeed 
the One that is thus conditioned into three, 

* Says A'nandagiri, the commentator on S^anTtareCs BMshyai If Is' vara, 
were possible in any form other than this, he could not be free ; and 
the extra-cosmic nature of Is* vara set up by Nyfiya and Vais'eshihi is not 
tenable being refuted by S'anTiara in his comments on the Sutra " The Lord 
being irrelevant " ; as also by other arguments showing the injustice and 
cruelty of the government of such a god. 



s'ankara's commentary. 18 

2. The Vaisvdnara is the cognizer in the right eye*^ and 
the Taijasa in the mind within ; whereas the Prajna is present 
in the ak&ia of the hearty — thus the One is threefold 
in the ( same ) body. 



s'ankara's gloss on gaudapada. 

In explanation of the preceding part of the text (of the Man^ 
dukya) there are these (and the following) ilokas. It is im- 
plied that as the same Unit is in three places, in succession, 
and as unity is warranted by the experience of all, consisting 
of the form of memory in the phrase "I am that", the Unit 
independent of the three conditions, is ever one, pure, and 
absolute. The Sruti corroborates this by the illustration of 
the great fish.f 

This stanza is meant to demonstrate the experience of all 
the three conditions in one and the same waking condition, 
(and thus to prove the unity of them all). The vaiivanara 
etc., means that the vaiimnara is the real cogniser of the 
variety of objective beings seen by the eye. The Sruti also 
corroborates this, in that it says '^ih^purusha in the right eye 
is the enlightener." 

That is to say, the vaiimnara which enlightens, so to speak, 
the objective, and which is called the virdj present in the 
Sun, is one with that cognized in the eye. A doubt may here 
be raised. The hiranyagarbha (who is known as present in 
the Sun) is quite apart from the kshetrajna (the soul), thq 

' * The late Mr. T. Sabba Row explained this phrase " the right eye," as 
meaning the mental eye of the highest intellection, by means of which we 
apprehend the loftiest spiritual ideal conceivable by man on the physical 
plane. 

f A powerful fish goes from this bank of a river to that, and back, without 
being carried away by the force of the current, or being affected by any- 
thing pertaining to the bank or the stream. So, indeed, is atmom^ ever One 
and Unaffected, though conditioned by the three states. 



14 MiNDftKYOPANISHAD. 

director of and cognizer in the right eye, and the general 
governor of the body. It being so how can these two, so . 
entirely different, be said to be one ? This doubt is groundless, 
for, in reality, we recognize no distinction; and the Sruti also 
bears us out : " One all effulgence is embedded in all beings," 
which is further endorsed by the smrtii "0 Bh^rata, know 
me (Brahman) to be the soul (kshetrajna) in all beings 
{kshetras) " ; " though ever unconditioned, (It) subsists in all 
conditions, through being." It is needless also to ask, all 
organs of sense being as good vehicles of the cognizer (kshetra- 
ina or vaiivanara) as the eye, why should the latter alone 
be marked out as the vehicle ? For, though there is no differ- 
ence in this respect, the right eye being the principal organ 
of sight and perception, it is singled out by way of preference 
as the vehicle of the seer. 

If the riaiivanara having seen the variety of forms while in 
tte right eye, closes it, retaining memory of all that is seen, he 
sees the very same (forms) called into being by vAsana^ over 
again in the mind, as if in a dream. Who sees the forms of 
wakiug consciousness sees those of vdsand as well. Hence 
the taijasa cognizant of the mind is the same as the viiva 
(yaiivdnara) in the eye. 

When memory is at rest, the seer is, as it were, unified with 
the prajna^ in the akdia of the heart ; and becomes a " mass 
all sentiency." The function of the mind having ceased, and 
cognition and memory, the acts of the mind, being at rest, 
prdna is indistinguishably concentrated in the heart, for the 
Sruti says : ^'pj^dna alone draws all (within)." (As vaii-- 
vdnara and virdj are one, so) taijasa is the same as 
hiranyagarbha^ for it is the seer in the cosmic mind. The 
mind (macro- and micro-cosmic, being one) is the link between 
the two ; and this is borne out by the Sruti : " i]mpurusha is 
manomaya (all mind)." 

Prdna is differenced or distinguishable in sleep, for then (as 
the S'ruti has it) all organs of sense are fused into it; how then, 



s'ankara's commentart. 16 

is it called indistinguishable or undifferenced ? This is no mis- 
take, for that is undiflFerenced (avyAkrta) which is not condi- 
tioned by time and space. Though in the case of those who 
relate their individuality to prana, it is not in the undifferenced . 
condition, still in sleep it is in that condition, because the ego 
born of the accident of body is fused, then, in it. As the j^rana 
of those who speak of it as belonging to them, is in the undif- 
ferenced condition, at the time of death ; so the condition of 
the ]prdna of those who relate their ego to it (in the waking 
state) ought to be similar under similar circumstances (sleep) ; 
and this jprdna should (on the individual plane) be similarly 
the source of all, like the (avydkrta on the cosmic plane). 
The cognizer of the two states is also one — the avydkrta. The 
cognizer of the conditioned {vis'va and taijasa) is one with 
this {avyakrta prdjna on account of the seer of all conditions 
being one) ; and the qualifications " unified," " mass all sen- 
tiency" &c., become appropriately applicable to it. How indeed 
is the avydkrta called prdna (the breath) ? The &ruti " the 
mind is bound to prdna^^ authorizes this usage. But this text 
considered in its proper place and context is not concerned with 
avydkrta or prdna^ but sat ; for it begins " good one, all 
this was sat in the beginning," ^fimought therefore to mean 
sat^ i. e., Brahman, by the wc/d prdna and not the mind. 
This discrepancy need not trouble us, for sat is admittedly the 
source of all. Though sat, i. e\ Brahman, may be meant by the 
word prana in the said text, still it should not be forgotten 
that it is described as such, and also as prdna, only because 
it is, for the time, supposed to be the source of all beings ; for 
otherwise if Brahman, the unconditioned absolute, were meant, 
the expressions used would have been something like the follow- 
ing, viz.^ " not that, not that," " wherefrom speech turns back 
baffled," " other than both the known and the unknown," etc. 
The smrti also enjoins the same coarse inasmuch as it says 
" It is neither sat nor asat'^ If by sat in the text in question 
were meant the unconditioned, it were impossible for those 
immersed in sat, as in sleep and pralaya, to rise again ; and 
moreover (if it be assumed that though so immersed in ^a^, beings 



16 BliNDftKYOPANISHAD. 

in sleep and pralaya could rise again) the muktas (the liber- 
ated, 2. e., unified with sat) will have to re-incarnate them- 
selves*. 

If it be urged that the latter contingency will never 
come to pass, inasmuch as the cause of such re-incarnation is 
absent, we reply, the absence of the cause, in both conditions 
(sleep and muhti\ is the same. If it were urged that absence of 
cause means absence of any thing that could be done 
away with by gnosis {jndna)^ the so-much-praised gnosis 
itself would be of no use. Therefore the word sat^ in the 
text under consideration, should be taken to mean the po- 
tential cause, prdna^ described as the cause in all &rutis. 
It befng so, the real unconditioned sat is described as 
"that which is above the undifferenced," "that which is 
unborn either as cause or effect ", " that from which speech 
turns back baffled," "that, which is not this, not that," 
etc. This, the Fourth, ever unconditioned state oitlaQprajna^ 
free from all relation with cause and effect, the reality 
of realities, is therefore separately described. The condition 
of being the cause is clearly experienced, on waking, in the 
form of a blank memory of the time of sleep. Hence it is 
well said, all three conditions are experienced in one and the 
same body, and the one is therefore threefold in every 
individual. 



Gaudapada-Karika — (continued.) 

3. Fruition of the Viiva, Taijasa and Prdjna^ consists 
severally of the gross, the subtile, and the blissful. This is 
the three-fold fruition. 

4. The gross satisfies the Viiva, the subtile the Taijasa, 
and the blissful the Prdjna. This is the threefold satisfaction. 

♦ Which is a reduotio ad absurdum ; for mukti means entire cessation of 
re-incarnation (at least for a JuUpa or ifummntara), whence sat ia the text 
in question must mes^frdna. 



s'AjfKABA's oomnstrsASY. 17 

S. ffawMo knotty the ohjeet of fruiUm, as w9li as tits 
su^sH thereof, in meh of the a6ope, is not affeetM fy tiie 
fim^on. 

0. R is qmte plain that all beings become manifest fr&ai 
precious (unmanifest) existence; thepurasha, in the form Of 
prAna^ sends forth all the varioics centres of consciousness. 

7. Some trying to analyse this process of formation, regard 
it as the work (of an extra-cosmic God), whereas others rega/rd 
it as of a class with dream and iUtcsion. 

8. . Others maintain that it is simply an act of tie will of 
€fOd, while those who rely on time declare tkoJb everythinf 
proeeed^from Time. 

9. Some declare it an act of fruition or of diocT'sion ; 
Snt it is ^e very Tiature of the ejidgent, wnd how amid he 
who is at the point of the highest desire, have any desire ? 

s'ANEABil's GLOSS ON GAUDAPADA — (continued.) 

Verses tBree and four have been already explained. 

(&.) In all three conditions, viz., waking, etc., the object of 
firmtion consisting of the gross etc., is the same object in three 
different aspects. The subject of this fruition, whether vie'va^ 
tmjasa, or pra^na, is also one, as inferred from tiie unity of 
e(»isciousnes6 implied in the form of the cognition ^^ I am 
That", common to all conditions; as also from the circumstance 
ef all three bmng the same as the subject or cognizer; 
He who knows this variety of the subject and object 
of fruition as being, each, one in itself, though appearing 
as many, is never affected by the act of fruition ; for the 
object in the absolute is experienced by the subject in the 
absolute. Nor is it possible for any relative acts of frui- 
tion to modify in any way the subject of such act, just as itt 
the case of fire consuming a variety of ftiel to ashes. 

(^> From pr^viws existenee, that is» fiMoai antecedeo^ 
jet unmanileflt exiitf^^nee-^ 9ik Iw inpy that ia^ vie'va^ tai^amf 
pp i ^m^ become as eudi, \xf assuming name i|nd fenn^ as rnani^ 
3 



18 MAKDdKYOPANISHAD* 

fest object, through the action of avidyd. This is thus 
explained. A barren woman cannot be said to give birth to .a 
child either in reality or in illusion. For if things did come 
out of nothing, the whole of the world of experience ought 
to become nothing, a circumstance which will tend to render 
BraJiman itself, whose existence is inferred from experience, 
a mere void. This, however, cannot be, for the snake etc., that 
a rope is mistaken for, on account of the action of mdyd 
(illusion), are not simply nothing but are already pre-existent 
in the form of the rope. The rope, the snake, or the mirage 
are nowhere experienced or seen, by any one, without a 
suitable substratum. Just as the snake is in the rope evea 
before it appears in being, so indeed are all beings existent va 
the very form of prdna^ the cause, even before manifestation 
in existence. The same is declared by the text ^^All this was 
Brahman in the beginning '* ; " All was AUfumr etc. Prdna 
sends forth all the centres of consciousness as represented by 
the various forms of gods, men, animals, etc., comprised under 
prdjna^ taijasa^ and viha. They are so many parts, as it 
were, of the all-conscious pumskay like so many reflections in 
water of one and the same sun, or like so many rays of the 
sun. They are all evolved from puruska^ the prdna^ as cause^ 
in forms independent of one another, by their varying 
capacities for fruition etc., but always like their source, and 
tiierefore like so many reflections of the sun, or like so man^ 
sparks of one fire, being all called jivas etc. Another apt 
illustration, in point, is that of the spider who spins his web 
out of himself. Even the S'ruti itself lays down " As sparks 
from fire " etc. 

(7.) Work, i. e. creation of God. This is the opinion of 
those who attach importance to an analysis of the cosmos, for 
^deed th^re are those who do not care at all about the matter. 
The Sfruti also dismisses the subject with the remark ^Indra 
becomes manifold by m&ydP A juggler throws the end of 
a thread up in the sky, and climbing by the help of the thread 
disappears with all his accoutr^nents. His body begins tp 
&llto the ground in pieces which unite anon into the s^If*? 



s^akkara's oommbntart. 19 

«ame jnggler. Now those who witness this illnsion do nofc 
care to look into its essence and meaning. In the same 
manner the series of the states of sleep, dream, and waking, 
is like the throwing np of the thread, and prajna^ tazjasa, 
etc,, are like the juggler who appears to climb np the thread, — 
the real director of the whole illnsion being ever entirely aloof 
from the thread as well as from him who climbs np the thread. 
As this man stands all the while on the ground, entirety 
unseen on account of the power of illusion, so even stands . for 
€ver the Reality of realities — the Absolute, Eternal, Truth. 
Hence those desirous of moksha think only of this last, and 
not of the panorama of illusion that supervenes. The opinion 
hinted at in the text is therefore, that of th6se who are misled 
by this illusion. 

(8.) As ideas in the divine mind are always real, the universe 
is regarded by many as an act of real divine ideation Ii]ke ear- 
then pots etc., which are not other than the idea in the potter^s 
inind. There are, however, others who regard Time as the 
cause of the universe. 

(9.) Others take it that the object of the universe (evolved 
in any manner) is either fruition or diversion. The writer 
now refutes all these theories by the single assertion that he 
who stands at the highest point of desire cannot possibly have 
any desire either for fruition or diversion, and that therefore 
there being no motive, he can never move himself with a 
-view to creation in any of the aforesaid manners. The cause of 
(the semblance) of evolution is none other than the very 
nature (of the absolute), for in the case of the rope mistaken 
for a snake^ the cause of the latter is to be sought nowhere 
but in the nature of original avidyd. 

Text of the Manoukta — (continued.) 

; The Fourth is that which is not conscious of the 
subjective, nor that which is conscious of the objective 
nor that which is conscious of both^ nor that which. 



20 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

is simpte consciousness, nor that which is a mass aB" 
sentiency, nor that which is all darkness. It is un*- 
seen, transcendent, unapprehensible, uninferable, un* 
thinkable, indescribable, the sole essence of the 
Qonscioiwiess of self, the negative of all illusion, tbe 
erer peacefol, all bliss, the One Unit ; — this indeed m 
dtman, it should be known. 



S'ANKAitA's CoMMBNTARY — (eonttnued.} 

The fourth q^uarter is now described in its place. Thia ia 
done in the words " The Fourth is that etc." It is not possiUn 
to describe this, the Fourth, by words,^ hence it is descrftied 
sui^ly by predicating of it the negatiYC of all p098iht» 
attributes. Is it then, mere negation f No. For^ imaginati(» 
must always have something to stand upon. The (fklse) idea« 
of silver, a man, or the mirage cau never arise but with mother 
-o'-p^rj, a post, or a jaece of saltish land, as their respective 
hase^. If it were so, the Fourth were the substratum of ^H 
uLeas and forms such as prdna etc, and ought to be expressible 
fike jars, etc^, which are the substratum of wat^, etc, m 
words ; and ought not to be described by predicating of it, 
simple negation of all possible attributes. This is not ckv 
For, idea^ such as prdna^ etc., (supposed to subsist in the 
Fourth) are as entirely unsubstantial as the idea of silv^^ 
etc., in mother-o*-pearl, ^c. ; and tiie substantial is^ iievw^ 
known to have any relation to the unsubstantial. And first, 
the possessive relation cannot be good, for it is that no- 
thing which cannot be the* subject of speech. Nor could it 
be the subject of any otter instrument of knowledge, like^the 
iU^*ete., on account of itapeculiar nature, fotdtmem ise^er JSrm 
fipotn alt aeeideirt. Nor can it be said to be that which U- 



^^smbaUe by its ge&enc property, like the <x>w etc^ Ssar^ it 
imag one mihout ^ seoend, esai have no generic or «peoifie 
jDark. Ber is it t^bat wMch ^tets like a^so^ etc^, fi^ it is 
iflways known to be withMt action. To lay hold #f any of 
ikt iiroperties and define it as <^ bhie ^etc., is out of place 
iiasBicicli as it kas no properties whateter. Hence it can 
»07er be positiirely desmbed by a name in any manner. 
Then it oij^ht to belong to the category of ^'tke honn 
«f a hare." No. For, knowledge of the foattk as one 
'vvith dtman destrc^ all desire for mn&bmn^ jost as the dela- 
sion of silver is destroyed bf rightdescriminitoii of its snbsirar- 
tmn« It is not at all poc^iUe that identification of the fonrtk 
mi^ diman can bring in its train f)idyd and tij^ brood of its 
•enfa snch as d^rire eke Nor is tiiere any cogent reason wl^ 
^e fonrth should ncrf^ be regarded as Atman^ for aji t^panifyuk 
^igree in saying the same tMi^; as observe, '^ Thou art that^'' 
^ This self {dtrnm) is BnAman^' " That is the foiath,'' " ft 
is ^man^"* ''That which is present in i£iiect cognition is 
Bmhman^'^ ^ It is the eternal canse and e£Eect," '' AU this is 
4Ltmtm " etc, This Sliman^ the totality of the real and the 
mireal, is supposed to be made np of fonr quarters. The mnzeal 
portion of it is that which is marked off by avidyd; it is like 
the snake imagined in place of a rope, and consists of the three 
quarters described before as the seed and the growth. Hence- 
forth it is intended to describe the unconditioned substance cor- 
iresponding to the rope in the illuskation just quoted, by nega- 
tivii^ of it the thiiee quarters correi^nding to the snake of the 
same ffinsbwtion, in &e words ''not conscious of the subjective 
ete.** It may be asked why the fourth is described by sinyile 
ttigaticmof the<^arthriee P For its existenceis akeadyimplied 
"^en three of the four quarters of dtn&in have been Ascribed. 
^This need not be so. For, ^ is only meant that dimem with 



22 MiKD(hET0PAKI8HAIK 

its three quarters is itself the fourth when it is not anjr of the 
three, joist as the rope is the rope when it is not the' snake 
etc. This is meant to be implied in the same manner as the 
imity of ** Thon *' and " that '' in the iruti " Thon art that" If 
the fonrth were anything other than Atman qnaUfied by the other 
quarters, all teaching woxdd be to no purpose ; and there would 
be every possibility of our being driven to the only alternative 
of an absolute negation as the substantial, on account of a 
fonrth such as is meant to be conceived being not cognizable 
by any instrument of knowledge. When like the rope taken for 
a snake or a garland, or any similar thing, the one cUinan is 
taken to be any of the three quarters, according to circum- 
Atances, the absolute negation of the variety of experience im 
dtPian is established by the very same instrument of know- 
ledge which demonstrates that. It is not that which is 
conscious of the subjective, nor that which is conscious of 
the objective, nor that which is a mass all sentieney. That 
is to say no additional effort, or no fresh act of knowledge^ 
is necessary for conscious realization of the Fourth ; ( the 
liimple negation of its being the other three being 
sufficient.)* 

The same happens in our properly understanduig the- 
nature of the rope ; for at the very moment proper dis^ 
crimination reveals to no the true nature of the snake, we^ 
realize the rope as well ; — ^in other words knowledge of the 
rope is simultaneous with (is in fact the same as ) knowledge 
of the illusive character of the snake etc. But there are those 

* The advaita holds that liberation is the veiy nature of the universe, it 
is neither a thii^ to be obtained nor state to be brought about. What is to 
1>^ done consists of getting rid of the illusion which creates the sense of 
duality and prevents proper realization of the Unit. Hence it is well said 
no fresh effect of knowledge is necessaiy for realization of the fourth, •ther 
i4han the one for realizing the absence of iUusion— the imaginary threer 



s'ankaba's oommentart. 2t 

Hirlio maintain that an instroment of knowledge helps not 
only the removal of the obstrnction ( illusion ), as darknecui 
etc. in the case of knowing a jar ( by direct cognition ), but 
it enables the object also to reveal itself. If this, however, 
were correct the act of cutting something ought, in their opi-^ 
Bion, to accomplish something over and above the severance 
*of the part from the main body. But if, in the case of 
cognizing the jar, in the illustration, enveloped in darkness, 
the instrument of knowledge did nothing more than disperse 
the darkness, which is not the object ought to be cognized 
( the action of the instrument ought to be regarded as com* 
plete ); — ^like the act of cutting directed to the severance of 
the part being complete with the accomplishment of the 
severance ; — and the knowledge of the jar which follows im* 
mediately and necessarily must not be said to be any result 
accomplished by the instrument of knowledge. In the same 
mannar the instrument of knowledge, vtz.^ the negation of 
all possible predicates, employed with a view to proper dis- 
isriniination of the conscious-of-the-subjective and others 
which the dtman is, at times, illusively taken to be, will 
not be able to cognize the Fourth unless it negatived of 
it, the consdous-of-the-subjective and others, not meant to 
be cognized. For the distinction between the employers 
of the instrument, the instrument itself, and the object 
meant to be accomplished by that instrument, will be 
annihilated with the establishing of the said negation* 
The same is expressed in ^^ gnosis accomplished, duality is 
nowhere.** Gliosis does not wait even for the moment im* 
mediately next the annihilation of duality, for if it did there 
would be a regressus in infinitum^ of gnosis after gnosis^ and 
duality will not at all be annihilated. Therefore it is esta- 
1)lished that the annihilation of the illusion of Taijasa ect. 



wbsiatiag in Mmnh is suntiltaBieoiis with the res^ MoomgUr 
iJiddVjr tiu^ imAtrament of knowledge, viz*y tibe n^gati^ if nil 
possible iMnedioateB* 

It is not ^'that which is conscious of the snl^ecU^iFe'' 
i. $. It is not Taijasa; nor is it the VadmAnaru^ inasmodh 
|Mi it is not that whioh is conscious of the ol^ective. By 
flaying that it is not that whidi is conscions of either^ 
lit is denied that it corresponds with the condition between 
i|reikm and waking. By saying that it is not gimrple 
conj3ci(wsness, it is shown to be other tdian the condi^ 
tion of sleep which is the condition <^ tbit uidiscrimi-^ 
miio(n which makes it tiie canse. It is denied to he that 
which is a inafi» all sentiencgr, to imply tibtt it is not that 
l^hich cognises all things by a single act of knowledge. And 
i il3 shown to be other than de^ matter by pre<ticar(ing of \t 
tbe no^ktion of darkness. A 4onbt night here sogfest itself 
jT^^^o^ee and others are demonstrated as existent in iOmcm^ 
hffTf cocdd they then, by simple negation, disi^pear from dtnum 
like the snake etc. from the rope ? This conld be in this wise* 
Thongh they are of the form of thonght, they, like the em^ 
«tc. which the rope is mistaken for» are not mntoally «:»slfisiYe 
1!^ one another. The essence of thought is the truths on. aa- 
iQQnnt of being exclusive of everything. If it be urged tiiat 
it is non-exclusive c^ deep sleep, we say that it is not so, t&c 
sleep is capaUe of being experienced ; and the iruti also sa^ 
^^ the cognition of the cegnised is not annihilated." Hsuise tte 
£mrtii is 4e8cribed as " unseen " ; and it is not the sulgeet of 
«xperiMce because it is '^ unse^." It is also not capable of 
being 4^»INFehended by the senses, and therefore ^ranscendmt. 
It is '* unin&rable " t. e. act possible to prove as ^Pfi^ Jiff 
Aakng ^ middle torn of anything belo^i^ to it. Hcfife i^ 



iB «" mrthk^aOde," UnA tb^fere '' uMteactib^Aile." ft is ""the 
Mte 60»6nce of the oonseioftiBiiefiB <ii self'' on loeoiat ^ tiie 
unity of the subject implied in the eonscioas experience *^ I am 
tiot " oommon to all three con^ions, waMng, 4ream and 
flle^ Or " the sole essaice of the conscionsness of self " may 
Man ftttt '* conscionsness of self <^o)" is the sole instra- 
ment o( knowii^ the Fourth, and the Fourth is therefore the 
supreme essence, result, ground of the consciousness of self. 
F^, the mat also declares '' this should be adored as the 
Sdf." By the negation of '' that which is conscious of the 
subjective" etc., the connection with the Fourth of any 
adjuncts of tiie conditioned^ is n^atived ; and by describing 
the Fourth as ^he negation of all illusion" it is declared to be 
foM of properties wMch make up canditiens. Hence it is 
** the ever peaceful " and " all bliss." As it is the Unit, one 
without a second, free from all and every distinction, it is the 
Fourth, as distinguished from the other quarter^ generally 
seen and experienced. ''This indeed is Atman^ it should 
lie kuoiKm " is added by way of explaining the meaning of the 
iruti " Thou art that," in the same maainer as the rope is 
iBdicated as an independent thing by itself impart from the 
imaginary snake, stick, etc Atman is the unseen sear, and 
4 should be fcno^wn as described intiie iruti ^'t^e sight of 
4lle ster is never lost*'; that is to say, known only relativdy 
to its previous unknown condition, for in reality when 
gnosis purifies, duality (in the form ofknower, known, and 
Jouy^ledge ) is non^ia^ 

KAbikAs. 

10. The F^rth is that which is capaile of destroying all 
0fil$i so$r changdswy (^ all beings the me without a second^ 

4 



S6 MlNDdKTOPANISHAD. 

11. Vihd and Taijasa are eandttianed as cause or effect^ 
Pr&jfML as cause al&ne ; but neither the me nor the other has 
any relation with the Fourth. 

12. Prdjna knows not self or nxynrself^ nor truth orfalse-^ 
hood^ hut ike Fourth is ever all^seeing. 

13. NoTicogmtion of duality is common to Pr&jna and 
Turya (tke Fourth)^ but the difference consists in the/ormer 
being vrith sleep in tke form of cause^ and tke latter beiny 
entirely free from it. 

14. Tke first two are accompanied by dream and sleeps 
iJie tkird by dreamless sleep, but tkose wko arefirminthe 
Fourtk experience neitker dream nor sleep. 

15. Dream is the condition ofkim wko takes tkings in the 
contrary manner, and sleep of kirn wko is ignorant of reality. 
Ligkt being tkroum on tke nature of this inversion, the Fourth 
is realized. 

16. Wken tke Jiva is atoakenedfrom tke sleep of that de^ 
lusion wkick has no beginning, it realizes (m itself) tke 
unborn, ever awake, dreamless, one witkout U second. . 

17. If tke variety of experience were real it certainly 
cugkt to disappear {some time); but tke wkole of duality i^ 
mere illusion, tke reality being tke Unit. 

18. If any one can be supposed as possibly imagining the 
various ideas, these migkt be supposed to cease. Tke idea {of 
duality implied in tke distinction ofteacker, taugkt, and teackr^ 
ing) is imagined possible because of tke teacking, but in gnosisr 
there can be no duality. 

s'ankara*s gloss on gaudapada — {continued^ 

(10.) AsalUvil existing in the very forms — Prdjna, Taijasa^ 
F3«m,— is destroyed by proper realization of the Fourth, it is 
saidtobethedestroyer of all evils. It is, in fact, described 
as capable of so destroying them, inasmuch as the disappear*^ 
ance of evil is consequent on realization of the Fourth. It is 
evar changeless, that is to say never subject to any change 
(from within or without). And why ? Because vXL entitieflr 



s'ankaba's gomhektart. 27 

lieihgnnreal like the snake etc., imagined in place of the 
rope, it alone is of all beings the sole unchangeable Unit, 
one without a second. And it is also effalgent, that is, the 
cause which makes all beings what they are, which is the very 
essence of being ; whence it is all-pervading as well. 

(11.) The generic and specific characters of Visva and 
others are here described with a view to clearly explain the* 
nature of the Fourth. EiSect means that which is the fruit,, 
the result ; and cause that which acts, in other words that 
which is the condition of the effect in embryo. Viha and 
Taijasa are conditioned by cause and effect, in the sense res- 
pectively of ignorance of reality and inverted cognition.. 
Prdfna is conditioned by cause alone for causality in the sense^ 
of ignorance of reality is its only condition. Hence these two» 
cause and effect, or ignorance of reality and inverted cogni- 
tion, are not possible in the unique Foiu*th. 

(12.) Howis Pr&jna said to be conditioned by causality alone, 
and how again are the two, ignorance of reality and inverted 
cognition, not possible in the Fourth ? As Pr&jna does not^ 
like Viha and Taijasa^ cognize an3rthing of the duality born 
otavidydj and is other than &tmany it is conditioned only by 
that which is the cause of inverted cognition, viz.^ by causality 
in the form of ignorance of reality (avzdyd). As the Fourth 
is ever conscious of all this, on account of the impossibility 
ofanythingyet transcendent, it is ever allngeeing. As it is 
all-seeing, causality in the form of ignorance of reality can- 
not exist in it, and consequently the result of that causality 
— ^inverted cognition — as well. For, in the sun, all light, the 
contrary of light viz.y darkness, and any light other than his 
native effulgence, are never possible. The sruti too says 
^The sight of the seer is never lost ." Or the Fourth is ever 
all-seeing because it is the cause whence all beings derivje^ 
their betnffy and is, as such, present in all, whether in dream 
waking or sleep. The iruti supports this when it saych 
*♦ There is no cognizer other than this." 



■26 Mi3«)teY<M>AKiaaA©. 

(13«) This aldkk is mealnt to sake a diffientty. 13ie 
isognitioii ^dtudity is (^mmcm beth to the JPri^na and Hie 
S^^arth ; why should the fc^mel* d[<me be rc^gafded as ^oeiifi^ 
tioiied by causality ? That alone shotQd be so regarded ^be- 
cause it is with cause in tJie form oi sleep which is the saae 
as ignorance of reality. This is the cause Qf all specific wak- 
ing cognitions. This is called the sleep that is the <^use, and 
condition of the Pr&jna. This kind of «le^ m not possible in 
the Fourth, like t&e simke in \ke rope, on aeoomnt of its being 
^meit all-seeing. Hence the ecmdition of causality cannx^ ex»fc 
VEL it. 

(14.) Dream is inverted cognition like that of the snake 
iu place of the rope. Skep is already defined as that dark- 
ness, which is ignorance of reality. Visva and Taijasa are 
accompanied by dream and sleep in this sense ; and they are 
therefore described as conditioned by cause and efifect. AM 
darkness is never seen in the sun, so do those who are firm in 
the Fourth, never see either the cause or the effect, for in 
•either instance the thing seen would be contrary to the Tery 
nature of the place where it is meant to be seen. Hence the 
Fourth is the absolutely unconditioned. 

(15.) It is now explained when cme becomes firm in the 
feurtk Of the two, dream and sleep, one who cognizes the 
i^^lity in an inverted or s^ae oth^ form, like the coalition 
-of a snake in ^ce of the rope, expm*iences dream ; smd one 
who is entirely ignorant of reality experiences sleep wMdb^ 
however, is common to all three ( viha etc., ). As dream ami 
«leep are common to viim and Taijasa^ and as inverted 
oognition is precbminent in both, they Ml under the same 
-class. Sleep, in tJiis class, being snlxHdinate to inverted 
^o^tion, the inversion which is the oharaoteristic of this 
•class is described simply as dream. In the tiiird — J^ri^im 
>{ whkh farms tiie second elass implied in the text whieb 
speaks only of dream and sleep ) — ^sleep alone, in the fonn ef 
i^gsorance of reality, eoBstitutes the u^ersion* Thus thM» 
^hen this inversion diz^ igiwtw^ce of reality and inverted 



«o^Mon whidi respectively are the conditions of cause a&4 
«ffieet, is destroyed, on knowing tke essence of reality, tli^ 
POHith is immediately realized. One who does not see these 
two conditions becomes firm in the Fourth ( for it is that light 
wherein no darkness exists and which, as the substratum of 
1^ conditions, is beyond them. ) 

(16.) By force of the cause in the form of ignorance of 
i!ieality, as well as by force of the dream in the form of inver- 
fed cognition, called illusion ( mdyd ) without beginning, 1^ 
jtritb experiences dream ; and imagines itself for the time \» 
receive impressions such as this is my father, this is my son or 
^andson, this is my ^^perty, these are my animals, I am 
tiie master of these, I am happy, miserable, this has injured 
me, that has done me good, and so on. When tie jwa is 
awakened by the kindness of a teacher who has himself re^ 
aBzed the truth of the Vedtrda^ with the w<»ds " thou i»t 
not any of all that thou imaginest related to thee as cause or 
effect, but *' Thou art that " ; it realizes its true nature* It 
{atTTuirC) has neither inside nor outside, nor birth (nor the other 
five stages leading to decay); and it is hence called the unborn, 
a. e, free from all changes external or internal, incidental to 
existence. As sleep, the cause, in the form of the darkness 
of avidy a is not present, it is called the ever awake. And the 
l^burth is dreamless also, because it is all awake, and is noi 
subject to inverted cognition. As it is ever awake, and dream- 
less, it is unborn and one without a second. This is realizjed 
as the self. 

(17.) If this kind of realization follows (mly upon removal 
of illusion, how can it be said that all is one without a seconi^ 
iphile illusion in the Ibrm of experience subsists? This, is 
thus explained. All could not possibly be one without a 
second if the illusion were real. It is, however, not real, being 
only imagination, like that of the snake for the rope. If it 
were real it were possible to think of its subsequent removal. 
But tl^e snalte tfon whidli tile rope is ti^eii, ooiy through siun^ 
tntstake, is not actually eflkkcedfirom existence, by proper dUk 



30 MiNDdKTOPANISHAD. 

xirimination. Nor similarly is the illnsion, spread oatbja 
jaggler, withdrawn like a real tangible thing, on the^yes of the . 
spectators being freed from the spell cast by him. The same 
istrne of the Duality oim&yA^ called illusion, the advaita (Unit) 
1)eing the rope or the juggler of the illustration. It is the 
reality where, in truth, no illusion appears or disappears (be- 
.cause illusion does not exists being void of substantiality). 

(18.) ( We may grant this, but) how could the duali^ 
implied in the very idea of teacher, taught, and the teach^ 
ing, be done away with? This is not difficult to explain. 
If the idea subsist in the mind of any one, it is possible to 
think of its obliteration. Just as the whole of the illusion of 
experience is like the illusion cast by a juggler, or of the 
form of the snake, so indeed is the idea of teacher, taught, and 
teaching. The idea has some existence only as the cause of 
teaching, and it is therefore relatively true only till the teachings 
bears fruit. This fruit — gnosis — ^having been brought about, 
no variety, no duality, id possible. 



Text of the Mand6kya — (Continued.) 

vni 

This is that dtman even with regard to the letters 
j(of the word aum)\ it is the aumkdra with its parts. 
The quarters are the parts, and the parts the quarters 
the former being a,u,m. 

The word aum^ the object of this discourse, described as 
Mtnum made up of four quarters, is the same as Atman even 
•by its four parts corresponding to the four quarters. What 
are these parts ? The parts make up the whole word atwu 
This word aum analysed into its component parts is called the 
aumkStra with parts. How could these two ( aum and dtman ) 
be one ? They are one because the parts are the quarters and 
ilie quarters are the parts. The parts are A, U, M. 



s'ankara's commbntart. 31 

IX. 

The first part^ is vais'vdnara whose sphere is the 
condition of waking, on account of all-peryasiyeness^ 
or on account of being the first. He who knows this 
has all his desires fulfilled^ and is the first (of all). 

This general statement of identity is now explained in 
particnlar. Vaiivdnara whose sphere is the condition of 
waking is the first part of the word aum^ vtz.,iiie letter A. 
What ground is there for this identity ? The first is all-per- 
TasivenesSy that is, being present in all, for the letter A is 
present thronghont speech ( i. e. in all ^letters, consonants). 
For, the sruti says " The letter A is the whole of speech.'* 
In the same manner is Vaih&7iara present throughout the 
whole of the universe, for says the sruti '^ of this Atman^ the 
head of Vathdnara is the effulgence " etc.; and we maintain 
the unity of names and objects. There is also a second ground 
of this identity. It is the circumstance of being first for, as 
the letter A is the first of all letters, Vathdnara is the first 
of all the four quarters. Now is described the merit of know- 
ing this identity. He who knows it has all his desires fid- 
filled. He becomes the first of the great. 



X. 

The second part U is Taij<z8a whose sphere is the 
condition of dreain, on account of superiority, or on 
account of being in the middle. He who knows this 
has his knowledge refined to the highest point of 
superiority, he finds no cause of difference with anyone^ 
nor is any one ignorant of Brahman bom in his family. 

r Taijasa whose sphere is the state of dream is the second part» 
the lett^ U. What is the ground of this identity? The ground 



32 tf^B^KTOPAKlBBAB. 

is that the letter U is, as it w^fte^ superior to the letter A; and 
taijam toa is superior to vUva. Or there is yet another ^otmd. 
As the letter U is in the middle, bekig between the kitter A^ 
wad My so^ is Ta^ma ia the middle of viiva undp^ajna* Noivr 
is described the merit of knowing this ident^. Be who Imowfli 
this has his knowledge refined np to the highest poini of 
superiority, i. e. his powers of knowing increase considerably^ 
He finds no canse of difference with anyone, that is to saf 
he is regarded in the same light both by enemies and £riend» ; 
nor is anyone ignorant of Brakman born in his family. 



XI. 

The third part M is Prdjna whose sphere is i^e 
condition of sleep^ on account of its being the measure^ 
or on account of its being that wherein everything 
loses its identity. He who knows this is able to 
measure all and to comprehend aH within himself. 

Prjana whose sphere is the condition of sleep is the thifd 
part of aumkdra^ the letter M. What is the ground of this ideur 
tity? The ground may be thus explained. Aa a heap of 
barley is measured by a prastka ( a kind of measure ), part 
by part, so are viha and taijasa as it were, measured in 
pralaya (involution ), and utpatti ( evolution ) by prajna. In 
the same manner if the word aum were repeated immediately 
after one repetition, its two letters A and U appear, as it weref 
to first merge in, and then emerge frcmi, its last letter M. 
Hisistiie ground called "measure" in the text. Thenett 
ground is that in the Frdjna all things lose their identkfy* 
This is plain in the event of an immediate second repetitioit 
^ the word a«m, for then the lett^s A utd U ai^peap ta 
mnrge ^emselves^ entirefy in tiie letter M; and i»tSm wmL 



S'ANKARA'S COMKBNrART. 33 

taiJMa are known to merge in prdjna during sleep. H«ice 
the identity of prd;na with the letter M, Now is described 
the merit of knowing this. One knowing this is able to mea- 
sure all, that is to saj, he is able to penetrate into the natnre 
of tiie universe. He is also able to comprehend all within 
Mmself, {. e.y to be the cause of all. The attaching so much 
merit to each of these acts of knowing is meant as an explana- 
tion to help knowledge of the principal thing in view. 



KARiKAS — (continued). 

19. The plain ground of ike identity of Vis'ta and the 
letter A^ is the circumstance of each being firsts as also the fact 
of the all-pervasiveness of each. 

20. Of recognizing/ the identity of Taijasa and the letter 
Uy thegroundy in both caseSy is superiority , as vsell as the being 
in the middle. 

21. Of the identity of Prajnja and the letter Jf, (he ground 
is mea^urCy as well as the fact that therein everything loses 
its identity. 

22. He who positively knows that which is the ground of 
identity in all three conditions is the worshipped and re^ 
spected of ally and the greatest of sages. 

23. The letter A puts one in communication with Vis'va^ 
U with Taijasa, and M with Prdjna ; no action being possible 
in that which has no parts. 

s'ankaka's gloss on gaudapada — (continued.) 
(19.) When Vis'va is meant to be identified with the letter 
Ay the plain ground is being first, as described in the text or 
the Upanishad just discussed. The second ground, all- 
pervasiveness, also is explained under the text corresponding 
to this verse. 

(20.) Of the identity of Taijasa and the letter U, the 
grounds are "superiority" and "being in the middle." 
!Ehese should be understood as before. 
5 



84 HiNDdKYOPANISHAD. 

(21.) That is to say, in taking Prdjna as identical Trith 
the letter M, the grounds are '^ measure/' and the fact that in 
them, all things " lose their identity." 

(22.) He who has a conviction, in its full sense, of the 
grounds of identity in all the three cases, receives the worship 
and respect of all. He, in fact, is Brakmavit ( the knower of 



(23.) Having identified the quarters of dtman with the 
parts or letters (of the wor^ aum) on the grounds already 
described, and having thus realized the true meaning and 
nature of aumk&ra^ it is now explained what is the true import 
of the merit assigned to a knowledge of the grounds of each 
identity. If one meditates on the first, he is carried to the 
viha ; in other words, if one meditates on the first part of 
aumkara he is identified with the Vaiav&nara. In the same 
manner the letter U leads to identification with the Taijasa^ 
and M with the Prdjna. The letter M too being wiped out 
of the mind, the condition of causality entirely ceases, and the 
residue is the* awT/t^Ara-with-no-parts (herein there is no 
action incidental to any condition whether of cause or efiect). 



TEXT OF THE MiNDftKYA. — (contiumd.) 

xn. 

That v^rhich has no parts is the Fourth, indescribable, 
free from the illusion of experience, all bliss, one with- 
out a second. This is aumkdra. He who realizes 
dtman in himself, loses self in the Self. 

That which has no parts is called amdtra, and amcUra 
aumkdra is the Fourth (quarter) i.e.y pure dtman. As mind 
and speech, the instruments of naming, are not able to compre- 
hend It, It is called indescribable. When in this manner the 
illusion of the variety implied in experience is reduced to 
nothing, It is necessarily all bliss, and therefore one without a 



S^ANKARA^S COMMKNTAHT. 35 

second. Awmkdira^ as thus nnderstood, is the same as that 
which is with three parts, and also as that which is with three 
quarters. He who knows this loses himself in the Self, t.^., 
dtman. Those who realize the reality are one with dtnuin^ 
haying reduced to naught all conditions of cause and effect ; and 
hence they never return, for the Fourth is the unconditioned 
Absolute. For, the snake which has merged in the rope, on 
proper discrimination of the snake and its substratum, is never 
capable of coming to life again, by any feat of the mind, in 
the case of those whose knowledge never fades. To those, 
however, whose power of discrimination is, as yet, in the 
middle or initial stage, and who consequently are mere students 
of this philosophy ; or to those who quitting the world walk 
in the path of virtue with the aim of mastering the truths of 
this teaching, knowledge of the grounds of identity of the 
quarters and the parts will, on their applying themselves to 
proper meditation of the word, aumk&ray prove itself of invalu- 
able help towards the final realization of Brahman. The 
same is expressed in the text " The three inferior stages of 
life etc." 



karikAs — {continmd.) 



24. The aumk&ra should be knoum as one mth the quarters^ 
the quarters being its parts. Hating known the word with its 
parts ( quarters ) nothing else should be thought of. 

25. The mind should be absorbed in the word (aum ), for 
it is Brahman^ the ever-fearless ; one so absorbed has no fear 
whatever. 

26. The " word of glory " (the pranava — aum) is the lower 
as well as higher Brahman; it is transcendent^ unequalled^ 
having nothing without itself^ unrelated to any effect^ and 
changeless. 



36 mIndAktopanishad. 

2ft. The " word of glory " i> the htgtnmng^ mddle and end 
of all ; having known it in this manner one enjoys ( the peace 
of eternal unity). 

28. The '* word of glory " i^ the Isvara present in the 
heart of all ; the mse man knowing aumkdra to be alUpervad- 
ing^ never fnds cause for misery. 

29. Be who has known the amatroraumkAra^ the anantamAr 
tra, the substratum in which all illusion dissolves itself^ all 
blisSy is the only sage^ and none other. 



s'ankara^s gloss on gaudapAda — (continued.) 

(24.) There are these Uokas on the text as before. On 
account of the grounds of identity described before, the quar- 
ters are the parts, and the parts the quarters. Hence it is well 
put, " aumk&ra should be known as one with the quarters." One 
who has thus known the word aum^ should not, on account of all 
his desires being fulfilled, think of anything seen or unseen. 

(25.) The mind should be absorbed in, that is to say, 
unified with, the real essence of the Word, viz.^ aum^ as ex- 
plained before. For, the " word of glory " is the ever-fearless 
Brahman. One centred in It has no fear whatever, for, says 
the S'ruti^ " one knowing does not fear." 

(26.) The "word of glory" is the lower as well as higher 
Brahman. That is to say, the parts and the quarters being 
all abandoned, the residue is pure dtman^ the highest Brahman. 
That which has nothing corresponding to it in experience, in 
the form of cause (or effect), or any thing, or circumstance, 
is here called transcendent. The other attributes are self- 
evident. The ever-unborn comprising within itself all re- 
lations of cause and effect, is like the salt ever present in the 
waters of the ocean. 

(27.) The " word of glory " is the beginning, middle, and 
end, viz.y the source, existence, and disappearance of all that 
iSy that is to say, the whole of the concrete world beginning 
from akas^ay and produced after the manner of the illusive 
elephant, the rope-snake, the mirage, etc.; all having for their 



s'ankara's commentary. 37 

respective canses the illasionist and the like. The meaning is 
that one who knows " the word of glory,'' dtman, to be in place 
of the illusionist or the rope in the illustration, is instantane- 
ously unified with it (dtman). 

(28.) The " word of glory" should be known as the Ihara 
( antarySimin ) present in the heart, that is to say, in the place 
which performs the functions of memory, and knowing in 
general, of all beings. The wise having known aumkAra to be 
all-pervading like akdia^ never find cause for misery, for 
duality, the cause of misery or happiness, is nowhere. The 
Sruti also says " he who has realized atman has crossed the 
ocean of evil." 

(29.) The amatra (with no parts) is the Fourth, and that 
too is aumkara* Mdtra means measure, and that which is 
a measure of the highest inconceivable magnitude is the 
anantamcitra. In other words, it is that whose extent and 
dimensions are indeterminable. (The amatra aumkdra being 
dtman^ is the same as the anantamdtra.) It is all bliss, 
because in it duality does not exist. He who has realized 
aumkdra in the manner described is the real sage, and no 
one' else, even if he be learned in all the sciences. 



CHAPTER 11. 

(QAUDAPADA'S— KARIKA.) 

Of Illusion. 



1. The wise declare the unsubstantiality of all that is seen, 
in dreamy it being all within the hody^ on account of its partak- 
ing of the subtile. 

s'ankara's gloss. 
Aum. It has already been said, knowledge ( gnSsis ) hav- 
ing arisen, duality does not exist, and this has been borne out by 
the Sfrutis.mch as "The Unit is ever one" etc. This, however, 
is established only on the authority of the word of holy writ. 



88 ' mand6kyopanishad. 

Bnt it is possible also to show the nnsabstantiality of the objeo 
tive even from pure reasoning, and this second chapter is under- 
taken for that purpose. It begins with "The wise" etc. Un- 
snbstantiality is the fact of being unsubstantial, that is to say, 
false, illusive. The unsubstantiality of what ? Of all objects, 
whether things or ideas seen in dream. The wise, that is to 
say, those who derive knowledge by proper use of the instru- 
ments of knowledge, declare the said unsubstantiality. The 
text proceeds to describe the cause of the falsity of objects. 
They are unreal because they are seen within the body ( in 
dream ) for, without it, mountains, elephants and the like 
exist not. Hence all sights deserve to be regarded as futile. 
It may be objected that " being within " is not a valid middle 
term to infer futility from ; for jars etc., which are ** within " 
any cover, say a cloth, are in no way futile. To obviate this 
difficulty the text adds " on account of its partaking of the 
subtile." The whole taken together means that inasmuch as 
they are within the body in a subtile condition, ( they are 
certainly non-existent as tangible objects, but are mere futile 
ideas.) In the subtility prevailing in the nerves within, there 
certainly can never exist mountains, elephant43, etc., for, in the 
first place, they are not in the body itself. 

2. Nor does the seer of the dream see distant places by going 
mt to them^ for the time taken up does in no way appear to be 
long (nor is there any relation with space); nor does the dreamery 
on being awake^ find himself in the place (^of his dream,) 

s'ankara's gloss. 
That the objects seen in dream are only in a subtile condi- 
tion within is not correct ; for one sleeping in the east ex- 
periences dreams in the north. With this objection in view 
the text answers that the experiencer of a dream does not go 
out of the body to see things at a distance, or away from the 
place where he sleeps. The reason for this is obvious. The 
time between going to sleep and beginning to dream of things 
separated by thousands of miles, and capable otherwise of being 
reached only by travels extending over months, is not at all 



s'ankara's commbntaey, 39 

appreciable. Nor is the time taken in returning from such 
places at all perceived or felt*. Hence as the time taken in 
the act does not in anyway appear to be long, it follows that 
the seer of the dream does not see distant places by going out 
to them. Moreover, on being awake, the dreamer does not find 
himself at the place he dreamt of. If it be supposed that the 
dreamer does go out to the place he dreamt of, then certainly 
lie ought to find himself in that place on being awake. But 
this does not happen. One, in bed, at night, sees visions of the 
day and meets many persons ; (but if this meeting were real) 
he ought to have been seen by those whom he meets. This, 
however, never happens, for if it did, those who saw him ought 
to recognise him as the one they saw at a particular place 
and time. This too never happens.* Therefore, the dreamer 
does not go out to any place in dream. 

5. Moreover^ reason bears out the unsubstantiality of 
chariots etc., ( in dream ), whence their futility thus established 
is declared by the wise to be laid down is the Sruti as well. 



s'ankara's gloss. 
Objects seen in dream are false, for this reason, that their 
nnsubstantiality is demonstrated by reason. And this is borne 
out by the Sruti as well. The Sruti runs " there are neither 
chariots, nor horses," etc., and suggests the ftitility of objects 
seen in dream, on the ground of these being within the body 
in a subtile condition. This same futility thus indirectly 
suggested is declared by the wise, that is, by the knowers of 
Brahman to be clearly laid down in the Sruti demonstrating 
the self-cognizability of the Absolute. 

4. As in dream^ so in waking^ the objects seen are unsuh^ 
stantial^ though the two {conditions) differ by the one being 
internal and subtile^ and the other external and gross. 

* There are cases oii record of the recognition of persons as those seen in 
dream. This would appear to go against S'ankara's statement, that the 
dreamer does not go out &c. The dreamer is caUed Svapnadih—th.t seer of the 
dream, t.*., the real seer who certainly never goes out, whereas the subtile 
body may. It is a mistake to understand the subtile body by the "dreamer." 



40 llANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The proposition to be proved is this. Objects seen in the 
waking condition are nnreal. The ground for such inference 
is their capability of being seen. The illustration (to corro- 
borate the general induction — ^all that is capable of being seen 
as object is false ) is the phenomenon of dream. The capabili- 
ty of being seen, which proves the futility of objects seen in the 
condition of dream, is found also in objects cognized during 
the waking condition. Thus is established a relation between 
the middle term and the minor. The conclusion follows that 
objects seen in the wakeful condition are false. Though, on 
account of being internal and in a subtile condition, the phe- 
nomena of dream are diflferent from those of waking, the fact 
of being presented as object, and the consequent futility of 
presentation, are common to both. 

5. The wise regard the wakeful as well as the dreaming 
condition as one, in consequence of the similarity of objective 
experience in either ^ on grounds already described. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



" Already described," because cognition of objects is in every 
way similar in both conditions which, therefore, deserve to be 
similar. The wise, that is to say, those who are able to analyse 
and understand the trath. This verse only enunciates what 
has already been proved by the foregoing inference. 

6. That which is naught at the beginning and is so also cet 
the end, does necessarily not exist in the middle. Objects are 
like the illusions we see, still they are regarded as if real. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The objects of waking experience are false for the reason 
that they are known to have no beginning and no end, and 
that which is naught at its beginning and end is naught also at 
the middle, for instance, the mirage etc. This is the general 
rule of experience. The objects of waking experience are of 



s'ANBLiKA^S COMliBKtAftY. 41 

the same class, i. e.^ the mirage etc., which are naught in 
themselves on account of their being naught at their beginning 
as well as end ; and are, therefore, quite unsubstantial in them- 
selves. Though they are in reality illusive, the ignorant re- 
gard them as real. 

7. The being used as means to same end^ of the objects of 
waking experience, comes to naught in dream ; hence on account 
of being with beginning and end they are certainly false and 
no more. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

That the objects of waking experience are false like the 
phenomena of dream, is not correct, for, the former consisting 
of food, drink, etc., are used as tangible means to tangible 
ends, whereas the latter are not such. Therefore the futility 
of the objects of waking experience assumed from their 
similarity to the phenomena of dream, breaks down. This 
argument is not correct For, the being used as a means to 
an end becomes naught in dream, inasmuch as a man going to 
bed and experiencing a dream, immediately after having satis- 
fied his hunger by a full meal, and having quenched his thirst 
by a ftill draught of water, finds himself hungry or afflicted 
with thirst, for many months past. And the contrary also 
holds equally good ; for, one awakened from a dream wherein 
he has regaled himself with food, drink etc., finds himself quite 
hungry or afflicted with thirst. Hence it is clear that ' the 
being used as a means to an end,' which is put forth as a test 
of reality, is not true of the same objects only on another plane. 
Thus, therefore, the ftitility of the objects of waking experience 
deduced from their similarity to the phenomena of dream, 
stands well demonstrated. The being with beginning and end 
(if it should be setup as a ground of difference between pheno- 
mena of the two conditions, may be accepted by us as) common 
to both, in which case too, the said ftitility of objects stands 
doubly unshaken. 

5. That the phenomena of dream transcend the limits of expe-^ 
rience, is only a result of the condition of the cognizer^ as in the 
6 



43 mIkd^^topanishad. 

case (^ those residing in heaven. The cognizer being so condition'-^ 
ed sees the various objects^ even like one well-instructed here. 



s'ankara's gloss. 
The futility of the objects of waking experience deduced 
from their similarity to the phenomena of dream, is not well 
proved, inasmuch as the illustration does not agree with the 
thing to be illustrated. The objects of dream are not copies 
of the objects of waking experience. In dream one sees ob- 
jects transcending th« limits of experience, and finds himself 
even with eight hands, sitting on an elephant with four tusks, 
and the like. All such things are not like anything unreal, 
and are therefore real in themselves. Hence the objection 
that the illustration does not agree ; and it does not. follow 
that waking experience is false like the phenomena of dream. 
The whole of this discussion is based on a pure misunderstand- 
ing. That which is supposed to transcend the limits of 
experience in dream, is not an absolute reality in itself, but 
is only a condition of the cognizer conditioned by that state. 
(In other words, it is a mode of manifestation of the cognizer, 
brought about by the condition of that state, and not an in- 
herent power of it). As those living in heaven, such as Indra 
and others, have a thousand eyes ( by the very conditions of 
their existence ), so the transcending the limits of experience 
is the very condition of the cognizer in dream. It is no ab- 
solute property forming part of the absolute nature of the 
seer. The cognizer of dream sees, by the power of that state, 
objects of this description, consisting only of subjective ideas 
transcending the limits of experience. As here, in this world 
of experience, any well-instructed person going from one place 
to another by any known path, sees the variety of objects 
belonging to the place he goes to, so does the cognizer see 
in the present instance. Hence, as the rope, the serpent, the 
mirage, etc., being merely the conditions of the cognizer, are 
unreal, so the transcendent phenomena of dream, are only a 
result of the condition of the cognizer, and, therefore, unreal. 
Hence the illustration does not at all disagree. 



s^'ankara^s commentary. 4 J 

9. — 10. Even in dream that which is subjective imagination 
is unreal, whereas that which is objectively existent is real ; 
whereas in truth both are unreal. So in waking experience, 
though that which is subjective imagination is unreal, and 
that which is objectively existent is real, in fact, both ought 
to be unreal. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Having solved the diflSculty based on the nature of the 
objects of dream transcending experience, the text proceeds to 
again point out the likeness of waking experience to the phe- 
nomena of dream. Even in dream that which is simple 
mental imagination is unreal, inasmuch as it is not seen the 
moment next after its existence. In the same manner, objects 
imagined to be cognized by the external senses, such as jars 
etc., cognized by the eye etc., are supposed to be real. Thus, 
though the whole of the phenomena of dream are known to 
be unreal, the facts arrange themselves under reality 
and unreality. In the same manner, all objects, whether 
regarded as real or unreal, seen in waking experience, deserve 
to be unreal, notwithstanding their apparent;,opposition among 
themselves as real and unreal. The reason for this is the 
same as that for believing the unreality of the experience of 
dream, viz., the circumstance of being cognized by (the external 
or internal ) senses. 

11. If in both conditions experience reduces itself to illu- 
sion, who is the cognizer of experience ; who creates it ? 



s'ankara's gloss. 



This is what the opponent asks. If experience in both the 
conditions, dream and waking, were an illusion pure and simple, 
who is the cognizer of the whole of subjectivity and objectivity? 
Who is it that creates them ? In short, what is the substratum 
of knowledge and memory ? If you say — ^none, the conclusion 
must force itself upon you that ttieie is nothing like oMan. 



44 m£nd6etopanishad. 

12. The dtmaUf all lights imagines himself by himselfy 
through the power of his itdyd ; he alone cognizes the objects so 
sent/ortL This is the last word of the Veddntaonthe subject. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The atman^ all light, that is, self-cognizing, calls forth by 
himself, the variety of experience to be hereafter described ; it 
subsists also in himself, through the power of Maya ; just 
like the snake etc., seen in place of the rope. This is the 
conclusion of the Ved&nta on this matter. There is no other 
substratum of knowledge and memory ; nor are knowledge 
and memory admitted to be possible, as the Nihilists maintain, 
without a substratum. 

13. The Lord manipulates the variety of subjective experi- 
ence, as well as that of objective experience^ while cognizant 
of the subjective and the objective respectively. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

It is now shown in what manner dtman imagines out the 
whole of experience. The word " manipulates " is used to 
indicate a dividing of dtman within himself. Atman mani- 
pulates himself as the variety of objective experiences, such 
as words etc., as also the vdsands existing on the subjec- 
tive plane. In other words, he forms vdsands ( by a process 
of divine ideation ), while cognizant of the subjective. And 
while cognizant of the objective, he imagines them as the 
variety of objective experiences. The Lord means dtman. 

( A'nandagiri adds an apt illustration. The potter forms 
an idea of the jar he wants to fashion and objectively realizes 
the idea by a process of externalization. Cosmic, or dtmic^ idea- 
tion proceeds in the same manner up to the point of self- 
realization.) 

14. Those that subsist tvithin only with the mind^ and those 
that answer to two points in time without^ are all mere illusion; 
for^ the differen^ce between them is not based on any other 
ground^ 



s^aneaba's cohmektart. 4S 

s'ankara's gloss. 

That everything is mere imagination like dream is now 
questioned ; for external objects cognized by one another are 
unlike mere imaginations of the mind, and are grasped by the 
mind. This is no sound objection. Such objects as cannot 
relate themselves to any point in time other than that wherein 
the mind exists, are those " that subsist within only with the 
mind ", that is to say, such objects are those which only ap- 
pear to exist on account of their being cognized. Those things 
that answer to two points in time, are such as are cognizable 
by others existing at some other point of time and cognizing 
the latter in their turn. Hence they are mutually cognizant 
of one another from different points in time. To illustrate : 
If we say * he sits till the milking of the cow,' we mean that 
the cow is milked during his stay, and also that his stay is 
prolonged till the cow is milked. Other instances of the same 
kind are such expressions as ' this is so much ; ' ^ he is so and 
so,' etc. Those objects that are in this manner mutually 
cognizant are said to answer to two points in time. Objects 
which subsist within, only so long as the conceiving mind is 
present, as well as external objects, which ( by being indepen- 
dent of the mind) answer to two points in time, are all mere 
illusion. For, the answering to two points in time, the 
peculiarity of external objects, is not derived from any cause 
other than ' being imagined,' (which is the cause also of the 
phenomena of dream). It being so, the illustration of dream, 
applies here also in its fall meaning (and points to the illu- 
siveness of objective experience). 

15. Those that are in a subtile condition toithin^ as well as 
those that are manifest without, in a gross condition, are all 
mere imagination, the difference lying only in the means oj 
cognition* 



S'ANKARA S GLOSS. 

Though objects produced merely by mental vasanSi are 
unmanifest and subtile within, and though objects without are 
manifest and gross, the difference between the two is caused 



46 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

o.Ay inr 'ument of cognizing, such as the eye etc., and 

not \^^ lii substantial in the nature of the things them- 

selves, tl phenomena of dream are, for the time, as real 

as >se .>. Araking. Hence the difference being based only 
on lifference in the' instruments of cognition, waking expe- 
jienci i as much an illusion as that of dream. 

16. The Jirst result of ideation is Jiva, whence the various 
entities, objective and subjective ; for its knowledge must cor^ 
respond to its memory, 

s'ankara's gloss. 

What is the source of the imagination of objects, subjective 
and objective, related as cause and effect to one another ? 
This is proposed for explanation. This is Jtva, whose very 
nature is bound up with the idea of cause and effect, as 
evidenced by such daily experience as " I do this, " " this hap- 
piness, or that misery, is mine," and the like. Atman is 
absolutely free from any such idea, but in it is seen, like the 
snake in place of the rope, the idea of Jiva, Through it are 
evolved, by constituting the ideas of action, actor and act, as 
the ground of division, the various things,/>rana etc., — subjective 
and objective. The cause of this ideation is thus explained. 
The self-evolved Jwa having power to give shape to any idea, 
has its memory guided by its inherent knowledge. That is to 
say, from a knowledge of the idea of cause follows knowledge of 
the idea of effect ; then follows memory of the two ; then again 
knowledge and the variety of knowledge in the form of 
actor, act, and actions. From knowledge rises memory and from 
memory, knowledge, and this endless series continues without 
end, giving rise to various subjective and objective things. 

17. As the rope whose nature is not known, is, in the dark, 
imagined variously to be a snake, a line of water, etc., so is 
atman {imagined to be the variety of experience). 

s'ankara's gloss. 

It is laid down that experience begins with the idea of 7?m. 
Now it is proposed to clearly explain this position by an illustra- 



S^ANKAHA^S GOHHSNTABt. 47 

tion. A rope not known as such, is mistaken, in hazy darkness, 
for a snake, a line of water, a stick, or any one of numerous 
similar things. The cause of all these is none other than 
absence of previous knowledge of the rope ; for, if the rope 
were known beforehand, there would be no room, as in the case 
of things such as the fingers of the hand already well known, 
for the series of imaginings such as the snake etc. This case 
well illustrates the point in question. As dtman is not known 
in its native absoluteness as all purity, all thought, and one 
without a second, in contradistinction to the variety of expe- 
rience consisting of causality and the ideas of good evil etc., 
it comes to be conceived as manifold in the form of Jiva^ 
Prdna^ etc. This is the clearest declaration of the Upanishads. 

18. As complete knowledge of the rope dispels all illusion^ 
and the one changeless conviction arises that it is nothing else but 
the ropCy so indeed is confirmed the right knowledge of dtman. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

On the conviction being gained that the thing appearing as 
so many things, is nothing but the rope, all illusion vanishes, 
and the knowledge so acquired subsists for all time. In the 
same manner is confirmed the right knowledge that all is one — 
dtman ; in other words, dtman is realized in the full light of 
the lamp of knowledge lighted by the &dstras^ which proclaim 
the nature of dtman in such texts as " Not this, not that ; " "All 
this is dtman ;" " It transcends experience, being not other, not 
distant, not without, ever without and within, unborn, undecay- 
ing, undying, immortal, secure, one, and unique." 

19. It is imagined as Prdna and the variety of numberless 
visible objects^ — this is the power of illusion inseparable from 
the ever luminous^ who is (as it were) shaded off by it. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

If dtman were one, how could it be imagined as Prdna and 
the variety of objects making up the world of experience? 
This is explained by saying that all this is merely the result 



48 mand6kyopanishAd. 

of the power of illusion inherent in the ever-luminons atrimn. 
Just as the illusion spread forth by a juggler would show 
the sky blooming with flowery trees and plants, so does this 
power of illusion of the ever-luminous atman. It covers from 
view even its very substratum, atman. ( The Smrti declares ) 
"my illusion is intransgressible." 

.^0. Those acqibainted with Prana call it Prana ; those 
with the Bhutas^ Bhuta; those conversant with the Gunas call it 
Gma; those with the Tatvas^ Tatva. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Prdna^ Prdjna, Bijdtmd, and the rest ending with sthitt 
(enumerated in verses 20 — 28), are some of the varieties of 
numberless objects produced by illusion. These and others of 
their kind, imagined by all descriptions of beings, are like the 
snake in place of the rope. The substance is that they are 
all produced by avidyd^ on account of the absence of right 
knowledge in the ever free and distinctionless dtman. It is 
of no material use to define and discuss each of the things 
called Prdna etc. 

21. — 28. Those knowing the quarters^ call it the qvxir^ 
ters ; those immersed in objects of sense^ call it those 
objects ; those having their eye upon the Lokas^ call it the 
Lokas ; those thinking of the DevaSy see it as a Deva. Those 
knowing the Veda, describe it as the Veda ; those understanding 
Yajna^ call it Yajna; those realizing it as the enjoyer of every- 
thing^ describe it as such ; those seeing it as objects enjoy ed^ see 
it in the objects. The knowers of the subtile call it the subtile ; 
the knowers of the gross call it the gross ; those familiar with 
personality y call it the personal being ; those having no faith in 
anything y describe it as pure void. The knowers of time call it 
time ; the knowers of space call it space ; those versed in dis- 
putationy call it the problem in dispute; those knowing the 
worldy describe it as the world. Those who are cognizant of 
the mindy call it the mind ; those resting themselves in the sense 
Of supreme discrimination^ call it discrimination ( buddhi ) ; 



those toho €an reach only to CJUtta^ call it Chitta; tho$e 
familiar with Dharma arid Adhamta^ call it one or the other. 
Some conceive of it as ttoenty-'Jite^ others as twenty-six^ tohile 
there are others who conceive of it as thirty^one^ or eten manifold. 
Those whose ken is bounded by Heaven call it Heaven ; those 
who are bound to the Ahramas^ call it the Asratnas ; the grami^ 
marians regard it as vmle^femdle^ or neither ; others call it Para^ 
Apara. Those convinced of creatiofi^ call it creation ; those sure 
of destruction^ call it destruction, whereas those positive ahaut the 
present^ call it pure subsistence. Thus all describe it as all 
and everything they like it to be at any time. 

29. That idea which is pressed on one^ is perceived by him 
as the sole essence. It protects kim^ taking on the form of that 
idea, and allows him to be convinced that this is the sole essence. 



s'aneaba's gloss. 

There is no use in this kind of description without end* 
Whoever is told by his teacher, or any trustworthy person, 
that any one of the many things, praixa etc., or the like, is the 
sole essence {atman\ perceives that very idea to be the real 
dtmjan. And indeed such conception of atman, through the 
power of such faith and conviction, takes the form of that 
very conception and protects the devotee in accordance with 
his desires, and surrounds him with itself in every way. 
And the devotee also having full faith that this is the reality, 
believes that the absolute is of the form of that idea. 

30. This (^atman) ever inseparable from these {things) is 
imagined as separate. He who understands the truth in its 
fulness is aZ liberty to imagine dtman as of any form he likes. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Atman is ever inseparable from the variety of things de- 
scribed as prdna etc. Though it is so, it is imagined by the 
ignorant as something separate and apart from the thing 
seen, like the snake etc., from the rope. But to the illuminated, 
7 



80 IflND^KTOPANIBBAD* 

prAna and others are none of them apart from Atmafi^ like the 
ideas of snake etc., which are ever in and of the rope. For, the 
S^ruti also lays down *' All this is dtman.'^ Thns he who knows 
the tmth in its fnlness ; that is to say, in its fiill import as 
"shown in the Veda^ as also in its clear form as demonstrated 
by reason, wi:., everything is dtman and is as illnsive without 
dtman as the ideas of snake etc., without the rope; is 
at liberty to construe the texts of the Veda after any idea 
that best pleases his fiincy* For, none but one ftilly conversant 
with this spiritual truth is able to explain what a particular 
text refers to, or to know the Veda in its ftill import. " None 
who is not familiw with the spiritual is able to derive any 
fruit from his acts, " says Mann. 

31. As are dream and illusion or a castle^n^tkC'^Lir^ so^ 
say the toise^ the Veddntas declare this cosmos to be. 



s^ankara's globs. 



The futility of duality demonstrated by reason is now shown 
to be deduced from the Veddntas as well. Bream and illu- 
sion are in themselves entirely unreal, still they are regarded 
as real by the ignorant. As a castle-in-the-air seen frill of 
people — males and females, all moving about, among rows of 
well-furnished shops, houses or palaces, on various errands, is 
entirely obliterated from view, in a moment ; and as dream and 
illusion are entirely unreal though actually perceived 5 so is 
the cosmos an illusion of unreality, though experienced as reaL 
Where is this taught ? The text replies, in the Veddntas. 
"There is no variety here"; "Indra becomes many by his 
power of illusion"; " This was sole dtmun in the begining **; 
"This was Brahman alone, at first"; "All danger rises from 
duality"; " This duality does not exist"; " When all has become 
dtman who can see whom by what ?" In these and a number of 
other texts of like import, the wise, that is, those who can see 
through things, declare the futility of all. So indeed says 
also the Vydsa Smrti " ( Duality is seen by the wise) to be 
like a hole in the wall of thick darkness, or like the bubble? 



s'akkara's commentart. /51 

ttiat froth over fresh rain-water, ever being dissolved, ever 
away from bliss, and ever reducing themselves to naught after 
dissolution/' 

32. There is no dieeoluUon^ no creation^ none in bondage^ nor 
pupilage^ Ttane desirous of liberation^ none liberated ; this it 
the absolute truth. 



b'ankara's oloss. 



This vers^ is meant as a concluding summary of the preced- 
ing discourse. When duality is all illusion and Attnan alone 
is the reality, it follows that all that forms the subject of 
experience, whether derived from ordinary intercourse or 
from sacred texts, is mere illusion. It being so there is no 
dissolution, that is to say, destruction, in the absolute sense of 
the word. Creation means production, evolution, birth ; and 
the being in bondage is the condition of jiva. Pupilage is 
th6 condition of one trying to realize moksha. One desirous of 
liberation is he who feels the necessity of liberation, and the 
liberated is one who has already realized it. The absolute 
truth is that there being no dissolution and no creation, the 
being in bondage, etc., cannot at all be possible. It may be 
questioned — ^how can we say there is nothing like creation or 
dissolution ? We say this because of the entire absence of 
duality, and this is borne out by such texts of the SrtUi as 
" where there is duality there is danger " ; " who sees any- 
thing like duality in this ( passes from death to death)"; 
**all this is dtman alone"; ^Hhis is sole Brahman^^ ; 
^^ all this is one without a second" ; and the like. Creation 
sand dissolution are possible only of that which exists, 
not of that which, like the horns of the hare, does not 
exist at any time. The advaita is neither produced 
nor destroyed. That it should be one without a second^ 
and should, at the same time, have a beginning and 
end, is a simple contradiction in terms. It has already been 
described that experience which depends on the notion of 
duality is mere imagination of the form of Prdna^ etc. 



52 MlNDdKT0PA5I6HAD. 

having dtman for its snbstratam, like the imaginary snak^, 
etc., which have the rope for their sabstratnnu The snake, 
etc., seen in place of the rope as a result of subjective 
imagination, are neither produced from, nor dissolved in, 
the rope, nor are they produced from, or dissolved in, the 
mind, nor even in both (the rope and the mind). Thus 
duality being like any of these things which are mere 
subjective imaginations (it can have no real beginning or 
end )• Nor is duality at all present in the mind immersed 
in trance or sleep. Hence it is clear that duality is nothing 
but mere subjective imagination, and therefore it is well said— 
the absolute is the negation of dissolution, etc. 

If it were so, the object of all teaching ought to tend 
towards inculcating the negation of duality and not towards 
establishing the position of the advaita^ for there is apparent 
absurdity ( in employing that which proves a negation, to 
establish a position). If this were admitted there wc^dd 
Temain nothing to substantiate the positive existence of the 
advaita ; and the whole argument must of necessity terminate 
in the establishment of pure Nihilism, fbr even duality has 
been demonstrated to be [nothing. This objection does not 
stand. ^ It is no use reverting to a point already raised and 
discussed before, that the imaginary snake, etc., canned 
subsist without a substratum ( the rope )• The objector may 
advance that the illustration of the rope will not do, inasmuch 
as the rope, the substratum of the imaginations, ought, like 
the latter, to be no more than mere imagination. This we 
say is not right For, on the disappearance of the imagina'> 
tions, the unimagined residuum that persists, is for that very 
persistence, not an imagination, but the reality. It is n<yt 
correct to say that that also is as much imagination as the 
snake, for, even before knowledge of the unreality of the 
snake, it is entirely real, being never like the imagiz^d rope, 
the subject of imagination. Moreover the existence of the 
person imagining, must be antecedent to the imaginaticm, and 
ought therefore to be admitted as absolutely real. This ought 
.o be suflGk^ient to show the incorrectness of (iie argument 



s'aitkara's OOMMBKTABT. 53 

which requires that the snbstratnm also oaght to be unreaL 
It is, however, asked how, when (as shown above) the real 
iiatore (of d^maTt) transcends all instroments of knowledge, 
eonld teaching be of use in putting down the idea of duality* 
This is no difficulty. For, the whole of duality is merely 
imagined in dJtmom^ like the snake, etc., in the rope. How 
agtun is this to be made good ? Obviously by observing that 
cognitions of the form "I am happy"; "I am misera- 
ble"; " I am ignorant"; " I am bom, dead, old, with body, seen, 
imseen, the doer, the receiver, united, disunited, decayed, or 
any similar thing"; **this is mine," etc., are all merely 
imaginary in himom. Atfnan is the common substratum of all^ 
for its presence everywhere and anywhere, like that of the rope 
kt all such imagining as snake, line of water, and 
the like, is no deviation from its ( unoonditioned ) nature. 
The <^ponent again suggests that this being so, specific 
knowledge of d^^9ea72 is self-evident; what more has teaching 
to accomplish ? Teaching is always expected to accomplish 
something not accomplished, and ifl useless if it repeats what 
has already been accomplished. Our reply here is as follows z 
Atman is not realized in its native condition because of the 
obstruction created by such imaginations as happiness, etc., 
illusively created by avidyd. And indeed we do not take any 
thing other than realization of the native condition {of&tman) 
as final beatitude. Now then teaching puts down duality by 
producing full consciousness of the not-happy nature of Atman^ 
after the manner of the S'rutis " not this, " ** not that, " 
leading thus to a clear idea of its native condition. Non- 
happiness is not a characteristic {ot&tman) present in all 
ideas such as of being happy and the like, for if it were so 
there were no apparent specific difference produced by the 
illusive ideas of being happy etc. ; in the same manner as in 
fire which is naturally hot, no specific difference is created by 
its being supposed to be cold. Therefore Atman is purely 
characterless, and ideas like being happy etc., are attributed to 
it by mere illusion. It is now clear that the teaching which 
l»ys down the being not-happy as an attribute of atman^ 



64 IflNDdKTOPANISHAD. 

means only to imply that It is free from all attribtttes and 
relations, whether of happiness, misery, or any other things* 
In this connection here is an aphorism of those who know 
the d^amaa^ to the effect that ^^ It is proved on acconnt of its 
responding to negation." 

33. The absolute Advaita imagines itself to be the many ; 
all objects are thraagh It ; hence the happiest thing is the 
condition of the absolute. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 



The gronnds of the proposition laid down in the previons 
text are now explained. As in the instance of the rope^ 
through the imaginary forms snake etc., it is the rope, the 
real thing, that imagines itself to be the snake etc. ; in the 
same manner, through forms such as Prdna and others withr 
out number, substantially unreal, (dtman^ as it were, imagines 
itself to be those things )• For, indeed, no perception is 
possible without mental action, and action of all kind is 
foreign to dtman ; objects are cognized by a subject in 
action not by one in simple subsistence. Therefore through 
notions such as prdna etc., substantially unreal, the ever 
real and one dtman^ the rope-like substratum of all 
imaginations, imagines itself as divided into many 
forms. And this notwithstanding its one and unique charac-- 
ter. The meaning is this. No imagination can stand upon 
nothing, it must have a substratum to rest upon. Hence on 
account of dtman being the substratum of all imaginations,, 
and on account of its being ever inseparable and one, the 
condition of the absolute {dtman) is the happiest thing imagin-^ 
able. That which is unhappy or miserable are only the 
imaginations themselves, for they are the cause of fear etc.^ 
like the rope-snake. The condition of the absolute is free 
from fear and hence is the only happy thing possible. 

34. The existence of the variety (of experience) cannot be 
said to be identical tmthdtman^ nor in any way standing indepen^ 



s'ankaba's commentary. 65 

tknt by itdelf; — nothfng is separate or incorporate^ thus say 
the knotoers of the essence of things. 



b'ankaba'h gloss. 



Why is the condition of the absolute called the happiest ? 
The sense of nnhappiness is present only where expe- 
rience exists in the form of individuality, as seen in the exclusive 
existence of things by themselves. For, in dtman — ever one and 
absolute existence, the whole of the phenomenal consisting of 
jyrdnxi etc, together withthe whole of the variety of experience, 
when examined by the light of the absolute, does not exist ; 
just as the rope when examined with the help of a light is not 
what it appeared to be, viz.^ the snake etc. Nor is the pheno- 
menal existent by itself, for it is ever imaginary like the 
snake seen in place of the rope. Moreover things like prana 
etc., are not mutually exclusive like horse and buffalo. Hence 
on account of being unreal, nothing exists either separate, by 
itself, or incorporate, one in the other. Thus say the knowers 
of the essence of thin^, i. e.j the Brdhmanas. It is implied 
in this manner, that on account of not being the cause of the 
unhappy, the condition of the absolute is the happiest. 

35. By the sages free from attachment^ fear^ anger ^ and 
wellr-'oersed in the secrets of the Veda^ this ever one^ the nega^ 
tion of the phenomenal^ is regarded as the pure unconditioned 
(essence). 



s'ankara's gloss. 



This right knowledge is now extolled. The sages, that is 
to say, those who ever devote themselves to contemplation, 
being free from all evils such as attachment, spite, fear, 
anger, etc., and therefore able to properly discriminate right 
from wrong; and who know all secrets of the Veda^ being 
fully enlightened, declare from their knowledge and study of 
the Veddntas that dtman is ever free from all imaginations 



66 MAND^KTOPAKISHAD. 

and is never in relation to any condition. Atman is also 
the negation of the phenomenal; that is to say, the phenomenal 
consisting of the mutually exclusive units which make up 
duality, does not e^ist in it which, therefore, is ever one. The 
implication is that those alone who are free from all evil, and 
ever absorbed in meditation on the meaning and substance of 
the Vedaj and are sanyAsins^ can realize dtman; and not 
those whose mind is subject to the tempest of passions, or 
inclined like the Tdrkikas and others, towards upholding their 
own creeds and opinions. 

36. Therefore knowing It to be sttchy the mind should 
constantly be directed to the Adtaita^ having realized which 
(the enlightened) should walk the world like a' block of (dead) 
mqtter. 



s'aneara's gloss. 



As the advaita is the only happy condition, being that in 
which no evil is possible, the enlightened one should realize it 
as such by unifying his memory solely with it. In other 
words, he should constantly use his memory to the end of 
impressing, up to final and foil realization, the idea of the 
absolute ((i^ma;2) on the mind. Having known the advaita^ 
having been confirmed in consciousness of the advaita^ in the 
form of the cognition " I am Brahman^ " and having thus 
realized atman as above enjoyment and acquisition, unborn, 
and transcendent, the wise man should walk the world like a 
block of dead matter; that is to say, without ( relating him- 
self to duality by ) declaring in any manner what he is, or 
what he has become. 

37. The ascetic should place himself above praise^ abovs 
the forwjality of salutation^ abo^e the rites consumated with 
the use of the word Svadhd^ and should abandon himself 
entirely to circumstances^ being above the mutable as well as 
the immutable. 



s'iUmABJL^ OOMUBOTABY. 57 

' . s'ANKi^A'S GLOSS. 

How should the ascetic walk the. world ? He should be 
al30ve the pleasure of praise, or . the anxiety of securing 
that good-will which accrues from careful observance of forms, 
social and religious, and all similar conventionalities.* In other 
words, he should free himself from all cares, and take up the 
life of a completely retired paramahamsa ; for, says the s'ruti^ 
** knowing this dtman etc."; to whi^h the 8mrti adds " ( the 
ascetic should have his) mind ever, unified with it, ever 
one with it, ever in it, ever devoted to it, etc." The 
futile is the body, for it changes every moment. The firm is 
Atman. He has the futile for his abode when, on account of 
intercourse necessary for purposes of eating etc., he is obliged 
to temporarily forget himself, ever immovable like dkds'a^ 
and relate himself to the sense of egoism. Thus he has the 
futile for his abode in this sense, and not in the sense of being 
related to external objects of sense. Being so he should 
leave himself entirely to circumstances, that is to say, he should 
leave his being provided with food etc., merely to circum- 
stances. 

38. Hwoing realized the nature of the essence within and 
without^ one should become the essencey should ever rest in ity 
and should he firm in it. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



\ 



The essence within consists of the elements prthvi etc., and 
the essence without is the body etc., — all then are entirely 
unreal, like the rope-snake or like dream or illusion. For, 
says the huti, " concrete things are mere play of words, being 
empty names" etc. ; " dtman is everywhere within as well as 
without, unborn, transcendent, undivided, having no within or 

♦ The word SvadhA in the text refers to the ceremonies known as SrAddhas. 
Every oflEering in that ceremony is accompanied by the ntterance of that 
word. The sense is that the ascetic should renounce even these rites which 
are connected with the dead. 

8 



68 MiNDftKTOPAKlfiHAD. 

withont, entire, whole, all-pervading like dkdsa^ snbtilei 
inamovable, characterless, without parts, without action," etc ; 
"Itisthe truth,— i&awetn'^ ^' Thou art that" Having thus 
realized the true essence (i.e., having known all within and 
without to be dtfnan ), one should become it, and should rest 
in it, and not, like those ignorant of Atman^ in mere objects of 
sense. The object of saying that he should be firm in it is 
this. There are some who take the mind to be &tman^ and 
believe it to be affected by its action. They delude themselves 
into the belief that action of the mind assimilates &tman with 
the body, and that concentration of the mind allows it to 
rebecome itself— thus feeling vainly despondent or joyful iot 
the one idea or the other. Those who are real knowers of the 
essence should, however, not commit this mistake, for dtman 
is ever chaikgeless, and therefore not open to any chance of 
being dislodged from its native condition. The wise should 
be so firm and resolute as to be convinced that they are always 
Brahmarty ever in and of it. In other words, the consciousness 
of the self-realization of atman should never cease even for a 
moment. Well says the «»ir^e "(the wise should look with 
equal eye whether upon a dog or a chanddla ) they should be 
equal to all." 



CHAPTER III. 



( OAUDAPADA'S— ZARIKA.) 

Of the Advaita. 



1. The Jim betaking itself to devotion^ believing all to be the 
result of evolution from Brahman^ and therefore unjchanging 
and unborn even before such evolution^ is said to be of narrow 
intellect^ inasmuch as it so believes. 



s'ankara's gloss. 
Aum. The word Aum is folly explained even by simply 
enunciating the proposition ''AtTmn is the negation of the pheno- 



S'ANKABA'S OOMICEKTABT. 69 

menal, blissful, and ever one without a second"; as also by 
the other proposition " It being known duality does not exist." 
Duality has been shown to be mere illusion in the preceding 
chapter, by illustrations of dream, illusion, castle-in-the-air^ 
etc., and also by reasoning based on grounds such as " the 
capability of being seen," "the being finite," and the like. 
It is asked whether the Advaita is to be taken as proved only 
on the evidence of the Sruti, and whether no reason can possibly 
demonstrate it? This chapter, therefore, shows how the 
Advaita can be demonstrated by reason. The last chapter 
ends with the conclusion that all difference of whatever kind 
implied in acts of devotion, is mere illusion, and the only 
reality is dtman, the advaita. This is p^fectly correct. Jiva is 
any individual, here referring to one trying to obtain liberation. 
This Jiva betakes itself to devotion as a means to the end, viz.^ 
moksAa, and believes the relation between itself and Brahman 
to be one of devotee and the object of devotion. It under- 
stands that by the help of this devotion, it, subsisting in the 
present only or being evolved from Brahmany shalU in future^ 
that is — ^after death, become Brahman. For, as before evolution, 
it, as well as all other things, was unborn> all, including itself,, 
mnst become that which they were before evolution, by force 
of the said devotion. Such a Jiva, inasmuch as it regarda 
Brahman as conditioned in this manner and therefore othei: 
than the absolute, is called of narrow intellect, that is to say, 
with intellect limited by ignorance, by those who are acquaint- 
ed with the absolute reality. The Upanishad of the TalavakSirai 
idhhd has it " that which is not shaped by speech,, but that by 
which speech is shaped, is Brahman, and not what thou 
worshippest." 

, 2. There/ore, I begin to describe that which is infinite 
limitlessness of thought (sentiency?), which is ever unborn, and 
which is eqtial everywhere ; thus showing how, though appearing 
to give birth {to this variety of things ).on all sides, it is not 
at all affected by any such thing. 



60 HlNDteT0PAKI8HAI>. 

s'ankaba's aLoss. 

As one unable to realize dtman as ever nnbom and predent 
within and without, and therefore believing it to be limited 
by avidyA^ thinks ** I am bom "; ** I subsist because Brahman 
has evolved me out of itself**; "I shall become 5mAma7t by 
devotion to It '*; and thus remains in stupid narrowness of 
mind ; I begin to describe Brahman which in reality is in- 
finite limitlessness, etc. Narrowness of mind accompanies 
knowledge of duality, for there where one sees another, hears 
another, narrowness or limitedness arises. This is born out 
by the kruti declaring all to the mere name etc. Brahman 
called bhUmay the unconditioned infinite, is that which is 
opposed to this. That is the infinite limitlessness of thought^ 
]f ealization whereof destroys all narrowness of mind born of 
dmdyd. The source of the unconditioned infinite is not known 
and it is therefore called the ever unborn. It is also equal 
everywhere, for there is in it nothing like inequality 6r 
tmevenness caused by any variety in the form of parts etc.; 
for, that which has parts is said to be uneven in itself. But 
this ( Brahman ) is without parts, and is therefore equal every- 
where, being not marked by any part being brought into 
prominence. It is now proposed to show how this Brahman 
is not at all affected by any change, though ever appearing in 
different shapes like the rope in forms such as the snake etc. 

«3. liman is likened to dkdia: beiiig *t?ce totality cf alt 
Jivas put together like so many ghatdkdkas^ and being inclusive 
of the ghatas as well. This is the fittest illustroMon of evolu- 
tion {from Brahman^ if any). 



S'ANKARA's GLOSS. 

Brahman is ever unborn and is the infinite limitlessness of 
thought. This position is now substantiated by reasons and 
illustrations. As dtman is the highest and the infinite, it is 
likened to dkdsa, for it is like it without parts and all-pervad- 
ing. It is also like each ghatdkdsa ( the portion of dkdka in- 
tercepted in a jar ), each Jka being the ghatdkdsa (and the 



s'AKEARA'S OOmENTART. &1 

totality of all being dtman^ the makdAdaa). Each ghat&k&ia 
Trh^n lost in the mahAk&sa^ is all AkAia. The same applies to 
Jtva and &tman. Or the first half may at once be construed 
ia this manner. As Akdia is the totality of all jfhatdkdiaSj 
that is to say, is, as it were, made up of them, so is the absolute 
made np of the variety of Jims. The substance is that the 
production or evolution of Jiva from dtman^ heard of in the 
Veddntas, is only after the manner oighatdkdia produced from 
makdkdea. As from the same akdsa are produced all the 
ghatas as well ( dkdsa being that space which gives form to 
the i^X'—ghata ), so from the absolute, the dkdsa of the illus- 
tration, are produced, after the same manner, all the elements 
such as prthvi and others, gross or subtile, in fact all tibat is 
subject to causality, being all mere imagination like the rope- 
snake, and answering to the ghata of the illustration. Hence 
the text says " being inclusive of the ghatas as well. " When; 
the irutij with a view to enlighten the ignorant, speaks of the 
production of Jiva from dtman^ the production should be 
understood only after the manner of the production of ghata» 
and ghatAkdsas from dkdka^ t. e.^ moMkdia. 

4. As on the dissolution of gkata^ the ghatakdka is merged 
in dkdia, so Jiva is merged in dtman in the same manner. 



s'anka.ra's gloss. 

As the production of ghatdkdsa is consequent on that of the 
ghata^ and as on the dissolution of the latter, the disappearance 
of the former ensues, so, in the same manner, are the Jivaa 
produced on the formation of the body and similar limitating 
conditions, and dissolved in dtman on their disappearance. 
In other words, the production or dissolution oiJiva is not real 
in itself but is merely imaginary in the manner described. 

5. As on any one portion of dkdsa intercepted in a jar^ 
being soiled^ so to speak, with dust, smoke, etc., all such inter-^ 
cepted portions are not soiled or affected, so the misery or 
happiness of one Jiva is not the misery or happiness of all. 



82 MANBteTOPAItlSHAD. 

s'ankara's gloss. ^ 

This verse is an answer to the argnment of the dualists to 
the effect that Atman being one in all, it most follow that the 
birth, death, or misery of one, ought to be the birth, death or 
misery of all ; and further that this being the case, there cannot 
be any jnst or possible adjustment of cause and effect. The 
answer is as follows. As on one ghatAMic^ being soiled with 
dust etc., all ffhatdMsas are not soiled, so all Jtvas are not 
affected by the happiness or misery of one. The objector asks — 
do you admit the unity of dtman or not ? We reply — ^yes, and 
. add whether the objector has not heard what we said ere long on 
this point, likening oUman to dkdsa^ and thus showing its unity. 
Then, retorts the objector, dtman being one, nothing could pre-' 
vent the said unity of experience. This difficulty raised by the 
JSdnkkyas does not hold. The Sdnkhyas do not postulate dtman 
as capable of being affected by happiness, misery, etc., but declare 
t&at these (happiness etc.,) belong inseparably to btuidhi (the 
Blind). And besides this, there is no authority or argument for 
regarding dtman^ the transcendent essence of consciousness, as 
apart (from experience). Tou need not say that in the latter case 
(not regarding dtman as apart from experience), the "being for 
another " of the action oipradhdna^ will not be borne out ; for 
whatever ih^pradhAna may be supposed to accomplish by itself 
*'for another," has no inseparable relation with dtman. If bond- 
age or liberation accomplished by the pradhAna were possibly 
related in an inseparable manner, ix^pwusha^ ever apart, then 
indeed will the " being for another " of the action oipradhdna^ 
not be compatible with the unity oidtman^ and the multiplicity 
of ditm^n {purusha in Sdnkkya phraseology) will deserve to be 
tipheld. But the Sdnkhyas do not regard bondage or liberation as 
beingin inseparable relation with d^»eaw {jpurmha)^ totpurushas 
^.re regarded as centres of simple consciousness, ever free from all 
variety. Hence "being for another " of the action oipradh&na 
is rendered perfectly possible by the mere beiny^ of purtisha^ 
and the assumption of the multiplicity oipurmhaaia simply^ 
redundant. In other words, the " being for another" of the 
action of pradhdna cannot be strained to serve as a demonstratioa 



B'ANKARA^S OOHMENTAfiT. 63 

of tlie multiplicity of pnruskas. And the Sdnkkyas have 
nothing further to put forth in support of this theory of 
multiplicity. The pradkAna takes on itself bondage and 
liberation only through the nominal instrumentality of the 
mere being of another (the purusha). This another is the cause 
of the action of pradhAna only by the very fact of his being, 
and not on account of being with any additional attributes 
(as in the theory of those — Patanjali and others — ^who posit 
an Ihara over the purusha of the Sdnhhyas). Hence the as- 
aumptipn of the multiplicity oipurushasheiTdi^y^ sheer ignorance, 
and is wide of the sense and import of holy writ. Even that 
which the VaUeshikaa and others put forth, tiz.y that desire 
(and eight other attributes ) are in inseparable relation with 
dtmany is not correct. For, impressions* producing memory 
tannot, in the first place, be in inseparable relation with dtman 
which has no parts and no magnitude. Moreover, memory being 
only a result of the contact of mind with Atman^ the rule of 
memory ( that memory cannot accompany perception ) will 
not hold, as memory will be continuous and simultaneous. 
Evpn the said contact of Atman with mind is hypothetical, for 
Atman belongs to a class other than that of mind, and is 
entirely void of touch. And the Vaiseshikas do not allow that 
guna^ (property or attribute), karma (action), samAnya, 
( generic mark) and visesha ( differentia ) can exist independent 
of dravya (substance or substratum) — Atman in the pre- 
sent instance. For if they can be independent of substance, 
desire, etc., must also be so in the case of Atmjan^ and both in the 
One case as in the other their connection with substance ought 
to be wholly impossible. If again you say, that in the case of 
substances and attributes which are inseparably one, such 
inseparable relation {sama^vAya) is perfectly possible, we say 
it is not, for it is impossible to prove inseparable relation of 



* Impression being one of the nine attributes of dtnum in the VaU'eshika 
Uieory. 

t The contact {Samyoga) whose possibility is just denied, is a guna accor- 
ding to this theory and hence the argument to corroborate the denial. 



64 MANDteYOPAlrtSffAU* 

desire etc., inasmuch as the substratum — dtmany ever'pef* 
manent, is antecedent to thera, they being quite impermanent. 
If, however, this inseparableness of desire etc., and dtman^ 
were granted, the former ought to be as permanent as di- 
mension etc., which accompany the latter— -a reductio ad 
cbbsurdum. Moreover, there will be no room for liberation as 
such. If inseparable relation were something in itself other 
than its substratum, — the substance, — ^the relation between it 
and the substance must be something beyond itself, as in the 
case of attribute and substance. If you say that inseparable 
relation is a constant inseparable relation, and nothing exter- 
nal, everything related by this relation ought to be inseparably 
constant. Or if substance and attributes be still separate, 
the possessive used to indicate the possession by the former 
of the latter, would be meaningless. Atman too must of 
necessity become impermanent, being with attributes incon- 
stant in themselves, as proved by their coming and going. 
Moreover the being with parts, and the being subject to change, 
as in the case of the body, will be another set of arguments 
against the constant character of atman. 



As oikAsa is regarded, on account of the illusion of at)ia 
to be soiled with dust, smoke, and the like, in the same manner, 
when Mman is regarded as happy or miserable on account of 
the accident of the mind born of the illusion of avidyA^ 
bondage, liberation, etc., are rendered relatively possible for it. 
For, disputants at variance as to the nature of the absolute 
are all perfectly agreed as to the illusive and avidycL-hoxu 
character of the realm of relativity and experience. 

Hence it follows that thetheory of the multiplicity of o^maw^ 
(to justify which the objection at the begining has been raised) 
set up by the tdrkikas, is superfluous and useless. 

6. Fotrn^ capacity^ name, differ here, there, and emry where; 
but that i% not sufficient to imply any differen^ce in dhasa; — and 
the illustration may fully apply to Jiva. 



ji'ankaiu's commentary. 65 

^'Ankara's gloss. 

How is it possible that experience which proceeds with the 
mtdtiplicity of dtmans as its very bases, should be justified by 
mere avidyd^ on the theory of the unity of dtman ? This is 
thus explained. In the case of dkdm we see quite a number 
of the variety of its forms, large, small, mediocre, as seen in the 
form of a jar, a piece of haU, oi* a blanket ; as also a cor- 
responding variety of capacities such as fetching water, preserv- 
ing water, serving as a cover, etc. ; and lastly a variety of 
corresponding names such as jar, piece of hail, blanket, etc. 
This we see here, there, and everywhere, in fact throughout the 
world of relativity and experience. This experience is created 
only by the said variety of form, etc., and has no connection 
with the real thing ; for, in reality, dk&'m is never with variety, 
being ever one and changeless. As this experience therefore 
implies no variety in the dkSim itself, but only in certain 
external accidents, so in the case of Jha^ answering to the 
ghatdkoLHa of the illustration, variety in dtman produces them, 
the variety itself being a result of the accident of body born of 
avidyd. This is the conclusion at which the wise have arrived. 

7, As dkdka portioned off by a jar ^ is neither a part nor an 
evolved effect of dkdsa^ so is Jwa never a part or an evolved 
effect of dtman. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

It may be argued that the variety of forms such as ghat" 
dkdka etc., is in itself, real. This cannot be. For, ghatdkdsa 
is not something formed out of dkdm like ear-rings from gold, 
or bubbles, foam, etc., from water ; nor is it, like the branches 
of a tree, a distinct part of it. Similarly Jiva^ the ghatdkdsa 
of the illustration, is neither a part nor an evolved form of 
dtman, the mahdkasa of the illustration. Hence experience 
based on the multiplicity of dtman is entirely baseless. 

8. As dkdka becomes soiled in the eye of the inexperienced^ 
so does dtman become soiled in the eye of the ignorant. 



66 MANDftKYOPAKISHAD. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

As experience of death, birth etc., is concomitant Tfith 
individuality in the form of Jtva produced by the accident of 
the body, like the experience of form, action etc., consequent 
on individualization as seen in the case of gkat&kdm^ — ^the 
being-affected by misery, action, results, and the like, oi dtman 
is only casual, i. e.^ caused by the false idea of individuality, 
and not at all real. This is now shown by an illustration. 
As in the world, the inexperienced, that is, those not able to 
judge and discriminate, imagine the dkdsa ( i, <?., the visible 
dkdm^ the sky in this instance) to be overcast with clouds or 
soiled with dust, smoke, etc., whereas those able to judge for 
themselves know for certain that the sky is not at all touched 
by any of these ; so dtman the transcendent essence of subjec- 
tive consciousness, appears to be affected by misery, action etc.^ 
only to those who are ignorant, who in fact have not the power 
of judgment necessary to know the truth. But those who 
have this power are not at all deluded into any such belief. 
As saltish land, the substratum of the mirage, is never with 
the foam, bubbles, waves, etc., which those afflicted with thirst 
see on it, so is dtman never in even the least manner connected 
with the evils etc., which the ignorant attribute to it. 

9. Death J births motion^ rest, position; in all these^ as re- 
ffards all Jivas^ it is the same as in the case of dkdsa. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The point just explained is further developed. The apparent 
death, birth, etc., of dtman, as seen in all J was, are just the 
same as those of ghatdkdsa. In short these are mere illusion 
in the one case as in the other. 

10. All entities ( Jtvas ) are mere dream, being sent forth 
by the power of illusion in dtman, and nothing can show their 
reality whether they be all equal, superior, or inferior (to one 
another). 



s'anicara's commentary. 67 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The Entities such as bodies etc., which answer to the ghata 
of the illustration, are like entities seen in dream, or like the 
body created by an illusionist. They are sent forth by the 
power of illusion in dtman. This power of diman is called 
avidyd ; the entities are all evolved from it and are therefore 
unreal. If their relative inferiority or superiority, as in the 
case of birds, gods, etc., or if even their equality ( could be 
made to serve as an argument to establish their reality it is 
replied that ), their existence in itself is difficult to prove. 
Hence they are born only of avidyd and cannot be real. 

IL That which makes the sheaths^ Rasa and others, as 
described in the Taittiriyaha^ what they are, is the highest 
Jiva, fully described after the illmtration of dkdsa. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Now are adduced statements from the S'rutis to corroborate 
what has already been said in regard to the distinctionlessness 
of the absolute dtman, free from birth etc. Rasa etc., are the 
five annamaya, prdnamaya (and manomaya, vijUdnamaya, 
anandamaya ) ko^as, being each like a sheath, the first of the 
second, the second of the third, and so on in order, as described 
in the Taittiriyaka, that is to say, the Taittiriyasdkhoparashad, 
That which makes the kosas what they are, is Jiva, being the 
cause of their being. What is Jiva ? It is the highest dtman, 
described before as the only entity, all thought, and endless, 
called Brahman. The said sheaths exist through the power 
of illusion of dtman ; being described as issuing forth in the 
order of dkdsa etc., like pictures in the panorama of dream or 
illusion. This dtrrvan has been described after the illustration 
of dkdm in the previous verses. It does not answer to the 
description given of it by the tdrkikas, who say that it is an 
imagining Jiva within the reach of human reason. 

12, In the pairs described in the chapter on Madhuj^fidna, 
the substance is the imparting knowledge of the absolute (as 



08 mandAkyopanibhad. 

the ultimate fact of being), just as is the object in describ- 
ing dkdia as being under ground as well as in the stomach. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Moreover, in the words "that which is super-physical 
( adhidaiva ) as well as corporeal ( adhyatma ) ; that which is 
tejomaya and amrtamaya purusha ; that which is the knower 
within all such hsprthvi etc., is the highest dtman ; — ^all is Brah-- 
waw," though the pairs (adhidaiva and adhydtma, tejomaya and 
amrtamayoy etc.,) are put forth, the object is only to describe the 
absolute. Brahman^ up to the limit where duality or relativity 
disappears. It is also indicated when this is to be found ; for 
it is said that it is found there where the nectar of Brahma^ 
vidyd is tasted. This nectar is the highest bliss, is in fact the 
madhu (honey or nectar) ^flawa, set forth in the Madhubrdhmana* 
It is there that this is so described. The meaning is further 
developed by a reference to the illustration of akdm^ which is 
one in all pairs such as the earth and stomach, and the like, 

13. The oneness of Jiva and dtman in unity is praised, 
whereas variety or separateness is censured, which shows that 
this is the truth. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



That the Sdstras as well as sages like Vydsa and others 
should extol the unity of Jiva and dtman, demonstrated by 
reason, and borne out by scripture ; and that the idea of sepa- 
rateness or variety supposed to be natural as within the 
general experience of all, and advanced therefore by those 
perverse theorizers who have no insight into the real meaning 
of the S'dstras, should be censured by the knowers of Brah^ 
i«aw, in such texts as "It has no second"; "He experiences 
danger who finds even the smallest difference"; "All this is 
dtman^^\ "He goes from death to death who here perceives 
anything like distinction," and many more of the same import; 
—that all this should be so, shows that this is the truth. 



s. . ♦' > *<:-v 









c ■->^ 



s'ANKARa's commentary. 69 

ff 

easy of comprehension, and in accord with jtreason. The fals^ 
theories put forth by the tdrkikas are not of ^sy conrprehen- 
eion, that is to say, are not such as can.be accepted, on exami- 
nation, to be in accord with reason. 

14. The assumed separateness of Jiva and &tman before 
evolution^ is only mei^korical, with a view to ( describe what 
is to) be^ and does not at all deserte to be real. 



- s'ankara*» gloss. 



The phrase "before evolution" must be understood to mean 
*in that part of the £//?awe5Aarf which speaks of evolution, i.e.^ in 
the karmakanda^ The separateness of Jiva and atman is 
described in the said part ( karmakanda ), in various ways 
Tarying with the object of desire, in such texts as " Desirous of 
this"; "Desirous of that"; "He, the highest, supported heaven 
and earth ", etc. This being so, the question is agked how, when 
the words oi ih^ jUanakdnda conflict with those of the karma- 
kanda^ the former alone are taken to be in accord with truth 
and reason? The reply is as follows. The separateness described 
in the karmakdnda^ anterior to such texts of the Upanishad 
as "That wherefrom all beings emanate"; "As small sparks 
from fire"; "From this dtmxin came forth akdsa^^; "It saw"; 
"It created light"; which all speak of evolution, is not real. 
If not, what is it ? It is only metaphorical, and the separateness 
implied is like that between mahakasa and ghatakasa^ or like 
the present tense used in the phrase " he cooks rice ", said in 
regard to somebody cooking rice in future. Moreover texts 
in support of separateness cannot be shown to uphold real 
separateness as such, for, texts speaking of the real separate- 
ness of atman are empty statements in accord with the general 
run of the experience of those who being imbued with avidyA 
labour under a sense of separateness. Whereas in texts speaking 
of evolution, destruction etc., it is the unity, oneness, of Jiva 
and dtmxin that is clearly sought to be established, as in the texts 
" Thou art that"; " He does not know who knows "; " He is 
another"; "lam another", etc. Hence having in view the 



70 mAnd^topanishad. 

unity to be subsequently demonstrated in the Upanishads^ texts 
in accord with the idea of separateness seen in general expe- 
rience, must be only metaphorical. Or such texts as "It saw**; 
" It evolved forth light," etc., imply that before evolution there 
was one sole unity. And if, having in view the future circum- 
stance of the demonstration of this same unity in such texts 
as "That is the truth"; "That is dtman''; "Thou art that," etc., 
the separateness of Jiva and dtman were found enunciated in 
some place (as a preliminary to begin with ), it must necessarily 
be held that this separateness is simply metaphorical like the 
present tense in the phrase " he cooks rice." 

15. Evolution as described hy illustrations of earthy iron^ 
sparks of fire^ has another implication^ for they are only 
means to the realization of the absolute; there being nothing 
like distinction. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

It is true that before evolution all was one without a second; 
but Jivas being produced, with evolution, distinction is intro- 
duced. This is not correct ; for those texts that speak of 
evolution have a different implication or meaning. The diffi- 
culty raised here has been solved even before, in that it haS 
been shown that all entities ( Jivas ) are like dream, being' 
evolved from the power of illusion of dtman ; as also that the 
birth etc., of Jivas are like those of ghatakaia. The question 
is here re-opened taking into consideration the substance of 
these very texts which speak of evolution, distinction, etc., only 
with a view to determine the real meaning. Evolution descri- 
bed by the illustrations of earth, iron, and sparks of fire, has 
an entirely different meaning ; for such illustrations are only 
meant as means to assist the true realization of dtman. As in 
the chapter on the dispute between the pranas^ anecdotes about 
Vdi/iK Asura^ Pdpmd^ Vedhd^ are conceived only for assisting 
the mind to grasp the superiority of Prdna^ so is the import 
of all texts about evolution etc., which should therefore be simi- 
larly understood. If it be said that the meaning assigned to 
the said anecdotes is not correct, we say it is, for in different 



s'ank aba's commentary. 71 

4akhas we have the same dispute described in different forms, 
^hich could not be if the dispute were understood in its 
literal sense. The fact of the existence of different versions of 
the same dispute clearly shows that the dispute is not to be 
taken in a literal sense. If it be urged that the fact of crea- 
tions being different in different kalpas^ will justify the diver- 
gence between descriptions of the said dispute in different 
places, as also of the different evolutions described in 
different texts, we emphatically say — no. For any such suppo- 
sition is simply aimless. It is not possible to find out for texts 
speaking of the dispute or the evolution, any use other than 
that of serving as a means to assist the mind in grasping the 
truth just described. If it be urged that it is possible to find out 
such use, inasmuch as they might be supposed to assist concen- 
tration leading to that end, we say — no. For concentration on 
despair, evolution, destruction will only lead to identification 
with one of them ( and not with the absolute ). Hence texts 
speaking of evolution etc., are to be understood metaphorically 
as Tielps to assist the mind in grasping the unity of dtman^ 
and in no other sense whatever. It being so, there is nothing 
like destruction etc., implied by the said evolution etc. 

16. There are three grades (dsramas) corresponding to 
three — lower^ middle^ and higher — powers of vision. This 
phase of devotion is taught for their use. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



If such texts as " all is one without a second," prove that 
atman alone is the highest, ever pure, all thought, ever free, 
ever full, the ever existent, and all else is entirely false, what, 
it is asked, could be the use of devotion such as is taught in 
texts like ^'^ Atman should be seen"; "That atman who 
has wiped off all sin should perform sacrifice"; ^^ Atman 
alone should be invoked," etc. And what is the object of 
enjoining karmxis like agnihotra and the like ? The reason 
for all this is as follows. The word dsrama in the text means 
those who belong to the airamas ; as also those who belong to 



72 kiND^KYOPANIBHAD. 

the ( varnas ) and observe prescribed scriptural usages and 
rites. The use of the word a srama at once implies that the 
first three classes (varnas) are meant, and those are possessed 
of lower, higher, and middle powers of vision, that is to sfLy, 
endowed respectively with low, ordinary, or high powers of 
intellect. Devotion and karma are enjoined by the Veda out 
of pure sympathy, to indicate the road that leads by degrees 
to realization of the absolute. But this only for those who are 
possessed of ordinary and low powers of intellect ; and not for 
those whose powers of vision are high, and who therefore know 
dtman already as one without a second, as described in the 
S'rutis " that which is not thought of by the mind but that 
whereby mind is able to think at all, is Brahman, and not 
that which is worshipped," "thou art that"; "all this is atman^ 
etc. 

i7. The advocates of duality, obstinate each in their own 
conviction, conflict with one another, whereas this conflicts 
with none, not even with them. 



s'ankaka's gloss. 



The advaita is the truth demonstrated by reason and sanc- 
tioned by scripture, and all else foreign to it is false and ima- 
ginary. But the philosophy of duality is false for this addi- 
tional reason, that it is eaten up at core, by conflicts within 
its own fold. How is this ? It is as plain as anything. The 
followers of Kapila {Sankhya), KanMa (Vaihshika), Buddha 
( Buddhist schools ), Jina ( Jainas ), all dualists, are obstinate^ 
ly firm each in their individual convictions, that is to say, are 
so depraved and perverse as to hold that truth in its entirety 
must be of this form and this alone. It being so they naturally 
hate whomsoever they regard as their opponent. Being thus 
aflFected with sympathy and aversion, they conflict with one 
another for the sake of their individual conviction. With these 
thus conflicting among themselves, our view of the unity of 
dtman, teaching the non-separableness of all, is not at all in 



s'ankara's commentary. 7$ 

conflict, like one not in conflict with one's own hands and feet^ 
Hence not being open to sympathy or aversion, the idea of the 
unity of all is the truth. 

18. The reality is the advaita^ duality is only its part. 
The dualists regard duality as real either way^ whence thi» 
position of ours is not antithetical. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



. It is now explained how the advaita is not antithetical to- 
the Dvaita^ the philosophy of duality. The advaita is the 
reality, and duality, that is to say, variety, is only apart of it; 
in other words, only a result, an effect of it, borne out by the 
texts " all is one without a second"; " It evolved light," etc. 
Beason also adds its evidence to this, tot in the absence of 
the activity of the mind, in Bamoidhi or trance as also in 
swoon and sleep, duality is not at all present. Hence duality 
is only a result of unity. The dualists hold that either way^ 
that is to say, in reality as well as by way of illusion, duality' 
is the truth. As this conviction, in their case, is a result of 
sheer ignorance, the advaita known to us, the enlightened 
ones, and enunciated in such texts as " Indra becomes mani- 
fold through illusion"; "there is no second," etc., is not in 
conflict with their idea. This is like one who seated upon a 
mad elephant, does not, out of his sense of general non-opposi- 
I tion, urge the beast upon a mad man who, though on the 
ground, maintains that he too is seated on a similar elephant, 
and that the man seated on the elephant should drive his 
I beast at him. Therefore knowledge of the advaita Brahman is- 
i the very self, the very light, of the dualists ; and for this very 
^ reason this our theory is not at all antithetical to theirs. 

19. This the ever unborn appears as if with distinction 
only on account ofrn&yd,^ and for no other reason^ for^ if dis^ 
Unction were real the immortal would bectme mortal. 

10 



74 mAnd^kyopanishad. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

If duality were an eflfect of the advaita it ought to be as 
real and substantial as its cause. With this objection in 
mind it is said that the advaita which is the only absolute 
reality, appears manifold on account of m&ydy like the one 
moon appearing as two to one afflicted with deficient sight, 
or like the rope appearing as a snake, a line of water, a 
garland, etc. This however is all nothing in reality, for 
dtman has no parts and no magnitude. That alone admits of 
distinction which has parts, for change in the relative posi- 
tion of the parts may lead to a variety of aspects, like pots, etc^ 
which the clay diflTerentiates itself into. Hence the ever 
unborn which is without parts, admits of no distinction, in 
any manner whatever, other than the one described viz.^ 
illusion ( mdyd ). For if it really did admit of distinction, the 
immortal, the unborn, the ever one without a second, and the 
essence of being, would become mortal ; ( a reversal of its 
nature which will be ) equal to that of fire becoming naturally 
€old. And this change to a condition which is the opposite 
of that which belbngs to one by nature, is most inconsistent, 
for, it contradicts all modes of reasoning. Therefore the 
reality, dtman^ ever unborn, and without parts, appears as if 
with distinction, only through mdyd. Whence it follows that 
•duality is unsubstantial. 

20. Of that being which is ever unborn^ birth is predicated 
hy some^ but it is impossible that the unborn and the immortal 
4:ould ever partake of the mortal. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

If those interpreters of Brahrimn^ who, expounding the 
doctrine of the Upanishad without properly weighing the 
words, say that dtmxin^ the, by its very nature, unborn and 
immortal, really passes into birth ( as the forms of objects 
which make ap e:^perience ), were correct, hitman by the very 
fact of its having passed through birth ought to be subject to 



s'ankara's commentary. 76 

death as well. Bnt how is it possible to imagine that Atman 
which by its very nature is unborn, immortal, and the very 
essence of being, should become mortal, and nothing ? That 
is to say, it will in no manner become mortal, become some- 
thing opposed to its very nature. 

21. The immortal does not become mortal^ or vice versd ; 
Jor in no way is it possible that a thing can be changed into 
something quite the opposite. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



As in experience the immortal never becomes mortal nor 
the mortal immortal, the becoming otherwise of the nature of 
a thing, that is to say, its being changed into something 
entirely opposite, as in the illustration of fire given before, is 
never possible. 

22. How can he who believes that the naturally immortal 
becomes rnortal^ maintain that substance remains immortal^ 
though passing through birth^ and stands ever changeless ? 



s'ankara's gloss. 



For the disputant who maintains that the immortal subs- 
tance does become mortal by passing through birth, it is idle 
to hold that substance is immortal before birth. How then 
can the substance be said to be immortal though passing 
through birth? And how again can that which passes 
through birth be said to stand changeless ? This cannot be 
justified in any manner. Hence he who holds that the 
atrmin passes into birth can never say that it is immortal, 
inasmuch as to him all is mortal. And all being mortal there 
is in this theory no room for anything like liberation ( i. e.^ 
permanence ). 

' 2i. The import of the sacred texts on the subject of passing 
into birth^ whether in reality or unreality^ is the same through- 
out ; that alone is possible which is sanctioned by S'ruU and 
demonstrated by reason. 



76 mAkd^kyopanishad* 

s'ankara's gloss. ' 

It is objected that in the case of those who maintain that 
the absolute never admits of any change, it will be difficult 
to reconcile texts which speak of evolution. We reply there 
are indeed such texts, but their meaning is not what it appears 
to be, for it has already been explained that all such texts 
serve only as helps to the mind in the act of grasping the- 
absolute. Though thus disposed of, the question is re-opened 
with a view to allay all doubt in regard to the favourableness 
or otherwise of these texts, to the main point at issue* 
■Whether we take the evolution of things as real or as mere 
illusion spread forth by an illusionist, the fate of texts speak-- 
ing of evolution, remains unaffected. It may be urged in 
this connection, that when choice has to be made between the 
metaphorical and the actual sense of words, the latter ought 
to prevail. We say — no. For, evolution in any sense ( othei 
than illusion ) is not known to ns, and is superfluous even if 
demonstrated. All evolution whether supposed to be actual 
or metaphorical refers only to illusive evolution through the 
power of avidyd, and not to anything real. The S'ruti alsa 
chimes in " within and without all is the unborn." Hence 
that which the S'ruti declares one without a second, nnborn, 
immortal, and reason demonstrates to be the same, is what 
has already been enunciated in the preceding pages. This id 
the sense of the S'rutis in question, and none other. 

24. By the text " The^^e is no variety kere^ as also " Indroy 
by m&yA^ etc.^^ ( it is plainly implied that ) the ever unborn be^^ 
eomes many only through mdyoi. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 



How can it be said that this alone is the import of the said 
texts ? It is replied that if evolution were absolutely real, the 
variety of experience must necessarily be real, and there ongbt 
to mppear no texts speaking to the contrary about experience* 
But in fact we have quite a host of texts speaking of the 
unreality of experience, to wit, " there is absolutely no variety 



s'ankara's commentary. 77 

liere '* etc., Therefore the evolution spoken of in these texts, 
-pnly Its means for a clear understanding of dtman^ is simply 
imaginary. And this is further borne out by the use of the 
word may a to indicate the act q^ evolution in the text ""^ Indra 
}>ecomes manifold through m&yoi,^^ It may be argued the word 
mdya means the mind, and we say yes to this. But as know- 
ledge produced in the mind through the senses is all avidyci^ 
it is not wrong to say that md,ya means illusion. For, the 
«aid text would, with the special meaning assigned ta the word 
^ndyA^ mean that Indra becomes many through knowledge 
produced by the senses, that is, in other words, through avidySL ; 
for the S'ruti also has it that " The unborn is born manifold " 
implying that the birth is only through illusion. The word 
♦' only " in the original text emphasizes the fact of this birth 
being pure illusion ; for, the being and not being born as many, 
:are two statements contrary to each other and are like the 
simultaneous predication of heat and cold in the case of fire. 
The realization of the unity of dtman has a very important 
object in view as described in the text " when could there be 
even the least idea of delusion or misery to him who realizes 
Unity ?" or, as implied in the text censuring the sense of duality: 
.*' he passes from death to death " etc. This, therefore, is the 
one determined sense of the S'ruti in question. 

25. Moreover^ by the negation of sambhuti^ the whole of the 
effects are negatived^ and by the words * who can cause it to 
pass into birth ' is denied the whole, of causality. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



"Those who worship sambhuti ( Hiranya-garbha) enter the 
region of thick darkness." This text excluding sambhuti from 
worship, excludes the whole of the effects (inasmuch as it is 
the highest of them). If this ( sambhuti ) were absolutely real 
its exclusion in this manner would never be possible. (There- 
fore it as well as all effects are unreal). It may be urged 
liere that the negation of worship in the case of sambhuti is 
meant only to point to the co-ordination of sawMei^e with the 



78 mAnd^yopanishad. 

karma called vindm^ in the same manner as the negation of 
worship in the case of avidyd, in the text " those who worship 
avidyA enter the region of darkness " ( is meant to point to the 
co-ordination of vidya and avidyd i. e.^ karma.) Yes, it is 
indeed trne that the exclusion of sambkuti is really meant to 
assert the co-ordination of devotion to God (Hiranya-garbha} 
implied in sambkUti^ and the karma called vindm. Still it 
should not' be forgotten that as the karma called vindia ha» 
as its result, freedom from death in the form of the result 
consequent on inborn ignorance, so the co-ordination of 
devotion to God ( with the said karma called vindsa ) meant 
for reforming the performer, and of the form of action pro- 
duced by desire for some result, must have as its result 
freedom from death in the form of the dual impulse of end 
and means. Thus then it follows that as one freed from the 
impurity known as death of the form of the dual impulse of 
end and means, becomes entirely pure, avidyd of the form of 
the co-ordination of devotion and karma has freedom from 
death as its end. (As here, so in the text instanced to corro- 
borate the fact of such co-ordination) co-ordination of (two 
opposites like^ avidyd {karma) and ??/rfya is reconciled by 
the fact that, as one free from the death of avidyd consisting 
of impulses, and therefore free from all attachment, obtains 
immediate realization of the unity of the absolute, on applica- 
tion to the Upanishads ; the said co-ordination of avidyd and 
vidyd in the same' person is easy of explanation by their 
succession in time. This being ( the import of the difficulty 
suggested by the exclusion being made to mean co-ordination ), 
it follows that the sense being other than that suggested by 
the words, the censure implied in the exclusion of sambhiiti 
from worship, is, having regard to the immortality obtainable 
by Brahmajfcdna, sufficiently well deserved. Even though 
devotion {io sambkuti) is of use, by being the means of de- 
stroying impurity, ( still ) not being the way to the immorta- 
lity ( of BrahmajHana^ it deserves to be regarded us inferior 
and unreal. Hence sambkuti being thus negatived, its reality 
is only relative ; for, having regard to the absolute unity of 



s'ankara's commentary. 7^ 

SttTnan, the tendency of effects towards any other kind of 
immortality ( is of no use), and is therefore declared unreah 
In the same manner, Jiva^ the creation of illusion, the result 
of avidydj reverts to its native form, on the disappearance of 
avidyd. It being so, it is impossible to say whence it is born* 
No one can reproduce the snake seen in place of a rope by 
force of avidya^ after it is entirely destroyed by proper discri- 
mination. In the same manner no one can produce the Jwa. 
In the interrogative form of the phrase " who can cause it to 
pass into birth ?," is implied the emphatic negation of causality^ 
That is to say,4ihere is nothing which can act as a cause 
to produce something which being mere illusion ( avidya ), i» 
subsequently destroyed. The Sruti also has it " this is from 
nowhere and has not been born of any." 

26. ^^ It is not tkiSy not tliat^ As this explanation nega-^ 
lives every thing of it, employing pure incomprehensibility a* 
reason^ (it follows that) the ever unborn ever subsists self-- 
luminous. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The S'rutiy believing that dtman, though demonstrated by 
the negation of all distinction or character in the words 
"hence this is the conclusion ;" "It is not this, not that," ia 
difficult to understand ; and being therefore anxious to des- 
cribe it by all possible means at its command, proceeds to 
negative all positive predicates of dtman. In other words, the 
S^ruti denying of dtman all that is comprehensible, in fact, all 
that can be the subject of the idea of being born ; and thus^ 
showing the invisibleness of dtTnan in the words "it is not this, 
not that," desires to negative everything positive that can be 
attributed to it, by employing incomprehensibility as a reason^ 
in this sense that one not knowing the entire subordination 
of all means whatever to the end to be achieved, should not 
take the means themselves to be as real as the end ( dtman )• 
Hence one knowing the means to be inseparable from the end 



so MlNDfrKYOPANISHAD. 

<Mid the end to be ever one and changeless, the ever unborn 
Mman which within, without, and everywhere is revealed of 
itself, in all its native light. 

27. That which iSy may appear to pass into birth, only 
through illusion^ and not of itself; he who maintains the 
reality of this births must maintain also that the born is born 
again ( and so on without end). 



s'ankara's gloss. 



It is determined by numerous texts that atman which is 
•everywhere, ever unborn, is the only one without a second, 
and nothing beside it possibly exist. The same conclu- 
sion is now demonstrated by reason. It may be urged if 
Atman is ever incomprehensible, it may be something unreal. 
This cannot be, for, we see its effects as plain as anything. As 
we infer the existence of the illusionist from effects such as 
the production of different forms etc., brought about by the 
existent worker of the illusion, so visible effects such as the 
birth of worlds, etc., must lead us to infer the existence of the 
absolutely real Atman, the substratum of the whole of illusion 
€ts spread out in the variety of forms etc. For, the birth of 
worlds, like that of the elephants etc. of the illusionist, is 
possible through the power of illusion only, dependent on a 
cause really existent and not non-existent. It is, however, 
not possible to say that anything is actually born of dtman. 
The words " of itself " in the text may be taken with the 
words " through illusion " and the first half of the verse may 
be made to mean 'the existent may be supposed to give birth 
to things, like the rope to the snake etc., only through illusion 
and not of itself, that is, not in reality.' In other words, 
though the ever existent is incomprehensible it appears to 
give birth to many things or to take many forms, only through 
illusion, like the rope appearing as a snake etc. That philo- 
sopher who, however, holds that atman, the absolute existence, 
ever unborn, converts itself into the variety of the cosmos, 
cannot say so on account of the contradiction implied in the 



s'ankara's commbntaby. §1 

^ery wordfcpnborn and born. If he continues to maintain 
tliat atman Ipes convert itself into the world of experience, he 
must admit Aj^t what is once bom will be born again and so 
tfn ad injinit'dh, (precluding all possibility of absolution )• 
thus it is plain fikat dtman is ever unborn and one- 

28. The non-esse never passess into birth either in reality or 
in illusion^ for the son ^ a barren woman is born neither in 
reality nor in illusion. ^ 



s'ankara's gloss. 



There are some who ^%txAsX^non-esse as the source of every- 
thing. It is, however, impossible for them to show that any- 
thing can come out of nothing, either in reality or illusion. For 
there is nothing in experience to corroborate the idea. The 
son of a barren woman is an empty concept, never realizable 
either in reality or in illusion. Hence this theory is entirely 
untenable and false. 

29. As in dream the mind a^ts as ij dual in character, 
through the power of mSiyd^ so in the waking condition also it 
4icts in the same manner through the same cause. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



How do we say that the becoming of being is only through 
illusion ? As the snake is pure being when seen as the rope, 
the mind is all being when seen as dtman by the help of true 
knowledge. The mind though single appears dual in dream, 
in the form of cognizer and cognized, through the power of 
illusion, like the rope appearing as a snake. In the waking 
condition also, the mind appears dual in the same manner, 
through the same cause. 

30. The mind though one appears as dual in dream^ so also 
in the waking condition it, though single, appears dual through 
illusion. 

11 



82 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The mind though in reality one with atman^ li^i the snake is, 
one with the rope, appears as if it were itself, anal, in dream.; 
For, in dream there exists not the cognized of the form of 
elephants etc., nor the cognizer of the ftrm of the eye etc.^ 
independent of the perceiving agent ( the mind ). As in 
dream so in waking, there being nothing independent of the 
perceiver. 

31. The whole of duality^ of whatever form^ is simply a 
phenomenon of the mind^for it is never experienced when the 
mind is naught. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



It may be asked what is the ground for saying that duality 
is all a phenomenon of the mind, even like the imagination: 
of a snake in place of the rope. This is here shown on the 
strength of an inference. Phenomenon of the mind means- 
result of the imaginings of the mind ; and the conclusion to 
be established is this, that ' All duality is of the mind ' in this 
sense. The reason for such conclusion is that it ( duality ) 
stands or falls with it ( mind ). When the mind is naught, 
when it is no mind, all its imaginings being withdrawn into 
itself like the snake in the rope, by the constant exercise of 
proper discrimination and non-attachment, or even in sleep, 
duality is not experienced. Hence on account of the absence 
of duality in experience, it follows that is does not exist. 

32. When it ceases from imagining ^ by a knowledge of the 
truth of Atman^ it becomes naughty and remains at rest for 
want of things to cognize. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



It is here explained how the mind could be reduced to 
naught. The truth of atman means the truth that Atman 
alone is real, like earth in the text " all evolution is mere 
play of words, earth alone ( in the case of pots etc., which are 



s'ankara's commbntart. 83^ 

forms of it ) is the truth." Knowledge of the truth of Atman 
means realization of the truth as here explained by the Sruti 
and its interpretation. This truth being realized there remains^ 
nothing to cognize, and the mind having nothing to act upon;, 
remains at rest, like fire for want of fuel. This is followed by 
that condition wherein the mind is naught. 

33. Thought is declared ever free from all imaginings^ 
unborn^ inseparable from the knowabley and Brahman is the 
sole object of this thought^ — the unborn knows the unborn. 



If duality is a chimera, who is it that gi*asps atman ? This 
is now explained. It (atman) is described by those who know 
it as free from all imaginings, that is to say, as not imagining 
anything, and therefore without distraction. It is unborn for 
the same reason. It is all thought ( sentiency ) and is inse^- 
parable from the knowable i, e., Brahman^ the absolute. For, 
says the S'ruti^ " the power of knowledge, of that which knows, 
never fails like the heat of fire"; " J5raAwaw is all thought 
and bliss"; " Brahman is the absolute truth, eternal thought, 
the ever endless." That which is an object of knowledge to 
Brahman is itself and nothing else, it being inseparable from 
everything that can be the subject of knowledge, like heat 
from fire. Hence the unborn atman(^Brahvmn\ like the 
ever-effulgent ( self-illuminating ) sun, is self-cognitive. That 
is to say, in either instance no extraneous light is required, 
they themselves being all the immutable and constant essence 
of light and thought respectively. 

34. The condition of the mind in trance^ and therefore free 
from imaginings^ and all lights should be carefully distinguished 
from sleep^for^ it is not like it. 



It was said before that the mind, free from imagination, on 
account of the knowledge of the truth of atman, becomes, for 
want of things to cognize, entirely tranquil, like fire not fed 
by fuel ; and thus falls into the condition of trance (samadhi). 



34 MAND^KYOPAKISHAD. 

It is also said that the mind being thns at rest, duality 
vanishes. The condition of the mind when it has realized 
this knowledge, that is to say, when it is free from imaginings, 
and is all light, being in a trance, should be understood with 
some care by the practitioner of yoga. It may be said tliat 
there is nothing to take note of in this ; inasmuch as absence 
of distinctive knowledge being the common character of both, 
the condition of the mind cannot be other than that of deep 
sleep. This is not at all true. For, the condition of the mind 
immersed, during sleep, in the torpidity of avidyd^ and still 
full of the potential impressions of the cause of experience, 
is quite distinct from that absolutely independent and perfect- 
ly tranquil condition of trance, all light. The seeds of avidya 
in the form of the potential tendency to act, lying imbedded 
Jn the mind, are all burnt to ashes when it is immersed in 
this condition. The fire that so burns is the fire of the know- 
ledge of dtman. Hence the two conditions cannot be similar, 
and the distinction should be carefully noted. 

35, In sleep the mind is simply overpowered, not so in 
trance, for then it has become fearless Brahman, all effulgertce. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The cause of the said distinction is thus described. The 
mind is simply overpowered in sleep, that is to say, it, with 
all the impressions and seeds of avidya^ is reduced to that 
«eed-like condition of potentiality, which is all darkness and 
admits of no perception. When, however, the mind is entranc- 
ed, nothing of this kind happens, that is to say, it is not im- 
mersed in darkness, because the condition of trance is one all 
thought and light. Hence the distinction between trance and 
sleep is well-defined, and well-marked. When thus free 
from the evil of duality of the form of avidya present in the 
distinction of cognizer and cognized, the mind itself is abso- 
lute Brahman, and is therefore beyond all fear ; for duality, 
the cause of fear, is nowhere. " Brahman is teanquility and 
fearlessness " ; " he who knows it is beyond " ; says the Sruti* 



s'ankara's commbntaet. 85* 

The eame is amplified by saying that it is all effulgences 
Effulgence is here employed as a symbol of thought {jlidna-^ 
gndsis.) Thought is the very nature of dtman^ and Brahman 
too is that whose nature is the light of thought ; in other 
words, whose nature is all thought, immutable, and one. The 
word " all " in the text further implies that this ' thought ^ 
is all pervading like dkdia, 

36. It is unborn^ free from sleep and dream^ without name 
andformy ever-efulgent^ all thought; no form is necessary (for 
it). 



s'ankara's gloss. 



In consequence of the absence of all cause of birth, it is, 
within and without, ever unborn ; for birth is a result of avidyd 
like the snake of (the illusion prevailing in regard to) the rope ; 
and this avidyd is destroyed by knowledge of the truth oidtnmn. 
It is without sleep because it is unborn, for being the ever-wak- 
ing advaita it is free from sleep, and for the same reason^ 
from dream as well. Name and form seen in it are creations 
of mere ignorance, and they are destroyed, like the rope-snake, 
on the rise of knowledge. It is without name and form, for^ 
it is not possible to describe it ( Brahman ) by name, or de- 
fine it as of any form whatever. The Sruti also says " From 
it speech turns back baffled." Moreover, it is ever-effulgent^ 
that is to say, always of the form of effulgence ; thought, being 
free from the evolution and involution implied respectively in 
knowing in the wrong manner and not knowing at all. The 
knowing and not knowing are like day and night, and the dark- 
ness of avidyd is the cause of the constant absence of light. 
On account of the absence of this darkness, and on account of 
being itself constant, unchangeable thought — effulgence — it is 
well called ever-efiftilgent. Hence also it is all thought, all 
knowledge. For a realization of Brahman^ thus described, 
no form whatever is necessary to be observed, such as samddhi 
die., which those ignorant of dtman set supreme value upon^ 
and attempt to carry out. In other words, avidyd being 



S6 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

destroyed, there is no room for doing anything, Brahman 
heing ever pure, all thought, and ever free. 

37, It is beyond all kind of expression, free from all con- 
ception^* all peace, eternal light, the highest trance, ever im- 
moveable, and above fear. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The cause of its being without name is further explained. 
The word expression is intended for the instrument of expres- 
sion, that whereby one expresses, viz,, speech ; and Brahmun 
is beyond speech. The word speech too is used only metony- 
mically, for the sense is that it is not burdened with any 
external instrument of knowledge, viz,, the external senses. 
It is free from conception in a similar sense. Conception 
here means the instrument of conceiving, viz,, the mind ; 
hence Brahmun is free from, that is to say, is without the 
mind. For the Sruti declares " It is without prdna, without 
mind, the ever effulgent"; "It is higher than that which 
is beyond akmraP Because it is without distinction and 
character it is all peace. It is ever-effulgent in the sense 
of being all thought, all knowledge. It is the highest tranc6 
inasmuch as its realization brings about that condition of the 
mind which is the highest trance ; or it is so called because 
in it the mind finds the highest happiness and rest. It is 
immoveable, that is, beyond change, and therefore above fear 
as well. 

, 55. In that where no concepts arise there is nothing to 
apprehend or give up. Then thought is centred in atman — 
ihoK^ht, formless and all peace. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

As it is said. It is the highest trance, immoveable, and above 
fear, there is no possibility of there being anything in it to 
^apprehend or give up.. For apprehension and abandonment 
are possible only where there is change or the possibility of 
-change, both of which are impossible in Brahman. For> 



s'ankara's commentary. 87 

duality or being with parts, which is the cause of change, is 
nowhere in Brahman. Moreover, where there is no room for the 
rise of any concept, apprehension and abandonment are simply 
out of question. When knowledge of the truth of dtman ensues, 
thought, on account of the absence of everything else to rest 
upon, is centred in dtman^ like the heat of fire centred in the 
fire (for want of fuel). This thought is formless, and all peace, 
that is to say, without even the least variety. Thus is wound 
'^P' by proper demonstration and by quoting texts from the 
Smtis to corroborate that demonstration, what was begun 
with the words " Therefore I begin to describe that infinite 
limitlessness of mind " etc. The words * formless' and *all 
peace' suggest that everything other than knowledge of 
atman is simple narrowness of mind, for the S'ruti^ also says : 
" Gfi.rgi ! whoever leaves this world without knowing the 
immutable is indeed a wretch of narrow mind," implying that 
aU who realize Brahman become fully satisfied and desire 
nothing. 

. 39. That yoga is the real one which is {absolute^ being) not 
in touch with anything; His difficult to be approached by 
{so-called) yogins^ for they shrink backfromit^ imagining 
Jear where there is none. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The absolute which is of this nature, is described in the 
Upanishads as that yoga which is not in touch with anything. 
That is to say, which is free from all relation (to any imagin- 
able thing or state). It is difficult to be approached by so- 
called yogins^ because these go by that name while ignorant 
iof that real knowledge ( which is called absolute yoga ) in the 
Veddntas. In other words, that yoga which is not in touch 
with anything is realized only through knowledge of dtman. 
The yogins^ meaning so-called yogins^ shrink back from this 
absolute yoga^ in the fear that it will annihilate the very self 
on which they fondly depend, thus imagining the greatest 
fear where there really is none. 



88 MANDdKYOPANtSHAD. 

40. To a yogin^ are dependent on control of mindyfearlesS"- 
nesSy destruction of misery ^ the light of knowledge^ and eternal 
veace. 



s'aitkara's gloss. 

Those who know that the mind as well as the senses are all 
imaginary, like the snake seen in place of a rope, and not 
existing apart from dtman or by themselves ; — ^those who in 
fact are thus Brahman^ experience entire freedom from all 
fear, and eternal peace. In other words, they experience 
mokshay and that not through anyone or by any means, but 
quite of itself. Whereas those yogins who, being of inferior 
or middling powers of vision, and being ignorant of the 
knowledge of the truth of dtmany believe that mind and the 
rest are all independent of dtmany and only related to it, can 
experience the said fearlessness and peace only if they can 
exercise control over their mind. Not only this but complete 
destruction of misery also will be one, of the results. The 
ignorant, however, can never experience this, for in their 
case, misery follows every act of the mind which stands only 
in some relation to dtman. The being awakened to real 
knowledge is also dependent on control of the mind ; and so 
also is mx>kshay eternal peace. 

41. The mind can be controlled by untiring perseverencSy 
equal to ( that of one engaged in ) emptying the ocean^ drop by 
dropy with the tip of a straw of kusa^rass. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

As one who applies himself with perseverence and patience^ 
without being at all tired, discouraged, or disconcerted may 
accomplish even the emptying of the ocean, removing drop 
after drop, on the tip of a straw of ^2^«a-grass ; so the same 
good qualities adhered to with resolution may enable the 
yogin to establish full control over the mind. 

42 The mind diffused in the enjoyments of imaginationy ^r 
lost in oblivious easCy should be brought back ( to dtman ) by the 



S'ANKARA's OOMMBNTAftT. 89 

proper means, for imagination and oblimon are both eqtuilly 
dangerous. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Is persevering application the only remedy for controlling 
the mind ? No. One who works with perseverence and appli- 
cation, should bring the mind, by remedies to be shortly 
described, back to dtman, when it diffuses itself in the enjoy- 
ments of imagination ( called up by desire). • Oblivion is that 
condition wherein it becomes oblivious, in other words, sleep ; 
and the mind, though at perfect ease, in such oblivion, should 
be awakened from it and brought back to dtrnan. Why 
should it be brought back if it is at ease ? Because this 
condition of oblivious ease is as dangerous as that of 
imagination. Hence the mind should be kept from imagina- 
tion and oblivion. 

43. It should be turned back from imagination and enjoys 
ment by a memory of misery ;'-^it sees not the born on remember-- 
ing all to be unborn. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



What is the remedy ? The mind diffused in the enjoyments 
of imagination, should be brought back by impressing upon it 
the memory of all duality bom of avidya being nothing but 
misery ; in other words, by strongly impressing on it lie 
sense of complete non-attachment. If it recollects what it 
has learnt from books and teachers, that all is the unborn, it 
does not need the born i. e.y duality, for then it itself does not 
e:W8t.. 

'44. The mind immersed in oblivion should be simply awake^ 
ned; and when diffused in imagination, should be brought bach 
{to dtman). The intermediate condition should be known as 
that in which attachment exists in a potential form. When 
it has gained the condition of proper equilibrium it should not 
be disturbed. 

12 



90 j MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The mind should be awakened by constant practice of 
knowledge, and of the habit of non-attachment, if it has a 
tendency to fall into oblivion, that is, sleep. By awakening 
is meant its being turned towards atman by proper discrimi- 
nation. The word used in the text for manas (mind) is chitta 
(the objectivising power of the mind), but both here mean the 
same thing. If it has diffused itself in enjoyments of imagi- 
nation, it should be pacified and brought back to atman. The 
mind of one thus trying repeatedly to control it, and therefore 
on its way back from enjoyment as well as oblivion, is, if it 
has not gained the condition of equilibrium, in a condition 
wherein both the enjoyment and the oblivion exist in a poten- 
tial form. It should not therefore be left to droop half-way, 
but should be carried, ^tli effort, to the condition of equilib- 
rium. When it has gained this last condition it should not 
be disturbed, that is to say, it should not be allowed to relate 
itself to objects of enjoyment. 

45. It shoulcl not le allowed to indulge in the happiness (even) 
of that condition ; btd (the ascetic) should free himself from all 
attachment by proper discrimination. If the mind thus 
brought to a point should Xry to externalize itself it should be 
unified with dtman. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The ascetic nearing the condition of samddhz (called the 
condition of equilibrium in the preceding verse) experiences a 
degree of happiness, which continues even in that condition. 
But the mind should not be allowed to attach itself even to 
this happiness. How should the ascetic then stand ? He 
should understand by discrimination that whatever is of the 
form of happiness is born of avidydy and is therefore futile ; 
and he should in this manner free himself of all attachment 
or relation, by turning the mind away even from that supreme 
moment of bliss» When, however, the mind, after being thus 
brought to a point, tries to externalize itself, tries in fact to 



s'ankara's commentary. 91 

indulge in a world of external objects called into being by 
itself, it should be controlled by the remedies described before, 
and should be unified with dtman^ that is to say, should be 
reduced to mere being as implied in the very form of pure 
thought. 

46, When the mind falls not into oblivion^ nor is distracted 
by enjoymenty it is itself Brahman^ being without action^ and 
beyond relativity. 



S^ANKARA^S GLOSS. 

\ When the mind controlled in the manner described, does 
pot fall into oblivion and is uot distracted by enjoyment, and is 
therefore without acticm, that is, as firm as the flame of a lamp 
in a place protected from the slightest breeze ; and is also 
beyond relativity created either by its own actions or those of 
f^nother, theu indeed it has become Brahman. 

47. That happiness is described as centred in itself all 
peace, containing liberation within itself, indescribable, the 
most sublime, the one unborn, {not apart from) the cognized, 
ever unborn in its turn, and itself that which is all thought 
{Brahman). 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The happiness just described as the result of the knowledge 
of the truth of dtman, is centred in itself ; all peace, that is to 
say, free from all evil ; containing liberation in itself, that is 
to say, equal to, or more than haivalya itself; and indescrib- 
able, because of being entirely unlike, and unconnected with 
anything. It is also the most sublime, inasmuch as it is 
cognizable only by ascetics; and it is unborn, because it is not 
born or produced like anything resulting from sensible 
objects. It is not apart, in the form of being ever sat (being), 
from the cognized, which also, in its turn, is in reality ever 
unborn, and all being so, is Brahman by its very nature 
(thought). This happiness is so described by those who know 
Brahman^ 



92 IcANDteTO^AKISHAD. 

48. No Jiva is born^ nor is its cause ascertained; — thia 
indeed is the highest truth that ^^nothing is hom^^ 



s'ankaba's gloss. 

All this talk abont controlling the mind, and about evolu- 
tion resembling the evolution of various forms from a piece of 
iron or a lump of clay, and also about devotion etc., is a mere 
means to the end, viz., realization of the absolute ; and has in 
itself no meaning whatever. The real truth therefore is this 
that no Jiva is ever produced, nor is any actor, any experiencer 
of fruition, in any way, ever produced. Hence it is natural 
that It, the ever unborn and sole dtman^ has no ascertainable 
cause, which fact in itself corroborates the first statement (for 
Jiva and dtman are not diflferent). This truth that in, and of 
Brahmariy the unconditioned absolute, nothing is born (in fact 
the whole of experience is not a reality and is never produced), 
is the highest truth, and the various truths given before were 
but as means to the realisation of this end. 



CHAPTER IV, 

(OAUDAPADA^S kIrIKA.) 

Of Quenching thb itre-bi^and* 



1. I bow to that best of men who knew the dk&sa4ike at- 
tributes as inseparable from the knotoable^ by knowledge re- 
sembling dkdia. 



b'an^aba's qloss. 

With the declaration " this is the highest truth " is well and 
finally established the position of the advaita^ undertaken fop 
demonstration on the occasion of an examination of sacred 
texts to determine the sense of the word Attm^ clearly defined 
by showing the futility of duality and distinction implied in 
the possibility of experience, and lastly perceptibly presented 



S'ANKARA's €0MMENTARY. 93 

to the mind in the chapter styled " Of the admita^^ on the 
authority both of scripture and reason. And a hint has been 
thrown out in the concluding part of the preceeding chapter 
that the philosophy of duality and nihilism, opposed to the 
ddvaita established by a concensus of all sacred texts, is entire- 
ly false, being torn asunder by internal and mutual opposition, 
brought about by partiality to individual opinions and jealousy 
of, and aversion to those of others. Moreover the advaita has 
been praised as the true philosophy, being non-antithetical in 
its nature. Hence it is proposed in this chapter styled *' Of 
quenching the fire-brand," (following that rule of induction 
which allows of the affirmation of a universal positive relation 
between the two terms of a proposition, only after examining 
and refuting all possible opposition between them) to complete 
the examination of the truth of the advaita by accentuating 
the internal mutual apposition of the various schools, and by 
thus showiug their utter futility. 

This first verse is meant as a salutation to the promulgator 
of the advaita philosophy conceiving him as nothing apart 
from the advaita. The worship of the teacher is useful aa 
a means to bring this undertaking to a successful issue. 

Knowledge resembling a^sa, means knowledge all-pervading 
like dkdia. What is done by such knowledge ? The attributes 
of dtman are known. These attributes too are dkdsaJiike^ that 
is to say, resemling akdsa. The knowledge by which these 
attributes are known is again not separate from the knowable, 
i.e.y the attributes themselves, inasmuch as knowledge and the 
known are, like heat and fire or light and the sun, not separable. 
He who knew by knowledge inseparable from the attributes, 
the very form of dtman^ the known or kuowable, is indeed 
Isvara, called Nardyana^ and to him I bow. He is the best of 
men, {purushas) and is therefore called purushottama. In thus 
saluting the teacher it is implied that the philosophy of the 
advaita — ^which teaches the unity of knower, known, and know-» 
ledge, is to be demonstrated in this chapter, through a refutation 
o£ all opposite theories. 



94 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

2. I salute him vstia taught the yoga called asparia (that 
which is not in touch toith anything^ i.^., absolute)^ which 
co7iduces to the well-being of all^ whieh is beneficent^ free from 
dispute^ and norirantitheticah 



s'aneara's gloss. 



Now is a salutation directed to the yoga taught by the 
advaita philosophy with the object of showing its super- 
iority over all others. Sparsa means touch, relation, and 
that which is not in touch with anything, which is beyond 
relativity, is called asparsa^ in other words, the absolute 
Brahman; the yoga of those who are one with Brahman being 
so called. It conduces to the well-being of all, (because it is 
different from all other kinds of yoga involving more or less of 
pain and trouble). There are certain forms of yoga such as the 
performance of austerities, etc., which, though tending to the- 
greatest happiness, partake largely of the form of misery. 
This yoga is not of this kind, but is throughout conducive to the 
happiness of all. But, it may be argued, even enjoyments of the 
senses are such. True, so they no doubt appear, but such en- 
joyment can hardly be beneficent as well. And this yoga is^ 
equally pleasant and beneficent, for it is, by nature, ever im- 
mutable. Moreover it is free from dispute, that is to say,, it is. 
that which is not the subject of disputation in the form of 
arguments pro and con advanced by two opponents. Why so ? 
Because it is non-antithetical, that is to say, not opposed, in its 
nature, to any theory of belief. I salute that teaching which 
has taught me this yoga. 

3. Some philosophers postulate evolution of being, others are' 
proud in their conviction^ of non^eing, thus disputing each the 
conclusion of the other. 



b'ankara's gloss. 



It is shown how the upholders of duality quarrel among 
themselves. Some philosophers, that is to say, not all, but the 
SSinkhyas alone, maintain that things are already in being be^ 



s'akkara's commentary. 95 

fore they appear as things. There are others, the Vaiseshikas 
and the Niyayikas^ who, proud of their intelligence, hold that 
things are produced of nothing. Thus they dispute with each 
other, and try to become each the superior of the other. 

4s That which ts^ cannot not he^ as that which is not^ cannot 
also be ; thus disputing they drift to the adcaita and (uncon* 
scioiLsly) imply that ajdti {absolute non-evolution) is the truth. 



s^aneaka's gloss. 



It is now shown what these, disputing each other's conclu- 
sions, tend to establish. That which is or has been, needs not 
to be produced, for it, like ktman^ already is. Thus argue the 
supporters of the theory of evolution from non-ens^ refuting 
^the opposite theory of the SAnkhyas. These, however, in their 
turn, say tliat it is perfectly absurd to imagine something 
coming out of nothing; and thus show the falsity of the theory 
of evolution from noivens. Thus refuting each other these 
dualists tend to the advaita^ and setting aside both being and 
non-being, accept the advaita theory of absolute non-being or 
non-evolution as the real truth. 

5. We gladly say yes to the absolute non-evolution that they 
thus tend to establish ; and see no use in arguing with them. 
Know this then to be that which is free from all dispute^ 



fc^ANKARA's GLOSS* 

We simply accept as good the absolute non-evolution that 
they thus (indirectly) establish, and do not care to argue the 
point with them by espousing like them one issue or other. 

Hence know, ye pupils, that this is the real truth often 
and often declared by us, as in this manner, free from all dis* 
pnte. 

6. Of that being which is ever unborn^ birth is predicated by 
some ; but it is impossible that the unborn and the immortal^ 
could ever partake of the mortal. 



9ft MANDfirKTOPANlSHAD. 

7. The immortal does not become mortal^ nor vice versa ; 
for in no way is it possible that a thing can be changed into 

somethiTig quite the opposite. 

8. How can he who believes that the naturally immortal 
becomes mortal^ maintain that substance remains immortal 
though passing through births and stands ever changeless. 



These have been explained before (chapter II. 20-21-22). 
They are repeated here only with the view of bringing into pro- 
minent relief the opposition of the schools of dnalistic thought. 

9. By the nature of a thing is understood that which is 
complete in itself that which is its very condition^ that which is 
inborn^ that which is not artificial^ or that which does not cease- 
to be itself 



s'ankara's gloss. 

As the nature of a thing is not known even in ordinary 
experience to be subject to change, it is praposed to define 
what is meant by the nature of a thing. " Complete in itself" 
means complete on account of its being well formed, in that 
shape, from the beginning. An illustration of this kind of 
nature is the occult powers or siddhis — a;em<i and others, accru- 
ing to the yogins^ and never changing in any of the three 
conditions of time. So also is that the nature of a thing 
which is its very condition, such as heat and light of fire, 
never apart from fire either in time or space. That which is 
inborn, that is to say, born with the thing to which it belongs, 
is also the nature of a thing, as the power of flight in birds. 
Anything else not artificially superinduced, as the nature of 
water to seek a downward course, is the nature of a thing. 
And lastly anything which never ceases to be itself, in any 
condition, is also the nature of a thing. If in mere imagi- 
nary things which make up ordinary experience, nature means 
that something which never alters, what should it mean when 



s'ANKARA'S COMtoNTAHT. 97 

referring to things eternally real? In other words, the nature 
of things absolutely real, viz., absolute immortality, can never 
be subject to even the least change. 

10. Alljivas are by nature free from decrepitude and decay, 
the very thought of these in any of the jivas believing themselves 
subject to them, is equal to an abandonment of their nature. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

What is that substratum of what is called nature in the pre- 
ceding verse, which is regarded as subject to change by certain 
theorizers ; or what is the flaw in such a theory ? This point is 
now enlarged upon. " Free from decrepitude and decay " means 
free from all change of every description. What is meant by the 
expression "all jivas^^ ? It means jivas which, being really 
dtman, are free by their very nature. It being so, if these jivas 
should imagine themselves subject to decrepitude and decay, z.^., 
to change in their native form, — dtman — like the imagination 
of a snake in place of the rope, they would desert their nature 
by the very act of such imagination. ( And this is absurd.) 

11. Those who regard the cause itself as the effect, admit 
the transformation of the cause into the effect. How could 
that which can be transformed into something be called unborn ; 
or how can that which admits even of partial change be called 
permanent ? 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The Vaiseshika shows how the Sdnkhyas in their theory of 
being involve themselves in contradiction. Those philoso- 
phers who regard the cause, meaning the material cause like 
clay etc., of pots etc., as the effect ; who, in other words, say 
that the cause is transformed, like milk (into curds), into the 
effect, imply that the ever-existent and unborn pradhdna, 
the cause, passes into birth in the form of effects such as 
mahat etc. If then the ever-unborn pradhdna passes into 
birth, and transforms itself into mahat etc., how could it 
be said to be unborn ? To say that it is unborn, i. e., immut- 
13 



98 mAnd^kyopanishad. 

able, and born, u e., passing into change, is in itself an obvions 
contradiction; moreover it is held that the pradhdna is 
permanent, but if it admits of change, say even partially, how 
can it be said to be permanent ? For even ordinarily a jar 
which admits of being broken on one of its sides is never called 
permanent. The contradiction is thns twofold : the cause is 
ever unborn and yet born ; it is permanent and yet capable of 
being partially cut off. 

12. If it be explained that the inseparableness of the 
e feet from the cause is all that is meant, then indeed the effect 
also ought to he as unborn as the cause ; or if it be urged that 
the inseparableness of the cause from the effect is the meaning ^ 
how about the permanence of the cause ? 



S'ANKARA S GLOSS. 



This verse is meant to amplify the preceding. If the 
SAnkhyas should explain that the cause is the effect in the 
sense that the effect is inseparable from the cause, the effect 
should be as unborn as the cause, which circumstance 
contradicts all experience inasmuch as it maintains that a 
thing is an effect and is yet unborn. If then it were put forth 
that the cause is the effect in that the cause is inseparable 
from the effect, it would be entirely impossible to say that the 
cause has permanence, for one part of a hen cannot be cooked 
while the other is in the act of laying eggs. 

13. There is no illustration to support the statement of 
those who say that effects are born of the unborn; and as to 
their being born of the born reconciliation is very difficult. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Moreover there is no illustration to support the theory of 
those who say that effects are born of a cause which itself is 
not born of anything. And as there is no illustration, the pro- 
position stands that nothing is born of the unborn. If it be 
«aid that effects are born of a cause itself born of something 



s'ankara's commentary, 99 

eke, it is impossible to avoid a regresstis in infinitum in regard 
to the last cause. Hence this theory also cannot be reconciled 
to reason. 

14, How can those who say that effect is the cause of the 
cause^ and vice versd^ maintain that either the cause or the 
effect is without be ff inning F 

s'ankara's gloss. 
The Sruti declares the entire absence of duality in the realm 
of the absolute, in the words "when all has become atman 
etc." The argument in this verse is from the point of this 
text. The cause, e. ^., dharma (merit) and adharma (demerit) has 
for its cause the effect, ??«>., the body etc., which too, in their turn, 
have for their cause the same dharma and adharma. Those 
who postulate this kind of interdependence of cause and effect 
and accept a specific beginning of each, cannot, without 
obvious contradiction, maintain that cause and effect are with- 
out beginning. In short, the immutable and firm dtman can 
never become either cause or effect. 

15, Those who maintain that the effect is the cause of the 
cause^ and vice versd^ would assert evolution after the manner 
of the birth of the father from the son, 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The contradiction is further explained. The contradictiou 
in which those who maintain the production of the cause from 
the effect born of that cause, involve themselves, is just the 
same as that implied in one's speaking of the possibility of 
the birth of the father from the son. 

16, You must determine the order in which cause and effect 
succeed each other ^ for if they he simultaneous they cannot be 
related to each other ^ like the two horns (of an animal), 

s'ankara's gloss. 

If you say that the contradiction just pointed out is not logi- 
cal, it is for you to show in what order are cause and effect pro- 
duced. For if they are simultaneous it is not possible to speak 



100 mandOkyopanishad. 

of any relation between them, as it is impossible to speak of any 
between the two horns of a bnll produced simultaneously. 

17. The came being 'produced the effect will not he definite ; 
and an indefinite cause cannot prodv/^e any effect. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



It is shown how it is not possible to speak of a relation of 
cause and effect, between the two simultaneously produced. 
The cause being produced from the effect which itself is not 
yet definitely produced, will not be definite, i. e.., will be non- 
existent like something produced from the horns of a hare. 
And the cause itself being a mere horn of the hare can never 
produce the effect. Two things thus dependent on each for the 
production of the other, can never, like the two horns of a hare, 
come to be related as cause and effect, or even as anjrthing else 
( I. e.j as the container and contained etc.). 

18. If the cause is prodzcced from the effect and the effect 
from the cause, which of the two, dependent each on the other^ 
is prior to the other ? 

s'anblara's oloss. 

If even after showing the impossibility of causality as con- 
ceived by the duality, they should maintain that it is possible 
for cause and effect to beget each other, we ask — which of the 
two is antecedent to the other, so that it may be, at least rela- 
tively, seen as the cause of its consequent. 

19. The reply must lie in inability {to explain), or iri 
ignorance {of the nmtter altogether), or in entire unjustifiability 
of the order of succession", in all which the learned only shed 
additional light on our theory of absolute non-evolution. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



If you say that this cannot be explained, this inability ia in 
itself a clear confession of ignorance of the matter, i. e., of that 
which is the absolute truth of the matter. Or if you try to 



s'ankara's commbnxary. . .-..--. 101. 

explain the order of succession, the one" alreaSy ^pointed*ou£ by* 
you is not at all justifiable, is in fact not consistent with logic. 
Thus the relation of cause and effect being shown to be im- 
possible, the theory of absolute non-evolution is brought to 
greater prominence, in this indirect manner, by the learned of 
each of the dualist opponents. 

20. The illustration of seed and tree is itself matter of 
proof anything which belongs to the same class as the thing of 
which something is to be proved^ cannot ie used as middle term 
in establishing that something of the thing in question. ' 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The opponents say " we have maintained the relation of 
cause and effect between an antecedent and its consequent, 
and you have raised mere verbal difficulties to show this posi- 
tion as absurd as that of the birth of the father from the son ; 
or as deficient in any possible relation between antecedent and 
consequent as the two horns of a bull. But in fact we have 
never maintained the production of the effect from a cause not 
already existent, or of the cause from effects not sufficient in 
themselves." To this we ask — ^what then have the opponents 
been maintaining all the while ? It is replied that the relation 
of cause and effect is analogous to that of the seed and the tree. 
This position we now proceed to analyse. This position is 
tantamount to saying that the illustration of seed and tree is 
an instance of the kind of relation to be demonstrated. It may 
be asked whether the apparent relation of cause and effect bet- 
ween the seed and the tree, is without beginning ? We suppose 
not, for all antecedents must be with beginning like their 
consequents. As a tree produced this moment is with begin- 
ning, the seed produced from another tree (existing in the past) 
is, by the very succession implied in the act of production, 
necessarily with beginning. Thus all antecedent trees and 
seeds must be with beginning ; and this being applicable to all 
cases, and everything born of the seed or the tree being with 
beginning, nothing can be said to be without beginning. The 



:Wit ••: •••••: : : /.i^iand6kyopanishad. 

• ••• *•• • • •• • • « «, * 

•*••• •• •*•••** 

same applies to cause and effect. If it be maintained that 
each of the series of seeds and trees is without beginning, we 
demur to any such thing, for it is difficult to establish the 
continuous unity of any such series. Each of the series can- 
not be conceived, by the upholders of the beginninglessness of 
the series, as anything existing in entire independence of the 
seed or the tree ; nor could each of the series of cause and effect 
be conceived as existing independent of individual causes and 
effects. Hence it is well explained how the beginninglessness of 
cause and effect can be maintained. Thus this as well as every 
thing else of the kind urged by us against the beginningless- 
theory of causality, is not at all of the form of verbal difficulty. 
Moreover even in the world, those who are versed in the 
art of logical deduction, are not known to use anything which 
is yet matter of proof, as a middle term to establish relation 
between the major and minor terms of a syllogism. The word 
middle term is used here more in the sense of illustration, 
for it is the illustration that leads to the minor premiss and 
through it to the conclusion ; and the case in question is not 
a middle term but an illustration. 

21, The absence of the knowledge of antecedence and conse- 
quence brings into relief the theory of absolute non^evolution ; 
^for if a thing is said to bi consequent it is absurd to say that 
its antecedent is unknowable. 



s'ankara's gloss. 
It is explained how more light is shed by the learned on the 
theory of absolute non-evolution. The absence of the know- 
ledge of antecedence and consequence, in regard to cause and 
effect, is itself sufficient to bring into relief the doctrine of 
absolute non-evolution. That which is a consequent is of 
course definitely known, and if that is definitely known, why 
should its cause not be known as its antecedent ; for one 
who knows an effect as such, ought necessarily to know its 
cause, the relation of cause and effect being inseparably one. 
Hence this ignorance plainly illustrates the theory of absolute 
non-evolution. 



s'ankara's commentary. 103 

22. Nothing is produced either of itself or of another^ nor 
is anything in fact produced^ whether it be being^ non-being^ or 
either. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Nothing is born of anything for the reason that whatever is 
supposed to be born (produced) is not born of itself, of another, 
or both of another and of itself ; nor is it being, non-being, or 
either. In fact the being produced of something is impossible 
to establish in any manner. Nothing is born of itself/.^., 
from its own form, not sufficient in itself. Nothing can re- 
produce itself, as a jar, a jar. Nor is anything produced from 
something else, as cloth from a jar ; and another cloth from 
the first. And thirdly nothing can be born both of itself and 
another, for obvious reasons ; for example, a jar and a cloth 
cannot together produce either the one or the other. It may 
here be urged that we always see the production of jars from 
clay, and of children from parents. This is all very true, for, 
the ignorant have no doubt a subjective consciousness of 
birth (and the relation it is supposed to involve) and the corres- 
ponding expression to denote the idea. But it is the business 
of the wise tp analyse these very subjective impressions, and 
the words used to express them, and determine the truth they 
contain. It turns out that all objective foundation of these 
subjective impressions, and verbal expressions, is nothing more 
than a name, the S'ruti also confirming the conclusion in the 
words " all effects are mere words and names." Again if the 
objects of experience are ever-existent like clay or parents, you 
need not suppose their superfluous production. If they are 
non-existent like the horns of a hare, they cannot, by their very 
nature, be ever produced. And lastly if they are both existent 
and non-existent, they will, by the very contradiction in their 
nature, be destructive of each other, and will produce nothing. 
Hence it stands to reason that nothing is produced:; those, how- 
ever, who, by postulating the presentation of an object as a 
result of production, maintain the unity of action, actor, and 
act, side by side with the transitory nature of objects, set up 



104 HANDfirKYOPANISHAD. 

something entirely removed from reason and experience. For* 
things do not exist in the moment next to their presentation, 
and there being no cognition, memory is impossible (a circnm- 
stance which npsets the very possibility of experience, the- 
thing to be explained). 

23. From that which is without beginning, the cause cannot 
derive its birth, nor the effect, of itself ; that which is known 
as causeless is without beginning as tvelL 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Moreover in accepting the begininglessness of canse and 
effect you necessarily accept their being not produced. Thus 
of an effect without beginning no cause can take its birth, for 
you don't admit that an effect without beginning can produce - 
anjrthing. Nor can you say that an effect is produced of 
itself, that is, without an external cause, or from a cause without 
beginning and unborn. Therefore in accepting the beginning- 
lessness of cause and effect you accept their being never 
produced. The rule of experience also dictates that what is 
without a cause is without a beginning ; for that only has a 
beginning which has a cause ; and not that which has none. 

24. Subjective impressions must have an objective cause^ 
otherwise both ought to be non-existent. For this reason, as 
also on account of the presence of evil, the reality of objective 
experience accepted by philosophers (at variance with the 
advaita) is forced on all. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



A doubt is raised in order to fortify by its solution, the 
position already taken. Subjective impressions consist of the 
variety of mental presentations accompanied by corresponding 
words to express them. These must have a cause in the 
existence of objects without the cognizing subject. It is 
impossible that impressions and words should exist without 
corresponding objects, for they must have a cause corresponding 
to their form. If words and ideas have nothing objective to 



s'ankara^s commentary. 105 

rest upon, the variety of impressions such as sound, touch, 
colour, and the like, must all be naught along with the ideas 
corresponding to them, and absolute non-existence must reign 
supreme. But this conflicts with experience. Hence because 
subjective impressions and their variety both exist in experi- 
ence, it is neccessary to explain them by the theory of the 
opposite school which holds to the reality of objects. It is 
not possible to explain away the variety of experience, 
by positing in place of an objective cause with colour, touch, 
etc., mere variety in the subject, all thought, through some 
action in, and of itself. In other words, variety in the subject 
is impossible, as in a pure crystal, without its being in 
touch with something external. Hence follows the reality of 
objects existing outside the subject, as maintained by others. 
Moreover, evil in the form of pain caused by burns, pricks, 
etc., does exist, which ought not to be, if fire or thorns the 
cause of the burn or the prick, were not a something inde- 
pendent and outside of the subject. But evil in this form is 
always present in experience, which fact also is an additional 
proof of the reality of the objective. 

25. It is true that reason must assign a cause to subjective 
impressions ; but arguments drawn from the nature of things 
point to the causelessness of the cause. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The preceding is now refuted. It is true that subjective 
impressions must have a cause, because of the contingency of 
absolute non-existence, and on account of the presence of evil. 
You are perfectly welcome to your reason for accepting the 
existence of things as they appear to exist ; but if you ask what 
we have to say against such conception — here it is. Jars etc., 
which you take as the objective cause of subjective impressions, 
have themselves no cause, nothing to rest upon ; and they are 
therefore not the cause of subjective impressions. This con- 
clusion is forced on us by the very nature of things. For, the 
jar, after its real nature — clay, has been understood, does not 
14 



106 mandOkyopakishad. 

exist apart from the clay, as exists a buffalo in entire in- 
dependence of a horse. But the jar does not so exist in entire in- 
dependence of clay, and so also do not exist a cloth apart from 
its threads, or the threads themselves in their turn apart from 
their parts. Going thus deeper and deeper into the very na- 
ture of things, even till language itself fails, we do not light up- 
on any thing which can become the cause of another thing. 
Or the words in the text interpreted as "from the nature of 
things,*' may be interpreted as " from the unreality of appear- 
ances " ; and the futility of everything supposed to be objective 
may be deduced from the fact of all appearance being unreal 
like that of a snake in the rope. And even the cause itself 
would be no-cause, being only conceived as such through illusion ; 
for it must cease to be cause when the illusion disappears. 
Experience accords with this, inasmuch as in sleep, trance, or 
liberation, nothing external to dtman is cognized, on account of 
the entire absence of illusion. It being so, that which is set up 
as the truth by the deluded cannot be accepted as such by those 
whose mind has not lost its balance. Thus are refuted the 
arguments drawn from the contingency of absolute non-exist- 
ence and the presence of evil. 

26. The mind does not relate itself to objects^ nor does it 
allow them to reflect themselves in itself; for objects are unreal 
and their reflection is not apait from the mind. 



Because there is nothing external the mind does not relate 
itself to external objects. It is not also a reflector of them, be- 
cause its activity is similar to its action in dream. External 
objects are, even in the waking condition, as unreal as the phe- 
nomena of dream, for reasons given more than once. Nor is the 
reflection of objects anything apart from the mind, in other 
words, it is the mind itself that externalizes itself as objects. 

27. The mind is never in relation to the cause^ in any of the 
three periods of time ; and it is not easy to see. how it could con- 
ceive or receive false impressions tzithoid a cause. 



s'ankara's commentary. "1^9 

s'^ankara's gloss. X 

Then we must say it is false knowledge — the reflection in the 
mind, of jars, etc., which do not exist in reality. If this were so, 
something must be found out wherein there is no such false 
knowledge, and in reference to which we pronounce this know- 
ledge to be false. Let us examine the facts. The mind never 
relates itself to the cause — external objects — in any of the three 
periods of time, past, present,, future. If it can be shown that 
it does relate itself to external objects in some moment of time, 
that in itself would constitute the reality in reference to which 
the other impressions of the mind may be called false. But 
such reality is nowhere, whence the assumption that false know- 
ledge is the cause of the impressions in the mind, falls to the 
ground, there being no cause for such hypothesis. In other words, 
the theory of false knowledge (anyath-^khyati) does not hold 
water. This is the very form of the mind, that it should con- 
tinue to take on the form of jars etc., their non-existence in 
reality notwithstanding. 

28. Hence not only are objects cognized by the mind not 
produced^ but also the mind that is supposed to cognize them. 
Those who regard it as produced^ are gazing for afoot-mark in 
the sky. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

Tlie discussion beginning from verse 24 contains the argu- 
ments of the Vijndnavddins (subjective idealists), a sect of 
the Buddhists, which are advanced against those who maintain 
the reality of objectivity. The teacher (advaitin) gladly 
accepts the conclusion, and using that very conclusion as the 
middle term, proceeds in this verse to overthrow the principle 
underlying the conclusion. We gladly approve of what the 
subjective idealist has advanced, to wit, that the mind takes 
on the form of jars etc., their non-existence in reality notwith- 
standing. For, this explanation accords with the facts of 
nature. But because this is so, the supposed production of the 
mind ( the subject ) ought afeo to become nothing more than' 



106 MANDteYOPANISHAD. 

4in idea ; and the mind should be regarded as not produced 
even in the same manner as the things supposed to be cognized 
by it. Hence those idealists who regard the mind as produced 
and partaking of momentariness, miserableness, emptiness, 
and non-dtman ; in other words, who try to understand the 
mind as (independent of, and) understandable by itself, do 
something equal to looking up at the sky for a foot-print. 
These idealists are thus more audacious than their opponents 
the dualists ; and the Nihilists,* who maintain absolute anni- 
hilation of self-conciOusness, are fools of a yet higher type, 
inasmuch as they wish to compress the heavens in the palm 
of their hand. 

29. The unborn is said to be born, but its very nature ts to 
be ever unborn ; and the nature of a thing can never be other^ 
wise. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

This verse is the conclusion of what has been discussed 
above. Brahman is unborn and one, on grounds already 
described. The mind too having been shown to be unborn 
is Brahman as well. If one should now say that it is born, 
this will be equal to saying that the unborn is born. And this 
will be contrary to its very nature which makes it ever unborn. 
The rule in regard to the nature of a thing is that it never 
alters. ( Hence the mind can never be said to pass into birth 
even through illusion ). 

30. The world cannot be said to be without beginning and 
at the same time non-eternal ; nor can liberation which has a 
beginning be eternal. 

s'ankara's gloss. 
Here is another flaw in the theory of those who maintain the 
reality of the world and liberation. The world which is with- 
out beginning, which in fact has not a definite past, cannot, in 

* The Mdjdk^a,m\hk sect of the Buddhists. 



s'ankara's commentary. 109 

•reason, be shown to have an end. For, in experience, nothing 
which has no beginning is non-eternal. If you instance the 
break in the continuity of the relation of seed and tree ( as 
against this thesis ), we say it is not to the point, for it is not 
one single entity. In the same manner it is not possible to 
demonstrate the eternity of moksha^ realized only at the mo- 
ment of its knowledge, and therefore known to have a 'begin- 
ning. For jars etc., with beginning, have no eternity. If it be 
said that (moksha in the form of destruction of bandha) not 
being any substance, can be eternal like the destruction of a 
jar (which though not a substance and though with beginning 
is without end ) ; such an assertion will go against the real 
positive character of moksha maintained by you ; for moksha 
being only negative, and therefore a nonentity, will be like the 
horn of a hare, and therefore without beginning. 

31. That which is naught at the beginning^ and is so also 
at the end^ necessarily does not exist in the present ; objects 
are all like ordinary illusions though regarded as real. 

32. The being used as means to some end of the objects oj 
waking experience^ comes to naught in dream. Hence on ac^ 
courd of being with beginning and end they are certainly false 
and no more. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

These verses were explained before (chapter II. 6-7) ; and are 
cited here only to corroborate our position in regard to the 
entire non-existence of creation and liberation. 

33. All things seen in dream arefalse^ being seen within 
the body \for in so small a space^ how could objects exist and 
be seen. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



These and the following verses are meant to explain what 
has already been demonstrated, viz.^ that the facts of nature 
point to the cause being no-cause and so forth. 



1 1 M ANDfTK YOPANISHAD. 

34. The seeijig of a thing at a distance hy going up to it 
is not possible, for no perceptible time is taken in the a^t of 
going ; and on being awake, the dreamer does not find himself 
in the place where he dreamed himself to be. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The time taken in going, as also the place of going, are all 
definite in waking experience ; but there appears to be no rule 
in regard to these in dream ; whence it follows that tli« 
dreamer does not cognize things at a distance by actually 
going up to them. 

55. On being awake, the dreamer does not see anything of 
what had been th^ subject of conversation with friends {in the 
d?*eam); nor does he possess anj thing he had then acquired. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

A man might talk to friends in a dream on various subjects, 
but he sees nothing of them on being awake. Nor does he 
hold in his possession whatever gold etc. he had acquired in 
dream. 

36. The body active in dream is unreal, inxismuch as there 
is another ( tangibly ) apart from it ; everything is unreal like 
this body, being only a creation of the mind, 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The body which appears to be wandering about in dream 
is quite unreal, for a body other than that is present at the 
spot where the dreamer is actually sleeping. As the body 
active in dream is unreal, so are all things unreal even in 
waking experience, being, like it, mere creations of the mind. 
The substance of this section is this, that waking experience 
is as much futile as the phenomena of dream. 

37. On account of the similarity of perception, waking 
experience must be the cause of dream ; and, it being so, 
waking experience must be relatively real to the dreamer. 



s'ANKARA's C0MME5JTARY. Ill 

s'ankara's gloss. 

The unreality of waking experience is further proved from 
this, that dream is an effect of it ; the experience of dream, con- 
sisting of perceiver, perception, and perceived, being similar 
to that of waking. And because it is so, waking experience is 
real only to the dreamer and to none else. As dream is real 
to the dreamer, that is to say, as the phenomena of dream 
appear as objects of common experience and really existent, 
so objects making up waking experience appear as if they 
were within general experience and really existent, being tlie 
cause of the phenomena of dream. But these are not so in 
reality, in other words, waking experience is like dream and 
no more. 

38, All are entirely unborm^ inasmuch as experience does 
not warrant the possibility of the birth of anything ; and the 
production of the unreal from the real is quite impossible. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



To begin with a doubt. Though waking experience is the 
cause of dream, it need not be as futile as dream ; for dream 
is only momentary, and waking experience is relatively perma- 
nent. The reply is that this is so only to those who are not 
sufficiently enlightened. Those who have received the light 
do not see any truth in causality and regard all as entirely 
unborn, i. e., as dtman; for the Veddntas declare " all within 
and without is the unborn." If it be said that from waking 
experience which is real, are produced dreams which are unreal, 
we say — no. For, the unreal is never produced from the real, 
the horns of a hare have never produced'anything. 

39. Being full of the unreal seen in loahing experience^ the 
dreamer re-enacts the same in dream ; and the unreality seen 
in dream is, moreover, not seen in the waking condition. 






1 1 2 mand6kyopanishad. 



That there is no truth in causality is an obvious contradiction 
after saying that waking experience is the cause of dream. 
This difiiculty is thus explained. The relation of cause and 
effect as conceived by us, in the instance adduced, is this-wise. 
One full of the unreal, seen like the snake in place of a rope, 
during his waking experience of the unreal, re-enacts the same 
in dream, calling into being the triad of perceiver, perception, 
and perceived, similar to that of the waking condition. 
Though thus full of the unreal again in dream, he does not, on 
being awake, as by parity of reasoning he ought, see the same 
unreality — the imagination which in dream called it into being, 
being absent. The breach in the chain of causation thus 
explained, is hinted at in the text by the word " moreover.'* 
And conversely (though waking exi)erience may generally be 
regarded as the cause of dream ) several things seen in waking 
experience, are never experienced in dream. ( Hence the 
chain of causation is neither absolute nor real ; but ) waking 
experience is only said to be the cause of dream (as an unreal 
cause of an unreal effect) not in absolute reality or truth. 

40. The unreal as well as the real cannot have thp. unreal 
as their cause ; nor can the real have the real as its cause ; 
a7id how could the real be a cause of the unreal. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



In truth causation itself is a chimera. How ? The imreal, 
like the horns of a hare, cannot be the cause of the unreal like 
a flower in the sky. Hence the unreal cannot be the cause 
of the unreal. In the same manner jars etc., which are ( sup- 
posed to be ) real, cannot be the effect of an unreal cause such 
as the horns of a hare. Thirdly, the real, such as jars and the 
like, is not the cause of the real, such as other jars and the 
like. And the fomth category— the real being the cause of 
the unreal — is purely impossible. No other relation than these 
four is possible under causation. Hence the enlightened 
regard causation as a myth. 



s'ankara*s commentary. 113 

41. Ab through false knowledge one handles as real^ things 
beyond the range of all possible waking experience^ so, in 
dreaniy through false knowledge^ one sees things possible only 
in that condition. 



s'ankara's gloss* 

This is put in, to do away with even the least possibility of the 
relation of cause and eflfect between waking experience and 
dream, though both be unreal. False knowledge means Y?Tong 
perception born of indicrimination. As one, by a simple feat 
of imagination, can believe himself handling as real, objects 
which cannot possibly be imagined as existent in waking 
experience such as the rope-snake etc., so he may imagine 
himself as seeing elephants etc., in dream, through similar falsQ 
knowledge. But both in the one condition as in the other, the 
experience of each is peculiar to itself, and there is no relation 
of cause and effect between the two. 

42. Causation is put forth by the wise only for those who 
being afraid of the absolute cessation of causality stick to the 
reality of things, from the warrant of their experience and 
from their fond attachment to forms. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The warrant of experience is of the form of a belief in the 
reality of experience which is truly unreal. Attachment to 
forms is faith in the merit of performing religious observances 
peculiar to one's varna and dsrama. The possibility of causa- 
tion countenanced at times by the wise, is only as means to an 
end ; and is meant only for the ignorant who, for the two 
reasons just explained, hold on to the reality of things. They, 
the ignorant, might do so, but students of the VedAnta must of 
themselves be able to realize the one ever unborn dtman, and 
know the futility of the rest. The hotriyas^ those who hold to 
forms, being thick-headed, are afraid of the absolute cessation 
of causation, implied in our theory of absolute nou-evolution, in 
15 



114 MlNDfirKYOPANISHAD. 

the belief that it tends to self-annibilation. The possibility of 
causation and all such things is meant only as a help to such 
persons, as already explained. 

43. Those who, afraid of absolute non-evolutiouy rely on 
their account of experience, and go astray, are not much affect^ 
ed by the evil results of their belief, though it is difficult to say 
they escape with perfect impunity. 



S'ANKARA S GLOSS. 



Those who being thus afraid of the theory of absolute non- 
evolution, rely on the warrant of their own experience, and 
guide themselves by faith in the forms of religion and go 
astray, that is to say, swerve from atman and accept duality, are 
not much affected by the evil results of this their false belief 
in causation, for, they are ( on account of their strict obser- 
vance of formal religion ), on the path of truth. If there must 
be some evil, it will be small, being the consequence of their 
not having realized the truth. 

44. As an elephant, called up by illusion, is said to exist on 
the warrant of experience, and on account of being the cause of 
action, so also are objects said to exist on the same grounds. 



S ANKARA S GLOSS. 

It may be said that because of the warrant of experience, 
and of the possibility of making things the subject of action, 
duality in the form of objective experience does exist. This is 
not true, for the grounds adduced do not allow of any such 
assertion. Why not ? We see in experience an elephant 
produced by mere illusion, we act upon seeing it as if it were 
real, and regard it as in every way a real elephant, by tying 
it, mounting it, and doing all possible things with it. The 
existence of duality, on these grounds, is therefore like the 
existence of this elephant. Hence the two grounds adduced 
do not prove the reality of objective experience, i. e., duality* 



s'ankara's commbntabt. 115 

45. Thought — all peace and one, the ever unborn^ immoveable^ 
and immaterial^ appears as admitting of creative motion, and 
material existence. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 



Here is explained what is that Sat which is, as it were, the 
substratum of the false notions of creation etc. The Sat is 
ever unborn, still it appears to pass into birth, like any ordir 
nary being, say — devadattci. It appears to admit of motion a^ 
if it itself were moving, like the same demdatta going from 
one place to another. It appears as if it were a material thing, 
a substance, the substratum of certain attributes, like the same 
devadatta appearing white, long, etc. In truth, however. It is 
ever unborn, immoveable^ immaterial, unsubstantial. What is 
it then that answers to this description ? It is all thought 
which being free from the said accidents is all peace and there- 
fore one. 

46. Thus neither is the mind produced nor are the objects; 
those who know this are never deceived into false knowledge. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 



Thus, that is, for reasons given, the mind as well as objects 
( Jivas ) are never produced, say the knowers of Brahman. 
The plural "objects" ia metaphorically used, with an eye 
to the variety created in the one dtman, by the accident of 
corporeality. Those who know itman to be pure thought, are 
not deceived by false knowledge, that is to say, they do not 
fall into the dark abyss oiavidyd ; for, says the S'ruti, "where 
is there any illusion or sorrow to one who has realized unity ?" 

47m As motion makes afre^brand appear straight, crooked, 
etc., so motion makes thought appear as perceiver, perceived, 
and the like. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The said true knowledge is further explained. As motion 
makes a fire-brand appear straight etc., so are produced in. 



116 MaNd6k YOPAKISHAD. 

dtman the appearances of perceiver, perceived, and the like. 
What are the perceiver, and perceived ? They are only the 
motion of that which is all thought ; only a motion appearing 
as such, through avidyA. For immoveable thought never 
moves, and thought has already been described as unborn and 
immoveable^ 

48. The fire-brand is untouched by the appearance and is 
ever unborn (as such), /or its motion is not at all real; similarly 
is thought untouched by appearance, and is ever unborn, its 
apparent motion being m£re illusion. 



s'aneara's qloss. 

As the fire-brand is neither straight nor crooked being 
motionless, and is therefore unborn as, and untouched by, the 
illusion ; so is the unborn and immoveable without all change 
on the disappearance of avidyA which is the cause of the illu- 
sion of change, and is thus free from the appearance of birth 
and the like. 

49. The appearances of the fire-hrand in motion do not 
come from without, nor do they result in anything other than 
the fre-brand at rest, though they do not appear to enter it. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Moreover the fire-brand being in motion, its appearance as 
straight or crooked is not brought into it from any thing without 
it. And the appearances do not appear in any other place 
when the fire-brand is at rest. Nor do they enter it at the 
time of its going into rest. 

50. They do not go out of the f re-brand because they are 
not of the class of substance. The same applies to thought 
inasmuch as appearance is common to both. 



s'a^^kara's gloss. 



The appearances do not go out of the fire-brand because 
they are not of the class of substances, such as a house etc. 



s'ankara^s commentary. 117 

In other words, as they are not real they do not go or come; 
Going in or out is possible only of real substances, and not of 
pure unsubstantiality. The same may, by parity of reasoning, 
be applied to appearances in thought. 

51 — 52. Appearances do not come from without when 
thought h in motion ; they do not go out anywhere beyond the 
motion ; nor do they enter thought. They do not go out because 
they do not partake of substantiality ; they are always indes^ 
cribable on account of their not being subject to the relation of 
cause and effect. 



s'akkara's gloss. 

The similarity is clearly brought out. Everything said of 
the fire-brand holds true of thought ; the only difference in 
thought being its ever immutable character. Whence could 
there be any possibility of appearances such as birth and the 
like in thought, ever immutable ? On account of the impos- 
sibility of demonstrating anything like a relation of cause and 
effect, the relation of producer and produced cannot be establi- 
shed ; and the said appearances are therefore ever indescrib- 
able and non-existent. The collective sense is that as the fire- 
brand, not in itself straight or crooked, is illusively seen to be 
such, so thought, ever unborn, is seen to pass into birth etc., 
only through illusion. 

53. Substance is the cause of substance and things other 
than substance of things other than substance; but Jivas cannot 
be shown to be substance or things other than substance. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Atmanh unborn (that is to say,, not a substance, being 
without parts ) and one ( that is to say, not something other 
than substance, say — attribute). Those who imagine some 
kind of causation must admit that substance is the cause ot 
substance, or something other than substance of something 
other than substance, but not itself of itself. And non-sub- 



us mi^DftKYOPANISHAD. ' 

stance is out of question inasmuch as it is never known in ex- 
perience to be the independent cause of anything. J was are 
neither substance nor something other than substance, and 
cannot therefore be the cause or effect of anything. Thus not 
being substance nor anything other than substance dtmafi 
(Jiva) is not the cause or effect of anything. 

54. Thus objects are not born of the mind^ nor the mind of 
objects^ the wise thus betake themselves to absolute non^tolution^ 
the entire negation of causality. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Thus for reasons already explained, the mind is nothing 
other than thought which is dtman ; and objectivity is not a 
result of the mind nor the mind of it, for, objects are mere 
appearances in thought. Thus no effect is produced from a 
cause, nor a cause from any effect ; and the wise, i. ^., knowers 
of Brahman betake themselves to, find the highest peace in, the 
theory of absolute non-evolution which is entire negation of 
causality. 

55. As long as there is the least faith in causality^ cause 
and effect will continue to operate ; that faith being destroyed^ 
cause and effect are nowhere. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

What then about those who have firm faith in causality ? 
As long as there is this faith in the form of the convictions "I 
am the producer of the cause in the shape of pious merit or 
demerit," " mine are merits or demerits," " I shall derive frui- 
tion from them after a time, in some incarnations "; in other 
words, as long as there is this false knowledge of causation in 
dtman^ and the consequent fixing of the mind on the idea, 
cause and effect must continue to operate, that is to say, merit 
and demerit and their results must continue to affect such 
an individual. When, however, this faith in causation, born of 
avidyd^ is destroyed by realization of the advaita^ even like 
obsession etc. by proper incantations, medicines, or herbs, 
then only do cause and effect cease to exist. 



S'aNKARA's COMMENfiHlY. 119 

66. As long as there is faith in causality^ the tOorld is 
eternally present; this faith being destroyed the world is no^ 
where. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

What harm is there if cause and effect continue to exist ? 
As long as faith in causality is not destroyed, the world is 
eternally present, it continues to exist to all eternity. The 
same faith being destroyed, the world is nowhere for want of 
the cause of its existence. 

57. Everything is "produced by the power of atidyd and 
nothing therefore is eternal. Everything again is unborn^ being 
inseparable from Sat, and there is nothing therefore like 
destruction. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



It may be urged how after maintaining that there is nothing 
besides one unborn dtman, could one speak of cause and effect 
or of the world and its production or destruction ? The 
answer is as follows. The power of avidyd is that power of 
it which spreads forth the illusion of experience and the world, 
in place of dtman ; and everything being born of this power, 
nothing in the domain of avidyd is eternal. The world, there- 
fore, though described as produced and destroyed, is well said 
to be " eternally present" ; for in absolute reality everything is 
the unborn dtman. Thus because there is nothing in the shape 
of birth, there is nothing corresponding to it in the form of 
death, viz.^ the destruction of cause or effect. 

58. Those entities that are said to be produced are not 
produced in truth, their production is similar to that of an 
illusion^ and illusion certainly is no reality. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

Entities, viz., Jivas and other things that are imagined to be 
produced, are not produced in reality, but appear to be so, only^ 



/ 



1 20 MAND<yKYOPANISH AD. 

through the said power of avidyL And thus birth being but 
a result of illusion, ought to be nothing more than illusion. 
Then is illusion any substance ? Not at all. 

59. From seeds, all illusion, nothing comesforth but sprouts 
of illusion, and these are neither permanent nor impej^manent. 
The same applies to the existence of all beings4 



s'ankara's gloss. 

How is the production of entities, mere illusion ? As from 
seeds such as of the mango-tree, all wtaya, nothing but sprouts 
of may a spring forth,* and these are neither permanent nor 
the reverse ; in the same manner, beings, that is objects, Jivas, 
everything nameable, have no beginning, and no end, being quite 
unreal. 

60. All entities being absolutely unborn, cannot be said to 
be permanent or not; where in fact words fail it is impossible 
to enter into analysis. 



s'aNKARA S GLOSS. 

All entities being shown to be absolutely unborn, being all 
dependent for their existence on thought, characterless, one, 
and eternal, permanence or impermanence cannot be predicated 
of them. That which cannot be grasped in words, which 
cannot be expressed, cannot possibly be analysed into this or 
that, having this or that attribute permanent or impermanent. 
The S'ruti also says " whence words fall back etc*" 

61. As in dream the mind acts as if dual in character 
through the power of mdyd, so in the leaking condition also it 
acts in the same planner through the same cause. 

62. The mind though one appears as dual in dream, so 
also in the waking condition it, though single, appears dual 
through illusioii. 



* This is a familiar illustration, being borrowed from the performance 
of certain experts in legerdemain who produce illusive mango-trees, etc 



^'ANKARA'S COMMENTARY. 121 

^'Ankara's gloss. 

That tlie abstract advaita-^thoxiglit — should appear as des- 
cribable iu words is only a feat of the mind, and nothing real, 
as expUiineJ before ( chapter IIL 20-30). 

63, The dreamer going about in all ten directions sees the 
tvJtole tarictg of Jicas born of eggSy perspiration^ etc. 



s'.vnkara's gloss* 



The unreality of duality which admits of being described in 
Words is borne out l)y tliis fiu*ther reason as well. The dream- 
er going al)out in all ten directions in dream, sees the variety 
oi Jtvas whether born of eggs, perspiration, or any similar 
source. What next ? 

64. These^ kowecer^ exist onhj in the 7nind of the dreamer ^ 
and are in no icag apart from it ; in the same manner this miiid 
too is existent onhj to the dreamer. 



s'a:;kara's gloss* 

Objects seen by tlie mind of the di*eamcr cannot exist out- 
side of it ; in other words, it is only the mind that objectivises 
itself. In the same maimer tlie mind of the dreamer must be 
regarded jis existent only for him ; that is to say, it exists no- 
where apart from the seer ( dtman ) of the dream* 

65.-66. One going about in the ten directions^ in the wak" 
ing condition^ sees the whole of the tariety of Jwas horn of 
eggs^ perspiration^ etc.; but these are existent only for the mind 
active in this condition, and are in no way apart from it ; — 
the mind too should^ in the same manner^ be regarded as 
existent only for the seer of this condition. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Jwas seen in the Waking condition do not exist anywhere 
but in the mind of the seer of that condition, for, they are not 
seen lav! jpendent of the mind, and are like the Jhas seen in and 
16 



122 MlNDtetOPAHIfilHAlH 

through the mind of the seer of a dream. The mind again^ 
made up of Jtvas and their perception, is not independent of 
the fleer of the waking condition, being, like the mind of the 
seer of a dream, an object of perception to the seer of the 
waking condition. The rest has already been explained. 

67. Both are object of perception to each other ^ which (^ 
them can really he said to he ? Both in fact are beyond the range 
of every rational instrument of knowledge^ fot these are possible 
only in and through them. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Jivas and mind are each an object of perception to the 
other. The mind exists relatively to the Jiva^ and the Jiva 
exists relatively to the mind. Hence they are each an object 
of perception to the other* Therefore anything cannot be said 
to exist ; neither the mind nor its objects. No wise man will 
assert the existence of either, for, as in dream, the elephant as 
well as the mind perceiving the elephant are not really exis- 
tent, so also it should be in this instance. How is it said that 
they are beyond every rational instrument of knowledge ? 
Because they are utterly incomprehensible and indescribable ; 
and their comprehension by any instrument of knowledge is 
possible only when they are supposed to exist. In other words, 
the triad of knower, known and knowledge, is possible only in 
the domain of unreality. If you deny the mental cognition of 
a jar, it is impossible for you to perceive the jar and vice versa ^ 
In short, the meaning is that it is impossible to define the 
respective province of instruments of knowledge and the objects 
to be apprehended by such instruments. 

68. 69. 70. As the Jiva existent in dream is born or deadj 
so all Jivas are and are not. As the Jiva^ all mAyd^ is born 
or deady so all Jivas are and are not. As the Jiva created 
{by an illicsionist) is born or dead^ so all Jivas are and 
are not. 



S'ANKARA'JS OOMMBOTARY. 123 

s'ankara's gloss. 

Created, i. «., sent forth by an illusionist by the help of incan- 
tations, herbs, or medicines. As Jivas existent in dream and 
illusion, and seen as bom of eggs, perspiration, etc. pass 
through birth and death, so all Jivas — ^human entities — ^which 
are really non-existent, are (with all concomitant appearance 
of birth, death, etc. ) mere results of the objectivising tendency 
of the mind, and nothing more. 

71. No Jiva is darn Tior is there any ^possibility of any suck 
birth ; that there is rwthing is the highest truths 



s^akeaba's gloss.. 

So long as the world of experience is supposed to be real, 
birth and death of livas are possible like those seen in dream* 
But the highest truth is that no Jtvais ever born, in the first 
place. The rest is plain. 

72. The whole of experience consisting of perceiver and 
perceived is merely an imagination of the mindt heme the mind 
is described as not in relation with o^ects^ eternal,, and 
absolute. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The whole of experience, i. ^.,dualify made up of perceiver 
and perceived, is pure imagination — ^a function of the mind 
which, in absolute truth is atman^ and is, as sueh^ not ii^ 
relation with objects, eternal, and absolute.. The S'ruti says 
" the purusha is always free from relation." That alone relates 
itself to objects which has any objects without itself ; but the 
mind, having nothing external, is perfectly free from all 
relation and therefore absolute. 

75. That which exists only in imagination does not exist 
absolutely ; and though it may continue to exist in accordance 
with the imagination of any other school of thought in 
absolute reality it does not. 



124 wANDfirKTOPANIBHAD. 



If the mind is free from relation, l)eing without external 
objects to cognize, sncli a position is not easy to maintain, in- 
asmuch as the idea of teacher, tan^ht and teaching, implied 
in imparting this trnth, goes against it. This obstacle need 
not detain ns. For all snch triads are as imaginary as any- 
thing else. These imaginations are useful only as means to 
the end, realization of the absolute ; for, imagination is only 
a function of the mind, and whatever exists of it does not exist 
in reality, and cannot be seen in reality. For, says the S'mti\ 
" duality is nowhere when gnosis arises." The existence of 
objects maintained by other schools of thought, may be true 
for them ; but from our stand-point of the absolute, nothing 
exists. Thus the absoluteness of tlie mind is not at all shaken, 

74. It is unborn also in imagination^ fo7\in realitg, it is not 
even unborn ; it is so imagined onhj relatieely in reference 
to the positions of other schools. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 

If teaching etc., were simple imagination, the being unborn 
of dtman^ taught by this teaching, ought to be. imagination as 
well. We say— yes ; for it is unborn only through such imagi-^ 
nations as teaching and the like ; in absolute reality it is not 
even unborn. It is said to be unborn only as against the 
position of those schools (which maintain that it passes into 
birth); and this description of It is therefore as much imagi- 
nation as anything else, nothing being true in absolute reality, 

75. {Men) have persistent belief only in pure unreality^ 
for duality does not really exist. He who this understands 
the non-existence of dzcality is never bm'n, being beyond the 
range of carnality. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 



Persistent belief in duality is mere inclination of the mind, 
from perversity of intellect, inasmuch as it is only a belief in 



s'ankara's commentary. 125 

something purely tiiireal, for duality does not really exist. As 
the cause of birth etc., is this persistent belief in the reality of 
the unreal, he who realizes the non-existence of duality is 
never born, being above false knowledge. 

76. In the absence of cazcse, superior, inferior, or middle 
the mind is n^ot horn ; for whence could an effect follow without 
a cause ? 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Superior causes consist of certain forms of religion peculiar 
to each jati and dsraTna^ and carefully observed under the 
supposition that they lead to the position of gods, by those 
who are free from the desire of any (other) fruit. Middle 
causes are religious acts mixed with certain irreligious practi- 
ces, which lead only to the world of mortals. Inferior causes 
lead to the condition of birds, etc., being wholly irreligious. 
When one knowing dtman, the advaita, does not relate himself 
to any of these causes, in fact imagines them as naught, like 
a man of discrimination not seeing the dirt etc., which child-* 
ren would see in the sky, the mind is not born, that is to say, 
it does not objectivize itself in the shape of gods, men, birds, 
etc., — the results of the respective causes. No effect can be 
produced without a cause, just as sprouts are not produced 
without seeds. 

77. The being unborn of the mind thus free from causality j 
is unconditioned and absolute ; and the same is true of ally 
ever unborn, for it is all an objectivization of the mind. 



S'ANKARA S GLOSS. 



It is explained how, in the absence of cause, the mind is 
not born. It is now shown what is the import of this position. 
" Free from causality" means free from the cause of birth, con- 
sisting of religious merit and demerit. And this freedom is 
attained only by realization of the absolute. The being un- 
born of the mind thus free, is unconditioned, that is, not 



126 HiNDdETOPAKISHAD. 

affected by change of conditions, and absolute, that is, eveir 
one. For, from the first, the mind is really ever unborn ; 
and so are all things. Even before this realization of the- 
absolute the whole of experience is a mere objectivizatioii 
of the mind. Hence the being unborn of the whole of expe- 
rience including the mind, is ever unconditioned and absolute. 

18. Having knoum absolute nanrcxistence of causality as the- 
truths and not finding any objective cause^ one easily reaches^ 
that which is ever free from sorrow^ desire, or fear. 



s'aneaba's gloss. 

Having known absolute non-existence of causality as the 
truth, on account of having seen the entire absence of duality, the 
domain of causation ; and not finding any external cause in the 
form of religious merit etc.; t. 6., being free from all desire- 
of external good, one enjoys the bliss of that condition where-- 
in there is entire absence of sorrow, desire, fear etc., that is 
to say, of avidyA the cause of these and everything of this kind.. 
In other words the jildnin is never born. 

19. As belief in the unreal attaches the mnd to the unreal^, 
knowledge of absolute non^volution frees it from relativity 
and turns it away from the unreal. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 

Belief in the unreal means belief in duality that does not 
really exist ; for duality is only a function of avidyd, being the 
delusion caused by it. Because faith in the unreal attaches 
the mind to the unreal, freedom from relativity brought about 
by knowledge of the absolute non-evolution, i. 6., unreality of 
things, turns it away from the unreal. 

80. The immutable condition is reached when the mind frees, 
itself from relativity and self-objectivization. This indeed is 
the field of the wise — It is the unconditioned, unborn, and one. 



b'ankara's commentary. 127 

s'ankara's gloss. 

"When tlie mind does not relate itself to duality, and ifrees 
itself from self-objectivization, it reaches that condition which 
is immutable, i. e., the state of Brahman ever indescribable, 
being all full of the bliss of one unique thought. As this 
condition and its experience are entirely realisable only by the 
wise (we cannot realize them). It is none other than the 
unconditioned, ever unborn, and one. 

81. The ever unborn^ awake, and dreamless^ illumines 
Atself of itself ; it is the ever-illumned by its very nocture* 



s'ankara's gloss. 

It is now shown how it is entirely knowable by the wise 
alone. It enlightens itself of itself, and does not expect any 
Hither aid, such as the Kght of the sun or the like. In other 
words, it is self-illumined. It is, by its very nature, all illu- 
mination. 

82. By perception being limited to any one object, bliss is 
thrown back and misery is brought into relief \ hence the Lord 
-(is not knoton). 



^Ankara's gloss. 



How is it that the world does not understand dtman though 
thus explained? Because, on account of perception being 
limited to single objects, that is, to duality ; in other words, on 
«,ccount of a vain faith in the reality of such perception and 
its objects ; bliss (inherent in the absolute nature of things) 
is of itself thrown back, that is to say, covered away from view, 
and misery (the result of imaginary individualization) is 
brought into relief. This is a direct result of the simple per- 
ception or notion of duality, and has no other act of the mind 
for its cause. This happens because of the supreme diflSculty 
attending realization of the absolute. The "Lord" means dtman^ 
the advaita. It is not realized (as the All) though loudly 
proclaimed by books and teachers, (for reasons just described). 



128 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

The S^ruti also says, " He who describes it is looked at witli 
wonder, the seer of it is regarded as the cleverest " etc. 

83. The childish miss it hy predicating of it such things as 
existence^ non-existence^ existence and non-existence^ absolute 
non-existence; derived respectively from their notion of 
change^ absence of change^ combination of both^ or absolute 
negation. 



s'ankara^s gloss. 

The perception that the absolute is existence or non-existence 
or the like, being the result of careful analysis undertaken by 
the (so-called) learned, serves only as a veil between them 
and dtman. When this is so even in regard to the learned, 
what should we say of those who are mere simpletons ? Some 
(the Vaiseshikas) predicate existence ofatman^ whereas others 
(the subjective-idealists, i. ^., the Vijnanjavadibauddhas) main- 
tain that there is no such thing as atman. A third, (the 
pseudo-nihilist) the Digambara-Jaind^ maintains that it is and 
is not; It is a compound of being and non-being; while a fourth 
(the nihilist, i. ^., the Madhyamikabauddha) holds that it is 
absolute non-existence. In all these he who predicates exis- 
tence of dtman derives that attribute from its changeful 
nature (for, in his theory, Atman is subject to happiness, misery, 
desire, and the like), and predicates it of it, to mark it out 
from all other things which are perishable by nature. The 
second position derives its predicate from the immutableness 
of the subject (which imagines the ideas). The third predicate 
is possible of atman because in the opinion of that school it 
partakes both of change and immutability. The fourth posi- 
tion derives absolute non-existence from its opinion about the 
nature of things. The learned trying to know atman by 
theories like these are only acting like children, for these results 
of their analysis of the nature of dtman serve only to cover the 
reality from view. If it is so in their case it is no wonder 
that the ignorant should be persistently misled. 



s'ankara's commentary. 129 

84. He has seen all toko has seen the Lord as untouched by 
any of these predicates^ which serve only to hide him from 
the seer. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The nature of the absolute, knowledge whereof is sufficient 
to acquit the learned from the charge of childishness, is now 
described. The Lord — dtm^n — is covered and therefore kept 
hidden from sight by the predicates put forth in the preceding 
four theories. In truth Atman is beyond all relativity, and is 
purely absolute. He who realizes the advaita as thus absolute 
and beyond relativity, and as the very purusha described in the 
Upanishad^ sees all, is in fact a really wise and learned man. 

SS. Having obtained the whole of omniscience^ and that 
condition of a Brdhmana which is one and without beginning^ 
middle or endy — what remains there to be desired? 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Having obtained the whole of omniscience as just described, 
and having obtained the condition of a Brdhmana (one who is 
Brahma\ as laid down in the text " this is the permanent 
glory of the BrAhmana^^ and ever without beginning, middle 
or end, nothing remains to be desired. Atmaldbha^ realization 
of dtman, is the last and highest good comprising all possible 
good in itself. The S^ruti also says " he has nothing to gain by 
observing or not the forrns of religion, " etc. 

86. This is the highest humility of the Vipra^ this is the 
ultimate and natural pacification^ this is the vjatural introvision 
of the senses^ — who knows thus acquires peace. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



The being dtman is the height of humility natural to the 
Vipra (Brdhmana). This realization of dtman is the highest 
pacification (of the mind). It is natural pacification and not one 
17 



130 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

induced by any artificial means. It is also the natural intro- 
vision of all the senses ; that is to say, all senses become then 
entirely centred in it; inasmuch as in themselves they are 
nothing. He who realizes dtman or Brahman^ in this manner, 
obtains peace, the highest rest, the state in accord with nature, 
— in fact he becomes or is Brahman. 

87, Duality consisting of object and subject is a creation 
of the external senses ; and the same toithout object but consist^ 
ing of sidject is also nothing else than another phase of the 
senses. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

The theories of diflferent schools contradicting one another, 
are the cause of making experience appear real, and are as 
such full of partiality and aversion. Having therefore shown, 
from their mutual opposition, that they are false, it has been 
finally established that the advaita^ being in no relation with 
the four predicates already discussed, and being not inclined 
to partiality nor open to aversion, and being therefore by 
nature all peace, is the true philosophy of existence. This 
section is introduced for an explanation of the method of this 
philosophy. Duality consists of subject and object, the per- 
ceiver and the perceived, including everything, the S'astraSy 
etc. This duality is a creation of the external senses, it is 
something cognized only during the waking condition. This 
is how the Veddnta understands waking experience. Another, 
i. e.y other than the one described (viz. the gross) phase of tl\e 
senses is that wherein objects are not present, for the senseiiv 
which externalize themselves as objects are not active in that \ 
condition. The subject alone is present, objectivizing itself 
into subject and object. This is the condition of dream. 

88. That which has neither subject nor object is that which 
is beyond experience, — ^e tvise call these three — knowledge^ 
knowable^ and the absolute. 



s'ankara's commentary. 131 



s'ankara's gloss. 



That which is beyond experience, in other words, beyond the^ 
range of the senses, is that condition wherein the perceiver 
(subject) and perceived (object) do not exist. Experience con- 
sists of subject and object and these being absent, the condition 
beyond experience is none other than sleep wherein the 
whole of experience exists only in a potential form. It is, as 
it were, the way to the realization of the absolute. That by 
which the creation of the senses (waking experience), the 
world apart from the senses (dream), and the condition beyond 
experience (sleep), are known is knowledge (thought). The 
knowable are all these three, for there is nothing knowable 
besides ; as all things imagined by all the different schools are 
included in these. The absolute knowable is the highest reality, 
the one uncreate dtman^ described before as the fourth. (This 
fourth is the reality — the way to which is through the three 
preceding stages which are purely naught when this is reached). 
These are thus described by the knowers of Brahman. 

89. The threefold knowable and knowledge^ being known 
one after the other ^ the man of high intellect at once realizes: 
e'cerywhere the condition which is all though. 



s'ankara's gloss. 

Knowledge means the knowledge that grasps the three- 
conditions. The knowable consists of the three conditions 
themselves. The first consists of the gross, the second of 
something more pure on account of the absence of the gross^^ 
and the third is that which results on the absence of the two, 
and which is described as beyond experience. These three being 
known one after the other, that is to say, the entirely unsubstan- 
tial character of these being realized, one after the other ; and 
the unborn anc^ one being realized, the condition which is all 
thought is seen of itself by the man of high intellect. He is. 
called a man of high intellect because his intellect grasps that 
which transcends experience. The realization that accrues 
to such a man is unconditioned by time or space ; for, the 



1 32 biandOkyopanishad. 

absolute once realized is realized for ever ; and there is no 
beginning or end of the knowledge of one who has realized the 
absolute. 

90. The preliminary things to be knoton^ such as the thing^ 
to he avoided^ the thing to he grasped^ the thing to he acquired^ 
the thing to he matured^ are all^ except the thing to he known^ 
mere forms of imagination. 



This is said in order to prevent an impressi(m that the three^ 
conditions described as knowable, are, on that account, in any- 
way substantial. The thing to be avoided is the triad of con-^ 
ditions, waking, dream, and sleep. As these do not exist in 
dtman^ like the snake in the rope, they are to be avoided., 
The thing to be grasped is the absolute, not at all in relation 
with any of the four predicates described before. The thing 
to be acquired consists of the three means of real knowledge,. 
— full knowledge of theory, child-like iunocence and full con- 
centration. These should be practised by the sage free from, 
the three desires (viz. desire for children, for wealth, and fol^ 
name). The thing to be matured is made up of the faults — 
attachment, hatred, delusion, and the like, called kasaya (the 
mordant for the dye of delusion consisting of experience). The 
ascetic should try to understand all these things to the best 
of his power. These, however, with the exception of the thing 
to be known, viz. Brahman^ are regarded by knowers of Brak-^ 
man as mere forms of imagination, that is to say, as results of 
mere delusion, and nothing substantial. 

91. All attributes must^ by nature^ he regarded as without 
beginning like &kAsa;for there is no variety of any form at 
any place. 

s'ANKARA'S GLOSS. 

Those desirous of liberation should regard all attributes of 
dtman as without beginning, and therefore permanent by their 
very nature, being like dkdsa^ subtile, unconditioned, and all* 



s'ankara's commentary. 1S3 

pervading. The other half of the verse is pot in to dispel a 
doubt suggested by the plural "attributes."* In atman therein 
no variety, and these attributes do not mean any, in any manner, 
at any place. 

92. All attributes are by their very nature all thought^ from 
the firsts and are perfectly defined; he who thus reconciles him-- 
^elf attains immortality. 



s'a^kara's gloss. 

The knowableness too of the said attributes is simple illu- 
sion, and nothing substantial. For, by their very nature, they 
are all thought from the first, just like the sun who is all light 
from all beginning. Nor do they require to be defined in any 
way ; for, from the beginning their form is perfectly well- 
defined. That person desirous of liberation who, in the man- 
ner described, stands in no need of any knowledge or defini- 
tion, either for himself or another, like the sun never in need 
of any light other than his own for himself or another ; and 
who thus reconciles himself to himself, that is to say, entirely 
shakes off the idea of having anything to know or perform, 
becomes fit for immortality, is on the way to moksha. 

93, They are all reconciliation Jrom the firsts ever unpro^ 
duced^ annihilated by their very nature^ and therefore eternal 
and inseparable; — all is the unborn^ enlightened Unit. 



s'ankara's gloss. 



Nor is there any room for bringing about a reconciliation in 
4tman, for all attributes are reconciliation itself from the first, 
unborn, and by their very nature unsubstantial. They are 
thus even, and inseparable, whence all is the unborn, en- 
lightened Unit. The point is that for this reason (e. e., be- 
cause nothing is born or destroyed) reconciliation or liberation 

* The word attribute means only the supposed effect of dtmany viz. Jivas 
which are called attributes as being inseparable from the substance, viz, 
dtman* 



134 MANDftKYOPANISHAD. 

is not a thing to be accomplished, for nothing is of nse to a 
thing which is always the same. 

94. Those who always rely on separateness never see the- 
light; those who maintain the reality of separateness^ are 
bound to separateness and are therefore called narrcyw^minded^ 



s'ankara^s gloss. 

Those who realize the absolute as described before are really 
high-minded, all others are simply of narrow mind. For, these^ 
latter are bound to separateness, that is to say, to individuality 
and therefore to duality and the world of experience. They are 
the up-holders of the theory of individuality, e,^., separateness,. 
in the absolute ; in other words, they are dualists^ They are 
truly called narrow-minded because they can' never see the 
light of the absolute, 

95. Those few alone are known in the world as of high in- 
tellect who are firm in their conviction of the unborn and the 
undivided. This the world cannot reach^ 



s'ankaka's gloss. 

The absolute is not capable of being realized by those little^ 
beings who, being beyond the teachings of the Vedanta, are of 
small intellect and narrow mind. Those few alone, including 
even women and others, who are firm in their conviction of the 
unborn and the undivided, are known in the world as persons 
of high soul and high intellect (mahdtmds), in other words, as 
persons one with the supreme essence. This, that is to say,, 
that which is known to these few—the absolute— is not withia^ 
reach of the world, the ignorant, the vulgar men of ordinary 
intellect. " Even gods lose themselves on the way of thos©^ 
who have become the All, who being all love leave no foot- 
prints behind "; " The way of these is not known like that of 
birds in the sky ;" — says the Smrti. 

96. Thought is described as that which itself unborn doe& 
not relate itself to attributes themselves equally unborn ; and 



s'ankaba's commentary. 135 

it is said to be unconditioned inasmuch as it is thus beyond 
relativity, 

s'ankaba's gloss. 

How are they said to be high-souled ? All things being 
unborn, that is to say, being one, thought is ever unborn and 
one, like the light and heat of the sun. Thought being such 
never relates itself to anything and is therefore fitly described 
as unconditioned Kke dkdsa, 

97. The least idea of variety in the mind of the ignorant 
bars all approach to the unconditioned ; not to say anything of 
its preventing the destruction of that which keeps it hidden. 



s'ankaba's gloss. 

From the preceding it follows that the least idea of variety 
or duality or separateness, either subjective or objective, in the 
mind of the ignorant, prevents him from going towards the 
absolute. And when the very way is thus barred, it is needless 
to say that the said idea prevents the destruction of that 
which keeps the absolute hidden from sight. 

98. Entities (attributes) have never been in any relation 
with the obstruction^ being entirely pure by nature ; they are 
all light and ever liberated from the beginning^ and are describe 
ed as knowoMe only because they are all thought. 



s'ankaba's GLOSS. 



That the destruction of that which keeps the absolute hidden 
from sight, is prevented, may be taken to mean that even in 
this theory the existence of a something in the form of 
obstruction is admitted. This is denied. For, all are absolutely 
unrelated to any obstruction, to the so-called bond of avidyk. 
Moreover they are entirely pure by their very nature, and all 
light, and ever liberated. If so, how is it that they are des- 
cribed as " knowable"? Because they are of a nature capable 
of being known. As the sun who is all light is described as 
shining, rising, etc; or as mountains never possibly in motion 



136 mAnd^yopanishad. 

are still described as standing; so are things described as 
knowable though in themselves all thought. 

99. Thotiffkt in the enlightened whose effulgence is every^ 
where never relates itself to objects^ nor do attributes or knoto^ 
ledge relate themselves to anything. This however is not the 
same as that which is held by the Bauddhas. 

s'ankara's gloss. 

As thought in the enlightened never transfers itself to any 
of the objects (attributes), it is always centred in itself, like 
light in the sun. " The effulgence of the enlightened is every- 
where " means that thought is all-pervading like didsa. Attri- 
butes, that is to say, the attributes of the worshipful or the 
enlightened, i. ^., dtman^ are also not in relation with anything, 
like dhdsoriike thought. This is only the summing up of 
what has been said before that thought is like dhdsa, and so 
forth. The dAd8ar-]ike thought of the enlightened whose 
effulgence is everywhere like dhdsa, never relates itself to any- 
thing, nor do things (attributes) relate themselves to anything. 
The substance — dtfnan — is like dkdsa, immutable, whole, per- 
manent, one, unconditioned, incognizable, free from appetites 
such as hunger etc. The S'rtiti too says " The sight of the 
seer is never lost." The absolute is the unification of per- 
ceiver, perception, and perceived (it is the unity of the unlimited 
and liiniting). But all the same this is not the same as that 
which the subjective idealists (Bauddhas) say, by their theory 
which substitutes subjective ideas in placer of objective things, 
absolutely denying their existence. This theory wears a sem- 
blance to the advaita^ but is not that absolute Monism which 
is the pivot of Veddnta philosophy. 

100. We, having realized that condition which is difficult 
to be seen, sublime, uncreate, even, all light, free from variety, 
salute it as best we can. 



s'ankara's gloss. 
This treatise is now concluded with a salutation meant to 
extol the magnitude of the Absolute. It is difficult to be seen, 



s'ankara's commbntabt. 187 

because difficult of comprehension, being not related to any of 
the four possible predicates. Hence it is sublime, not within 
reach of the ignorant, even like the bottom of the fathomless 
deep. It is also uncreate, even, and all light. Having realiz- 
ed this condition free from all variety, we who are that condi- 
tion itself, salute it, to the best of our power ; that is to say, 
though it is impossible to talk of salutation after realization 
of the Absolute, we say this only from the stand-point of rela- 
tivity and experience.. 



(T'he conmientatolr concludes, as he began, with the follow- 
ing prayer). 

L I bow to Brahman^ the destroyer of all fear of those who 
betake themselves to It, which, though absolutely unborn, 
appears by the power of its greatness to pass into birth ; 
which appears as if in motion, though always at rest ; and 
which though one, appears as many to those whose inner 
vision is dimmed by the p^ception of an endless variety of 
(unreal) existences. 

2i I am prostrate at the feet of this my guru^ the wor- 
shipped of the worshipful, who, from sheer love and sympathy for 
beings immersed deep in the waters of the ocean infested with ter- 
rible monsters in the form of the series of births, brought forth 
for the good of all this nectar, impossible to be obtained even by 
the gods, from the inmost depths of the ocean of the Veda 
churned with thei churning-rod of his intellect. 

3. I reverence with all my soul the holy feet, — ^the dispellera 
of the terrors of incarnation — , of him, by the effulgence of the 
glory of whose intellect the whole of the darkness of delusion 
haunting my mind fled away, appearing or disappearing from 
time to time, above or below the waters of the terrible ocean 
of numerous births. He at whose feet persons taking shelter^ 
obtain eternal and unfailing knowledge, accompanied with 
supreme peace of mind and complete reconciliation with Self^ 



18 



INDEX OF SANSKRIT TERMS NOT 
ENGLISHED IN THE TEXT. 



Adhakma — 

ISfot-dharma, i, «., demerit, sin; 
that intangible resnlt which ac* 
ernes from bad acts, and is the 
invisible canse of pain, misery, 
etc 

Adhidaiva — 

Terttdnmg to adhidevata the pre- 
siding deity of the instruments 
of pleasure and pain; hence 
pertaining to the elementals. 

AdhyItma — 

Pertaining to the hitman — Self, 
whence snbjectiye, pertaining 
to the body. 

Advatta — 

That which has not a second; the 
well-known philosophy of Abso- 
lute Idealism. 

Agni — 

The elemental of Fire; the god 

Fire. 

Agnihotra — 

The worship of fire ; a ceremony 
incumbent on every househol- 
der since his marriage (now 
almost obsolete.) 

AhankAra — 

That part of mental operations 
which connects every act with 
the ego. The egoistic principle. 

AjIti— 

The theory of Non-evolution. 



Aks'ARA'^ 

That which never wastes; whenoe^ 
the letters, the Absolute etc. 

AbcItra — 

Having no sign. 
Amrt — 

Nectar; Immortality.. 

I Ananta-MItra — 

^avlng infinite signs;. Absolut!9» 
Annamata (Kos'a) — 

The first of the five kos^as-^hesthB 
—of which the body consists ; 
the sheath of nutrition (food).. 

AntartImin — 

Th<& inner con,troller; the subjec- 
tive AtT/um; the Higher Self; 
The refiection of Atman in the 
microcosmic mind. 

AnyathA-KhtIti— 

The theory that the snake seen 
in place of a rope is on account 
of having seen a snake some- 
where previous to the presMit. 
illusion. 

Apara— 

Another; also the Highest. 
Aspars'a— 

That which is not in touch with 
anything; the Unconditioned; 
the Absolute. 

ASURA — 
Demons. 



u 



INDEX. 



AvidtA — 

Microoosmlo power of iVaifeftt— 
original matter. 

AvyAkrta — 

The undefined ; the Mlf^hat of th^ 
S^khyas; the nndi^erenced 
Bfahman of the AdvaiUns, 

Adhidaivika — 

Forming part of Adhidaina, 

AdhyAtmika — 

Forming pf^t of Adh^itma. 

^GAMA — 

The Yeda9. 
^HAVANIYA — 

One of the three fire9 forming thp 
Agnihotra. 

Akas'a — 

Xl^e fslpmeiit so c^le^i. 
Anandamata — 

The fifth of the ^ve sheatfis of t}ie 
human body, in which original 
iijnAna presides. 



As' 



RAMA- 



Position, place ; ope o| the fp^r 
periods oyer which hnman ^• 
tiyity is distributed. 

JltmalAbha— 

Attaining realization of 8p}f . 

Atman— 

Self; the great soul; the Absolut^. 

AuMKiRA — 
The word Apm. 

BhumI— 

Th|B Unconditione4* 

Bhuta — 

The elements. 



BiJATMA— 

The SulWm^tma Qi(i\^ SutrAtma 
or Antarfi&miih 

Brahman — 

The ftbso|utQ 4IL 
BRAHMAVIDTi — 

Tl^e philosophy ^d 9pifi«pe 9^ %^9 
4^bsoliJte. 

BUDDHI — 

The mental principle which de- 
termines, and distinguishes; con- 
science; the Higher Self. 

BUDDHINDRIYAS — 

The organs of knowledge mz^ the 
eye, the ear, the skin, the nose, 
the tongue. 

Chaitanya — 

The spiritual principle opposed to 
matter. 

Ohitta — 

That part of mental operation 
ifhich takes the object as spme- 
Uiiz^g apart from the subject; 
generally the mind. 

Dharma — 

Opposite of Adharma which see, 

Digambara-Jainas — 

A 9ect of the Jainas opposed to, 
the S^vetfimbaras. They do not 
wear clothes, and do not allow 
among many minor differences 
that a won^an can attain final 
liberation. 

Dravya — 

Substance, the substratum f>f some 
property. 

Ghata — 

An earthen jar. 



iWBX. 



iu 



GhatAkas'a— 

The AM^if #4olo9fjd in a yff, 
GUNA— 

Property, 

PiRANYAGAKBHA— 

fhid microcosmio spiritifftl pri^- 
ciplie on the subtile plane. 

I»'WARA — 

The reflection of Brahmm in 
ffi%d ; generally Brajivhaap itoelt 
JAti — 

Birth; eyolntion; technically the 
one common essenpe of many 
things. 

JnInakInda — 

The department of spiri^nal 
knowledge. 

Kalpa — 

The last great cycle ma4^ up of 

KJLRANA — 

The cause; the causal pla^e. 
Karma — 

The law of cajoae and el^ct; any 
act in general. 

Ka-rmakInda — 

The department of fonnal religion. 
KA.RMBNDRIYAS — 

The organs of action ma., the 
hands, the feet, speech, an4 the 
tT^o secret organs, 

Kars^aka — 
A particular coin. 

Kas'Ita— 

That subtle, infli^ence in the i^ind 
produced by enjoyment, and 
left there to fructify in time to 
come, and distract the mind 
from SamAdhi. 



Kos'as— 
l^heat]ti«» 4y0 ii^ f41« el the hvmxoL 
hfi4y» 

ESHBTRA — 

Literally a field; the Ibody^ 
KSHBTRAJNA — 

He who knows the body; thetoul. 

MadhujnAna — 

Ki^owledge set forth ift the 
Madhu-^^mana. 

MAHiKls'A— 

The great Ahat^a. 

Manas — 

The mind^ the principto yMoh 
thinks, which relatea its^ to 
objects* 

Manomaya (Eos'a) — 

The third of the five shpaths ii| 
which the mind prepondenriiefi 

MAyI— 
Illusion. 

Nyaya-t 

Literally the Syllogism; Benoe-tha 
^stem which deals with Syllo- 
gisms viz^ the Indian wt9m of 
Logic so called* 

Para— 

Supreme; another* 
Paramahansa-t- 

Supreme soul; a Bftja-Yogin of 
the last degree. 

PrIjna— 

The microcosmic spiritual prin- 
ciple qn the causal plane, 

PrIna— 

The viyilying pr^noipje ip nature. 



IV 



INDEX. 



PrAnamaya (Kos'a)— 

^ The second of the five sheaths in 
which theprdna predominates. 

Prithivi— 

The element so called, 
PURUSHA — 

The Stokhjan 8onl which is 
separate in every being. 
PURUSHOTTAMA — 

The Highest Purusha— i. e, Brah' 



Basa — 

Taste; the Sense of. 
SamIdhi — 

That stage of concentration where- 
in there is consciousness of the 
object alone; eostacy; trance. 
SiMANYA — 
See Jd^ 

SamavIya— 

The inseparable relation between 
the canse and its effect; as bet- 
ween a cloth and the threads of 
which it is made. 
Sambhuti — 

A particidar kind of Upisana 
(devotion.) 

Samyoga— 

Relation by union. 

SAnkhya — 

The philosophy so called; the 
philosophy of enumeration. 

SannyIsin — 

One who has abandoned the world. 

SHiKHi— 

Literally a branch; that particular 
reading and worship which is 
peculiar to every one group of 
Vedic teachers. 



S'rotriyas — 

Learned in Vedic lore. 
S'ruti — 

The Veda. 
Sthiti — 

Condition. 
SVADHA— 

The word u^ed in offering obla- 
tions to the PUTS. 

Taijasa — 

The microcosmic spiritual princi- 
ple on the subtile plane. 

Taittiriya — 

Follower of that S'akha of thQ 
(Black) Yajur Veda which bears 
that name. 

TiRKIKAS — 

Those who go by Tarka, reason | 
Rationalists— The Naiyayikas. 

Tbjomaya — 

AU light. 

TuryI— 

Fourth; the State of Brahmoi^ 
jnAna, 

VACH— 

The Word, the Logos. 
Vais'bshika — 

Those who expatiate on the- 
generic and specific marks of 
things, hence the school of philo-. 
sophy so called; they are allied 
to the Ny&ya. 

Vais'vAnara— 

The microcosmic spiritual princi- 
ple on the gross plane. 

Varna — 

The four orders. 



INDEX. 



VAsanA— 

The subtle impression in the 
mind capable of developing 
itself into action; it is the cause 
of birth and experience in gene- 
ral. 

VedInta — 

The philosophy given as the end 
of the Veda ri«., the Upanishads; 
the philosophy of the AdmUa. 

VbdhA— 

The PrAjapati. 

VignIkamata (Kos'a)— 

The fifth sheath in which buddU 
preponderates. 

VignInavAdins — 

A seit of Bnddhist idealists (sab- 
jective.) 



VinAs'a 

A particular kind of formal wor* 
ship. 

ViPRA — 

A Brdhmana ; particularly a Brdk» 
mana bom bred and learned as 
such. 

VirAj— 

See Vais^vAnara, 

VirIt— 

See Virdj, 

Vis'bsha — 

Differentia. 
Vis'vA — 

The microcosmic spiritual princi- 
ple on the gross plane. 

Vis'VANAR— 

Same as Vaia'vdnarat 



„^ORNTO*ec,rev..a«ond«Ko^any 

university ot CaHforma Ubrat, 
Qf to ttie 



':rar^a5^-ec.a.,ea.y«.,.,boo.s 

p,re:Sf ana ■ec.a.as n,ay .e .aOa . .ays 

prior to due date ___ 




VB 4059; 




M 9^^/-eB 



730 

Ed 



THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA LIBRARY 



^ T' p i JJ ii 1 ^ 11 Jl.M i . i I ■■1 11 



U.C. BERKELEY LIBRARIES 

III 



CDDMlMlbSS 





