Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 

in  2011  with  funding  from 

University  of  Toronto 


,<^^ 


http://www.archive.org/details/worksofphilojuda04phil 


^rv» 


THE 


WOEKS 


OF 


PHIL  0    JUD^U  S, 


THE    CONTEMPORARY    OF   JOSEPHUS, 


TRANSLATED    FROM    THE    GREEK, 


BY 


C.  D.   YONGE,    B.A. 


VOL.  IV. 


LONDON : 
HENRY  G.  BOHN,  YORK  STREET,  COYENT  GARDEN. 

1855. 


HADDON,    BROTHERS,    AND    CO.,    PRINTERS,    CASTLE    STRKET,    FINSBUKY. 


ST,     MICHAEL'S 


X        ^ 


■fin       ''"  Tr^^f 


T'^ 


-7  9^4 


CONTENTS. 


Paob 

On  a  Contemplative  Life^  or  on  the  Virtues  of  Suppliants      1 

On  the  Incorruptibility  of  the  World 21 

Against  Elaccus 61 

On   the  Virtues   and  on  the    Office  of  Ambassadors. 

Addressed  to  Gains 99 

Concerning  the  World 180 

The  Fragments  of  the  Lost  Works 210 

Fragments  extracted  from  the  Parallels  of  John  of  Da- 

mascus  .     .     .     .'."..■.. 242 

Fragments  from  a  Monkish  Mac«i«cript 257 

Fragments  preserved  by  Antonius^    .     .    ^ 271 

Fragments  from  an  Anonymous  Collection  iu  the  Bod- 
leian Library  at  Oxford     .     ....   *':"^ 270 

Fragments'  from   an  Unpublished  Manuscript  in  the 

Library  of  the  French  King 277 

A  Volume  of  Questions,  and  Solutions  to  those  Ques- 
tions, which  arise  in  Genesis 284 

Lidex  to  the  Four  Volumes ...     465 


An 


#^  jH 


A  TREATISE 
ON  A  CONTEMPLATIYE  LIFE, 

oa 
ON  THE  VIRTUES  OF  SUPPLIANTS. 


I.  Having  mentioned  the  Essenes,  who  in  all  respects  se- 
lected for  their  admiration  and  for  their  especial  adoption  the 
practical  course  of  life,  and  who  excel  in  all,  or  what  perhaps 
may  be  a  less  unpopular  and  invidious  thing  to  say,  in  most 
of  its  parts,  I  will  now  proceed,  in  the  regular  order  of  my 
sul)ject,  to  speak  of  those  who  have  embraced  the  speculative 
life,  and  I  will  say  what  appears  to  me  to  be  desirable  to  be 
said  on  the  subject,  not  drawing  any  fictitious  statements 
from  my  own  head  for  the  sake  of  improving  the  appearance 
of  that  side  of  the  question  which  nearly  all  poets  and  essay- 
ists are  much  accustomed  to  do  in  the  scarcity  of  good 
actions  to  extol,  but  with  the  greatest  simplicity  adhering 
strictly  to  the  truth  itself,  to  which  I  know  well  that  even  the 
most  eloquent  men  do  not  keep  close  in  their  speeches. 

Nevertheless  we  must  make  the  endeavour  and  labour  to 
attain  to  this  virtue  ;  for  it  is  not  right  that  the  greatness  of 
the  virtue  of  the  men  should  be  a  cause  of  silence  to  those  who 
do  not  think  it  right  that  anything  which  is  creditable  should 
be  suppressed  in  silence  ;  but  the  deliberate  intention  of  the 
philosopher  is  at  once  displayed  from  the  appellation  given  to 
tbem  ;  for  with  strict  regard  to  etymology,  they  are  called 
therapeutae  and  therapeutrides,*  either  because  they  profess 
an  art  of  medicine  more  excellent  than  that  in  general  use  in 
cities  (for  that  only  heals  bodies,  but  the  other  heals  souls 
which  are  under  the  mastery  of  terrible  and  almost  incurable 
diseases,  which  pleasures  and  appetites,  fears  and  griefs,  and 
covetousness,  and  follies,  and  injustice,  and  all  the  rest  of  the 
innumerable  multitude  of  other  passions  and  vices,  have  in- 
flicted upon  them),  or  else  because  they  have  been  instructed 
by  nature  and  the  sacred  laws  to  serve  the  living  God,  who  is 
*  From  OtpaTTtvu),  "  to  heal." 

VOL.  IV.  B 

6 
4.89 


"2  PniLO  JUD^US. 

superior  to  the  good,  and  more  simple  than  the  one,  and  more 
ancient  than  the  unit ;  with  whom,  however,  who  is  there  of 
those  who  profess  piety  that  we  can  possibly  compare  ?  Can 
v;e  compare  those  who  honour  the  elements,  earth,  water,  air, 
and  fire?  to  whom  different  nations  have  given  different 
names,  calling  fire  Hephaestus,  I  imagine  because  of  its  kin- 
dling,* and  the  air  Hera,  I  imagine  because  of  its  being  raised 
up,f  and  raised  aloft  to  a  great  height,  and  water  Poseidon, 
probably  because  of  its  being  drinkable,  J  and  the  earth  Deme- 
tor,  because  it  appears  to  be  the  mother  §  of  all  plants  and  of 
all  animals. 

But  these  names  are  the  inventions  of  sophists :    but  the 
elements  are  inanimate  matter,  and  immovable  by  any  power 
of  their  own,   being  subjected   to   the  operator  on  them  to 
receive  from  him  every  kind  of  shape  or  distinctive  quality 
which  he  chooses  to  give  them.      But  what  shall  we  say  of 
those   men   who  worship  the  perfect  things  made   of  them, 
the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  other  stars,  planets,  or  fixed-stars, 
or  the  whole  heaven,  or  the  universal  world  ?     And  yet  even 
they  do  not  owe  their  existence  to  themselves,  but  to  some 
creator  whose  knowledge  has  been  most  perfect,  both  in  mind 
)  and  degree.     What,  again,   shall   we  say  of  the  demi-gods? 
This  is  a  matter  which  is  perfectly  ridiculous  :  for  how  can  the 
same  man  be  both  mortal  and  immortal,  even  if  we  leave  out 
of  the  question  the  fact  that  the  origin  of  the  birth  of  all  these 
beings  is  liable  to  reproach,  as  being  full  of  youthful  intempe- 
rance,  which  its  authors   endeavour  with   great  profanity  to 
impute  to  blessed  and  divine  natures,  as  if  they,  being  madly 
in  love  with  mortal  women,  had  connected  themselves  with 
them ;  while  we  know  gods  to  be  free  from  all  participation  in 
,  end  from  all  influence  of  passion,  and  completely  happy. 
\       Again,   what  shall    we   say  of  those   who    worship  carved 
I  works  and  images?  the  substances  of  which,  stone  and  wood, 
I  were  only  a  little  while  before  perfectly  destitute  of  shape, 

*  The  Greek  is  t^ail^iQ,  as  if  "H^oKTrog  were  also  derived  from 
uTTTOiirti,  being  akin  to  a(pr). 

t  The  Greek  word  is  a'ipeaOai,  to  which  "Hpa  has  some  similarity  in 
sound. 

X  The  Greek  word  is  Troror,  derived  from  3rd  sing.  perf.  pass,  of 
TTivu)  TTSTTorai,  from  the  2nd  sing,  of  which  flaTroo-at,  Trumidujv  may 
p.-obably  be  derived. 

J  The  Greek  word  is  firjrrjp,  evidently  the  root  of  ilrjfxrjrrjp. 


ON    A   CONTEMPLATIVE    LIFE.  3 

before  the  stone-cutters  or  wood-cutters  hewed  them  out  of  the 
kindred  stuff  around  them,  while  the  remainder  of  the  material, 
their  near  relation  and  brother  as  it  were,  is  made  into  ewers, 
or  foot-pans,  and  other  common  and  dishonoured  vessels,  which 
are  employed  rather  for  uses  of  darkness  than  for  such  as  will 
bear  the  light ;  for  as  for  the  customs  of  the  Egyptians,  it  is 
not  creditable  even  to  mention  them,  for  they  have  introduced 
irrational  beasts,  and  those  not  merely  such  as  are  domestic  and 
tame,  but  even  the  most  ferocious  of  wild  beasts  to  share  the 
honours  of  the  gods,  taking  some  out  of  each  of  the  elements 
beneath  the  moon,  as  the  lion  from  among  the  animals  which 
live  on  the  earth,  the  crocodile  from  among  those  which  live 
in  the  water,  the  kite  from  such  as  traverse  the  air,  and  the 
Egyptian  iris.  And  though  they  actually  see  that  these  animals 
are  born,  and  that  they  are  in  need  of  food,  and  that  they  are  / 
insatiable  in  voracity  and  full  of  all  sorts  of  filth,  and  moreover 
poisonous  and  devourers  of  men,  and  liable  to  be  destroyed  by 
all  kinds  of  diseases,  and  that  in  fact  they  are  often  destroyed 
not  only  by  natural  deaths,  but  also  by  violence,  still  they, 
civilised  men,  worship  these^untameable  and  ferocious  beasts; 
thoughjraUQjtial^^*^  ;  though 

they  have  a  near  relationship  to  tEe  Deity,  they  worship 
creatures  unworthy  of  being  compared  even  to  some  of  the 
beasts ;  though  appointed  as  rulers  and  masters,  they  worship 
creatures  which  are  by  nature  subjects  and  slaves, 

II.  ]jut  since  these  men  infect  not  only  their  fellow 
countrymen,  but  also  all  that  come  near  them  with  folly,  let 
them  remain  uncovered,  being  mutilated  in  that  most  indis- 
pensable of  all  the  outward  senses,  namely,  sight.  I  am 
speaking  here  not  of  the  sight  of  the  body,  but  of  that  of  the 
soul,  by  which  alone  truth  and  falsehood  are  distinguished  from 
one  another.  But  the  therapeutic  sect  of  mankind,  being  con- 
tinually taught  to  see  without  interruption,  may  well  aim  at 
obtaining  a  sight  of  the  living  God,  and  may  pass  by  the  sun,  i 
which  is  visible  to  the  outward  sense,  and  never  leave  this  \ 
order  which  conducts  to  perfec^t  happiness.  But  they  who 
apply  themselves  to  this  kind  of  worship,  not  because  they  are 
intluenced  to  do  so  by  custom,  nor  by  the  advice  or  recommen- 
dation of  any  particular  persons,  but  because  they  are  carried 
away  by  a  certain  heavenly  love,  give  way  to  enthusiasm, 
behaving  like  so  many  revellers  in  bacchanalian  or  corvbantiau 

B   2 


4  PIITLO  JUD.^US. 

mysteries,  until  they  see  the  object  which  they  have   been 
earnestly  desiring. 

Then,  because  of  their  anxious  desire  for  an  immortal  and 
blessed  existence,  thinking  that  their  mortal  life  has  already 
come  to  an  end,  they  leave  their  possessions  to  their  sons  or 
daughters,  or  perhaps  to  other  relations,  giving  them  up  their 
inheritance  with  willing  cheerfulness  ;  and  those  who  know  no 
relations  give  their  property  to  their  companions  or  friends,  for 
it  followed  of  necessity  that  those  who  have  acquired  the 
wealth  which  sees,  as  if  ready  prepared  for  them,  should  be 
willing  to  surrender  that  wealth  which  is  blind  to  those  who 
themselves  also  are  still  blind  in  their  minds. 

The  Greeks  celebrate  Anaxagoras  and  Democritus,  because 
they,  being  smitten  with  a  desire  for  philosophy,  allowed  all 
their  estates  to  be  devoured  by  cattle.  I  myself  admire  the 
men  who  thus  showed  themselves  superior  to  the  attractions 
of  money ;  but  how  much  better  were  those  who  have  not  per- 
mitted cattle  to  devour  their  possessions,  but  have  supplied  the 
necessities  of  mankind,  of  their  own  relations  and  friends,  and 
have  made  them  rich  though  they  w^ere  poor  before  ?  For 
surely  that  was  inconsiderate  conduct  (that  I  may  avoid  saying 
that  any  action  of  men  w-hom  Greece  has  agreed  to  admire 
was  a  piece  of  insanity)  ;  but  this  is  the  act  of  sober  men, 
and  one  which  has  been  carefully  elaborated  by  exceeding 
prudence. 

For  what  more  can  enemies  do  than  ravage,  and  destroy, 
and  cut  down  all  the  trees  in  the  country  of  their  antagonists, 
that  they  may  be  forced  to  submit  by  reason  of  the  extent  to 
which  they  are  oppressed  by  want  of  necessaries  ?  And  yet 
Democritus  did  this  to  his  own  blood  relations,  inflicting 
artificial  want  and  penury  upon  them,  not  perhaps  from  any 
hostile  intention  towards  them,  but  because  he  did  not  foresee 
and  provide  for  Avhat  was  advantageous  to  others.  How  much 
better  and  more  admirable  are  they  who,  without  having  any 
inferior  eagerness  for  the  attainment  of  philosophy,  have 
nevertheless  preferred  magnanimity  to  carelessness,  and,  giving 
presents  from  their  possessions  instead  of  destroying  them,  so 
as  to  be  able  to  benefit  others  and  themselves  also,  have 
1  made  others  happy  by  imparting  to  them  of  the  abundance  of 
)  their  wealth,  and  themselves  by  the  study  of  philosophy  ? 
■  For  an  undue  care  for  money  and  wealth  causes  great  waste 


ON    A   CONTEMPLATIVE   LIFE.  O 

ofj^me,  and  it  is  proper  to_^QQQXiQmseAmSu  since,  according 
to  the  saying  of  the  celebrated  physician  Hippocrates,  life  is 
short  but  art  long.  And  this  is  what  Homer  appears  to  me  to 
imply  figuratively  in  the  Iliad,  at  the  beginning  of  the 
thirteenth  book,  by  the  following  lines, — 

"  The  Mysian  close-fighting  bands, 
And  dwellers  on  the  bcythian  lands, 
Content  to  seek  their  humWe  fare 
From  milk  of  cow  and  milk  of  mare, 
The  justest  of  mankind."  * 

As  if  great  anxiety  concerning  the  means  of  subsistence  and 
the  acquisition  of  money  engendered  injustice  by  reason  of 
the  inequality-  which  it  produced,  while  the  contrary  dispo- 
sition and  pursuit  produced  justice  by  reason  of  its  equality, 
according  to  which  it  is  that  the  wealth  of  nature  is  defined, 
and  is  superior  to  that  which  exists  only  in  vain  opinion. 

When,  therefore,  men  abandon  their  property  without  being 
influenced  by  any  predominant  attraction,  they  flee  without 
even  turning  their  heads  back  again,  deserting  their  brethren, 
their  children,  their  wives,  their  parents,  their  numerous 
families,  their  affectionate  bands  of  companions,  their  native 
lands  in  which  they  have  been  born  and  brought  up,  though 
long  familiarity  is  a  most  attractive  bond,  and  one  very  well 
able  to  allure  any  one.  And  they  depart,  not  to  another  city 
as  those  do  who  entreat  to  be  purchased  from  those  who  at 
present  possess  them,  being  either  unfortunate  or  else  worth- 
less servants,  and  as  such  seeking  a  change  of  masters  rather 
than  endeavouring  to  procure  freedom  (for  every  city,  even 
that  which  is  under  the  happiest  laws,  is  full  of  indescribable 
tumults,  and  disorders,  and  calamities,  which  no  one  would 
submit  to  who  had  been  even  for  a  moment  under  the  in- 
fluence of  wisdom),  but  they  take  up  their  abode  outside  of 
walls,  or  gardens,  or  solitary  lands,  seeking  for  a  desert  place, 
not  because  of  any  ill-natured  misanthropy  to  which  they 
have  learnt  to  devote  themselves,  but  because  of  the  associa- 
tions with  people  of  wholly  dissimilar  dispositions  to  which 
they  would  otherwise  be  compelled,  and  which  they  know  to 
be  unprofitable  and  mischievous. 

111.  Now  this  class  of  persons  may  be  met  with  in  many 
places,  for  it  was  fitting  that  both  Greece  and  the  country 

*  II.  xill  5. 


0  PHILO   JUDvEUS. 

of  the  barbarians  should  partake  of  whatever  is  perfectly 
good  ;  and  there  is  the  greatest  number  of  such  men  in  Egypt, 
in  every  one  of  the  districts,  or  norai  as  they  are  called,  and 
especially  around  Alexandria  ;  and  from  all  quarters  those 
who  are  the  best  of  these  therapeutae  proceed  on  their  pil- 
grimage to  some  most  suitable  place  as  if  it  were  their  country, 
which  is  beyond  the  Mareotic  lake,  lying  in  a  somewhat  level 
plain  a  little  raised  above  the  rest,  being  suitable  for  their 
purpose  by  reason  of  its  safety  and  also  of  the  fine  tempe- 
rature of  the  air. 

For  the  houses  built  in  the  fields  and  the  villages  which 
surround  it  on  all  sides  give  it  safety  ;  and  the  admirable  tem- 
perature of  the  air  proceeds  from  the  continual  breezes  which 
come  from  the  lake  which  falls  into  the  sea,  and  also  from  the 
sea  itself  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  breezes  from  the  sea 
being  light,  and  those  which  proceed  from  the  lake  which  falls 
into  the  sea  being  heavy,  the  mixture  of  which  produces  a 
most  healthy  atmosphere. 

But  the  houses  of  these  men  thus  congregated  together  are 
very  plain,  just  giving  shelter  in  respect  of  the  two  things 
most  important  to  be  provided  against,  the  heat  of  the  sun, 
and  the  cold  from  the  open  air  ;  and  they  did  not.  live  near  to  one 
a^jllgr  as  men  do  in  cities,  for  immediate  neighbourhood  to 
others  would  be  a  troublesome  and  unpleasant  thing  to  men 
who  have  conceived  an  admiration  for,  and  have  determined  to 
devote  themselves  to,^aalitud§J  and,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
did  not  live  very  far  from  one  another  on  account  of  the 
fellowship  which  they  desire  to  cultivate,  and  because  of  the 
desirableness  of  being  able  to  assist  one  another  if  they 
should  be  attacked  by  robbers. 

And  in  every  house  there  is  a  sacred  shrine  which  is  called 
the  holy  place,  and  the  monastery  in  which  they  retire  by 
themselves  and  perform  all  the  mysteries  of  a  holy  life,  bring- 
ing in  nothing,  neither  meat,  nor  drink,  nor  anything  else 
which  is  indispensable  towards  supplying  the  necessities  of 
the  body,  but  studying  in  that  place  the  laws  and  the  sacred 
oracles  of  God  enunciated  by  the  holy  prophets,  and  hymns, 
and  psalms,  and  all  kinds  of  other  things  by  reason  of  which 
knowledge  and  piety  are  increased  and  brought  to  perfection. 
f  Therefore  they  always  retain  an  imperishable  recollection  of 
\  God,  so  that  not  even  in  their  dreams  is  any  other  object  ever 


ON   A   CONTEMPLATIVE   LIFE.  7 

presented  to  their  eyes  except  the  beauty  of  the  divine 
virtues  and  of  the  divine  powers.  Therefore  many  persons 
speak  in  their  sleep,  divulging  and  publishing  the  celebrated 
doctrines  of  the  sacred  philosophy.  And  they  are  accustomed 
to  pray  twice  every  day,  at  morning  and  at  evening  ;  when  the 
sun  is  rising  entreating  God  that  the  happiness  of  the  coming 
day  may  be  real  happiness,  so  that  their  minds  may  be  filled 
with  heavenly  light,  and  when  the  sun  is  setting  they  pray 
that  their  soul,  being  entirely  lightened  and  relieved  of  the 
burden  of  the  outward  senses,  and  of  the  appropriate  object 
of  these  outward  senses,  may  be  able  to  trace  out  truth  existing 
in  its  own  consistory  and  council  chamber.  And  the  interval  / 
between  morning  and  evening  is  by  them  devoted  wholly  to/ 
meditation  on  and  to  practice  of  virtue,  for  they  take  up  thJ 
sacred  scriptures  and  philosophise  concerning  them,  investigatf 
ing  the  allegories  of  their  national  philosophy,  since  they  look 
upon  their  literal  expressions  as  symbols  of  some  secret  mean- 
ing of  nature,  intended  to  be  conveyed  in  those  figurative 
expressions. 

They  have  also  writings  of  ancient  men,  who  having  been 
the  founders  of  one  sect  or  another  have  left  behind  them 
many  memorials  of  the  allegorical  system  of  writing  and 
explanation,  whom  they  take  as  a  kind  of  model,  and  imitate 
the  general  fashion  of  their  sect ;  so  that  they  do  not  occupy 
themselves  solely  in  contemplation,  but  they  likewise  compose 
psalms  and  hymns  to  God  in  every  kind  of  metre  and  melody 
imaginable,  which  they  of  necessity  arrange  in  more  dignified 
rhythm.  Therefore,  during  six  days,  each  of  these  individuals, 
retiring  into  solitude  by  himself,  philosophises  by  himself  in 
one  of  the  places  called  monasteries,  never  going  outside  the 
threshold  of  the  outer  court,  and  indeed  never  even  looking 
out. 

But  on  the  seventh  day  they  all  come  together  as  if  to  meet  " 
in  a  sacred  assembly,  and  they  sit  down  in  order  according  to 
their  ages  with  all  becoming  gravity,  keeping  their  hands 
inside  their  garments,  having  their  right  hand  between  their 
chest  and  their  dress,  and  the  left  hand  down  by  their  side, 
close  to  their  flank  ;  and  then  the  eldest  of  them  who  has  the 
most  profound  learning  in  their  doctrines  comes  forward  and 
speaks  with  steadfast  look  and  with  steadfast  voice,  with  great 
powers   of  reasoning,    and   great   prudence,   not   making   an 


8  PHILO  JUD^US. 

exhibition  of  his  oratorical  powers  Uke  the  rhetoricians  of  old, 
or  the  sophists  of  the  present  day,  but  investigating  with  great 
pains,  and  explaining  with  minute  accuracy  the  precise  mean- 
ing of  the  laws,  which  sits,  not  indeed  at  the  tips  of  their 
ears,  but  penetrates  through  their  hearing  into  the  soul,  and 
remains  there  lastingly  ;  and  all  the  rest  listen  in  silence 
to  the  praises  which  he  bestows  upon  the  law,  showing  their 
assent  only  by  nods  of  the  head,  or  the  eager  look  of  the  eyes. 
And  this  common  holy  place  to  which  they  all  come  to- 
gether on  the  seventh  day  is  a  twofold  circuit,  being  separated 
partly  into  the  apartment  of  the  men,  and  partly  into  a 
chamber  for  the  women,  for  women  also,  in  accordance  with 
the  usual  fashion  there,  form  a  part  of  the  audience,  having  the 
same  feelings  of  admiration  as  the  men,  and  having  adopted 
the  same  sect  with  equal  deliberation  and  decision ;  and  tlie 
wall  which  is  between  the  houses  rises  from  the  ground  three 
or  four  cubits  upwards,  like  a  battlement,  and  the  upper 
portion  rises  upwards  to  the  roof  without  any  opening,  on  two 
accounts ;  first  of  all,  in  order  that  the  modesty  which  is  so 
becoming  to  the  female  sex  may  be  preserved,  and  secondly, 
that  the  women  may  be  easily  able  to  comprehend  what  is 
said  being  seated  within  earshot,  since  there  is  then  nothing 
which  can  possibly  intercept  the  voice  of  him  who  is  speak- 
ing. 

IV.  And  these  expounders  of  the  law,  having  first  of  all  laid 
down  temperance  as  a  sort  of  foundation  for  the  soul  to  rest 
upon,  proceed  to  build  up  other  virtues  on  this  foundation,  and 
no  one  of  them  may  take  any  meat  or  drink  before  the  setting 
of  the  sun,  since  they  judge  that  the  work  of  philosophising  is 
one  which  is  worthy  of  the  light,  but  that  the  care  for  the 
necessities  of  the  body  is  suitable  only  to  darkness,  on  which 
account  they  appropriate  the  day  to  the  one  occupation,  and  a 
brief  portion  of  the  night  to  the  other ;  and  some  men,  in 
whom  there  is  implanted  a  more  fervent  desire  of  knowledge, 
can  endure  to  cherish  a  recollection  of  their  food  for  three 
days  without  even  tasting  it,  and  some  men  are  so  delighted, 
and  enjoy  themselves  so  exceedingly  when  regaled  by  wisdom 
which  supplies  them  with  her  doctrines  in  all  possible  wealth 
1  and  abundance,  that  they  can  even  hold  out  twice  as  great  a 
\  length  of  time,  and  will  scarcely  at  the  end  of  six  days  taste 
\even  necessary  food,  being  accustomed,  as  they  say  that  grass 


ON   A   CONTEMPLATIVE   LIFE.  9 

hoppers  are,  to  feed  on  air,  their  song,  as  I  imagine,  making 
their  scarcity  tolerable  to  them. 

And  they,  looking  upon  the  seventh  day  as  one  of  perfect  i 
holiness  and  a  most  complete  festival,  have  thought  it  worthy  \ 
of  a  most  especial  honour,  and  on  it,  after  taking  due  care  of   . 
their  soul,  they  tend  their  bodies  also,  giving  them,  just  as   ? 
they  do  to  their  cattle,  a  complete  rest  from  their  continual 
labours  ;  and  they  eat  nothing  of  a  costly  character,  but  plain    / 
bread  and  a  seasoning  of  salt,  which  the  more  luxurious  of  | 
them  do  further  season  with  hyssop  ;  and  their  drink  is  water  ; 
from  the  spring  ;  for  they  oppose  those  feelings  which  nature 
has  made  mistresses  of  the  human  race,  namely,  hunger  and 
thirst,  giving  them  nothing  to  flatter  or  humour  them,  but 
only  such  useful  things  as  it  is  not  possible  to  exist  without. 
On  this  account  they  eat  only  so  far  as  not  to  be  hungry,  and 
they  drink  just  enough  to  escape  from  thirst,   avoiding  all 
satiety,  as  an  enemy  of  and  a  plotter  against  both  soul  and 
body. 

And  there  are  two  kinds  of  covering,  one  raiment  and 
the  other  a  house :  we  have  already  spoken  of  their  houses, 
that  they  are  not  decorated  with  any  ornaments,  but  run  up 
in  a  hurry,  being  only  made  to  answer  such  purposes  as  are 
absolutely  necessary  ;  and  in  like  manner  their  raiment  is  of  i 
the  most  ordinary  description,  just  stout  enough  to  ward  ou  * 
cold  and  heat,  being  a  cloak  of  some  shaggy  hide  for  winter, 
and  a  thin  mantle  or  linen  shawl  in  the  summer;  for  in  short 
they  practise  entire  simplicity,  looking  upon  falsehood  as  the 
foundation  of  pride,  but  truth  as  the  origin  of  simplicity,  and 
upon  truth  and  falsehood  as  standing  in  the  light  of  fountains, 
for  from  falsehood  proceeds  every  variety  of  evil  and  wicked- 
ness, and  from  truth  there  flows  every  imaginable  abundance 
of  good  things  both  human  and  divine. 

V.  I  wish  also  to  speak  of  their  common  assemblies,  and 
their  very  cheerful  meetings  at  convivial  parties,  setting  them 
in  opposition  and  contrast  to  the  banquets  of  others,  for  others, 
when  they  drink  strong  wine,  as  if  they  had  been  drinking  not 
wine  but  some  agitating  and  maddening  kind  of  liquor,  or 
even  the  most  formidable  thing  which  can  be  imagined  for 
driving  a  man  out  of  his  natural  reason,  rage  about  and  tear 
things  to  pieces  like  so  many  ferocious  dogs,  and  rise  up  and 
attack  one  another,  biting  and  gnawing  each  other's  noses,  and 


10  PHILO   JUD^US. 

ears,  and  fingers,  and  other  parts  of  their  body,  so  as  to  give 
an  accurate  representation  of  the  story  related  about  the 
Cyclops  and  the  companions  of  Ulysses,  who  ate,  as  the  poet 
says,  fragments  of  human  flesh,*  and  that  more  savagely  than 
even  he  himself ;  for  he  was  only  avenging  himself  on  those 
whom  he  conceived  to  be  his  enemies,  but  they  were  ill-treating 
their  companions  and  friends,  and  sometimes  even  their  actual 
relations,  while  having  the  salt  and  dinner-table  before  them, 
at  a  time  of  peace  perpetrating  actions  inconsistent  with 
peace,  like  those  which  are  done  by  men  in  gymnastic  con- 
tests, debasing  the  proper  exercises  of  the  body  as  coiners 
debase  good  money,  and  instead  of  athletes  (ddXTjraT)  becoming 
miserable  men  (a^X/o/),  for  ^that  is  the  name  which  properly 
belongs  to  theni. 

For  that  which  those  men  who  gain  victories  in  the  Olympic 
games,  when  perfectly  sober  in  the  arena,  and  having  all  the 
Greeks  for  spectators  do  by  day,  exerting  all  their  skill  for  the 
purpose  of  gaining  victory  and  the  crown,  these  men  with  base 
designs  do  at  convivial  entertainments,  getting  drunk  by  night, 
in  the  hour  of  darkness,  when  soaked  in  wine,  acting  without 
either  knowledge,  or  art,  or  skill,  to  the  insult,  and  injury, 
and  great  disgrace  of  those  who  are  subjected  to  their  violence. 
And  if  no  one  were  to  come  like  an  umpire  into  the  middle 
r  of  them,  and  part  the  combatants,  and  reconcile  them,  they 
,  would  continue  the  contest  with  unlimited  licence,  striving  to 
kill  and  murder  one  another,  and  being  killed  and  murdered 
on  the  spot;  for  they  do  not  suffer  less  than  they  inflict, 
though  out  of  the  delirious  state  into  which  they  have  worked 
themselves  they  do  not  feel  what  is  done  to  them,  since  they 
have  filled  themselves  with  wine,  not,  as  the  comic  poet  says, 
to  the  injury  of  their  neighbour,  but  to  their  own.  Therefore 
those  persons  who  a  little  while  before  came  safe  and  sound  to 
the  banquet,  and  in  friendship  for  one  another,  do  presently 
afterwards  depart  in  hostility  and  mutilated  in  their  bodies. 

And  some  of  these  men  stand  in  need  of  advocates  and 
judges,  and  others  require  surgeons  and  physicians,  and  the 
help  which  may  be  received  from  them.  Others  again  who 
seem  to  be  a  more  moderate  kind  of  feasters  when  they  have 
drunk  unmixed  wine  as  if  it  were  mandragora,  boil  over  as  it 
were,  and  lean  on  their  left  elbow,  and  turn  their  heads  on 

*  Odyssey  ix.  35.x 


ON   A   CONTEMPLATIVE    LIFE.  11 

one  side  with  their  breath  redolent  of  their  wine,  till  at  last  . 
they  sink  into  profound  shnnber,  neither  seeing  nor  hearing  • 
anything,  as  if  they  had  but  one  single  sense,  and  that  the  i 
most  slavish  of  all,  namely,  taste.     And  I  know  some  persons 
who,  when  they  are  completely  filled  with  wine,  before  they  are 
wholly  overpowered  by  it,  begin  to  prepare  a  drinking  party 
for  the  next  day  by  a  kind  of  subscription  and  picnic  contribution, 
conceiving  a  great  part  of  their  present  delight  to  consist  in 
the  hope  of  future  drunkenness ;  and  in  this  manner  they  exist 
to  the  very  end  of  their  lives,  without  a  house  and  without  a 
home,  the  enemies  of  their  parents,  and  of  their  wives,  and  of 
their  children,  and  the  enemies  of  their  country,  and  the  worst 
enemies  of  all  to  themselves.     For  a  debauched  and  profligate 
life  is  apt  to  lay  snares  for  every  one. 

VI.  And  perhaps  some  people  may  be  inclined  to  approve 
of  the  arrangement  of  such  entertainments  which  at  present 
prevails  everywhere,  from  an  admiration  of,  and  a  desire  of  [ 
imitating,  the  luxury  and  extravagance  of  the  Italians  which 
both  Greeks  and  barbarians  emulate,  making  all  their  pre- 
parations with  a  view  to  show  rather  than  to  real  enjoy- 
ment, for  they  use  couches  called  triclinia,  and  sofas  all  round 
the  table  made  of  tortoiseshell,  and  ivory,  and  other  costly 
materials,  most  of  which  are  inlaid  with  precious  stones ;  and 
coverlets  of  purple  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver  thread ; 
and  others  brocaded  in  flowers  of  every  kind  of  hue  and  colour 
imaginable  to  allure  the  sight,  and  a  vast  array  of  drinking 
cups  arrayed  according  to  each  separate  description  ;  for  there 
are  bowls,  and  vases,  and  beakers,  and  goblets,  and  all  kinds 
of  other  vessels  wrought  with  the  most  exquisite  skill,  their 
clean  cups  and  others  finished  with  the  most  elaborate  refine- 
ment of  skilful  and  ingenious  men ;  and  well  shaped  slaves  of 
the  most  exquisite  beauty,  ministering,  as  if  they  had  come 
not  more  for  the  purpose  of  serving  the  guests  than  of  delight- 
ing the  eyes  of  the  spectators  by  their  mere  appearance. 

Of  these  slaves,  some,  being  still  boys,  pour  out  the  wine ; 
and  others  more  fully  grown  pour  water,  being  carefully  washed 
and  rubbed  down,  with  their  faces  anointed  and  pencilled,  and 
the  hair  of  their  heads  admirably  plaited  and  curled  and 
wreathed  in  delicate  knots  ;  for  they  have  very  long  hair,  being 
either  completely  unshorn,  or  else  having  only  the  hair  on 
their  foreheads  cut  at  the  end  so  as  to  make  them  of  an  equal 


12  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

length  all  round,  being  accurately  sloped  away  so  as  to  repre- 
sent a  circular  line,  and  being  clothed  in  tunics  of  the  most 
delicate  texture,  and  of  the  purest  white,  reaching  in  front 
down  to  the  lower  part  of  the  knee,  and  behind  to  a  little 
below  the  calf  of  the  leg,  and  drawing  up  each  side  with  a 
gentle  doubling  of  the  fringe  at  the  joinings  of  the  tunics, 
raising  undulations  of  the  garment  as  it  were  at  the  sides,  and 
widening  them  at  the  hollow  part  of  the  side. 

Others,  again,  are  young  men  just  beginning  to  show  a 
beard  on  their  youthful  chins,  having  been,  for  a  short  time,  the 
sport  of  the  profligate  debauchees,  and  being  prepared  with 
exceeding  care  and  diligence  for  more  painful  services ;  being 
a  kind  of  exhibition  of  the  excessive  opulence  of  the  giver  of 
the  feast,  or  rather,  to  say  the  truth,  of  their  thorough 
ignorance  of  all  propriety,  as  those  who  are  acquainted  witli 
them  well  know. 

Besides  all  these  things,  there  is  an  infinite  variety  of  sweet- 
meats, and  delicacies,  and  confections,  about  which  bakers  and 
cooks  and  confectioners  labour,  considering  not  the  taste,  whicli 
is  the  point  of  real  importance,  so  as  to  make  the  food  palatable 
to  that,  but  also  the  sight,  so  as  to  allure  that  by  the  delicacy 
of  the  look  of  their  viands.  Accordingly,  seven  tables,  and 
often  more,  are  brought  in,  full  of  every  kind  of  delicacy  which 
earth,  and  sea,  and  rivers,  and  air  produce,  all  procured  with 
great  pains,  and  in  high  condition,  composed  of  terrestrial,  and 
acquatic,  and  flying  creatures,  every  one  of  which  is  different 
both  in  its  mode  of  dressing  and  in  its  seasoning. 

And  that  no  description  of  thing  existing  in  nature  may  be 
omitted,  at  the  last  dishes  are  brought  in  full  of  fruits,  besides 
those  which  are  kept  back  for  the  more  luxurious  portion  of 
the  entertainment,  and  for  what  is  called  the  dessert ;  and 
afterwards  some  of  the  dishes  are  carried  away  empty  from  the 
insatiable  greediness  of  those  at  table,  who,  gorging  themselves 
like  cormorants,  devour  all  the  delicacies  so  completely  that 
they  gnaw  even  the  bones,  which  some  left  half  devoured  after 
all  that  they  contained  has  been  torn  to  pieces  and  spoiled. 
And  when  they  are  completely  tired  with  eating,  having  their 
bellies  filled  up  to  their  very  throats,  but  their  desireg-Sjill 
unsatisfied,  being  fatigued  with  eating  they  turn  tTieir  heads" 
round  in  every  direction,  scanning  everything  with  their  eyes 
and  with  their  nostrils,  examining  the  richness  and  the  number 


ON    A    CONTEMPLATIVE    LIFE.  13 

of  the  dishes  with  the  first,  and  the  steam  which  is  sent  up  by 
them  with  the  second. 

Then,  when  they  are  thoroughly  sated  both  with  the  sight 
and  with  the  scent,  these  senses  again  prompt  their  owners  to 
eat,  praising  in  no  moderate  terms  both  the  entertainment 
itself  and  the  giver  of  it,  for  its  costliness  and  magnificence. 
However,  why  need  I  dwell  with  prolixity  on  these  matters, 
which  are  already  condemned  by  the  generality  of  more 
moderate  men  as  inflamiag_ihe  passions,  the  diminution  of 
which  is  desirable?  For  any  one  in  his  senses  would  pray  for 
the  most  unfortunate  of  all  states,  hunger  and  thirst,  rather 
than  for  a  most  unlimited  abundance  of  meat  and  drink  at 
such  banquets  as  these. 

VII.  Now  of  the  banquets  among  the  Greeks  the  two  most 
celebrated  and  most  remarkable  are  those  at  which  Socrates 
also  was  present,  the  one  in  the  house  of  Callias,  when,  after 
Autolycus  had  gained  the  crown  of  victory,  he  gave  a  feast  in 
honour  of  the  event,  and  the  other  in  ihe  house  of  Agathon, 
which  was  thought  worthy  of  being  commemorated  by  men 
who  were  imbued  with  the  true  spirit  of  philosophy  both  in 
their  dispositions  and  in  their  discourses,  Plato  and  Xenophon, 
for  they  recorded  them  as  events  worthy  to  be  had  in  perpetual 
recollection,  looking  upon  it  that  future  generations  would  take 
them  as  models  for  a  well  managed  arrangement  of  future 
banquets ;  but  nevertheless  even  these,  if  compared  with  the 
banquets  of  the  men  of  our  time  who  have  embraced  the  con- 
templative system  of  life,  will  appear  ridiculous.  Each  descrip- 
tion, indeed,  has  its  own  pleasures,  but  that  recorded  by  Xeno- 
phon is  the  one  the  delights  of  which  are  most  in  accordance 
with  human  nature,  for  female  harp-players,  and  dancers,  and 
conjurors,  and  jugglers,  and  men  who  do  ridiculous  things,  who 
pride  themselves  much  on  their  powers  of  jesting  and  of 
amusing  others,  and  many  other  species  of  more  cheerful 
relaxation,  are  brought  forward  at  it.  But  the  entertainment 
recorded  by  Plato  is  almost  entirely  connected  with  love ;  not 
that  of  men  madly  desirous  or  fond  of  women,  or  of  women 
furiously  in  love  with  men,  for  these  desires  are  accomplished 
in  accordance  with  a  law  of  nature,  but  with  that  love  which  is 
felt  by  men  for  one  another,  differing  only  in  respect  of  age ; 
for  if  there  is  anything  in  the  account  of  that  banquet  elegantly 
said   in   praise  of  genuine   love  and  heavenly  Venus,   it  is 


14  PIIILO   JUD.EUS. 

introduced  merely  for  the  sake  of  making  a  neat  speech ;  for 
the  greater  part  of  the  book  is  occupied  by  common,  vulgar, 

I  promiscuous  love,  which  takes  away  from  the  soul  courage, 

\  that  which  is  the  most  serviceable  of  all  virtues  both  in  war 
and  in  peace,  and  which  engenders  in  it  instead  the  female 
disease,  and  renders  men  men-women,  though  they  ought 
rather  to  be  carefully  trained  in  all  the  practices  likely  to  give 
men  valour. 

I  And  having  corrupted  the  age  of  boys,  and  having  metamor- 
phosed them  and  removed  them  into  the  classification  and 
character  of  women,  it  has  injured  their  lovers  also  in  the  most 

I  important  particulars,  their  bodies,  their  souls,  and  their 
properties ;  for  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the  mind  of  a  lover 
of  boys  must  be  kept  on  the  stretch  towards  the  objects  of  his 
affection,  and  must  have  no  acuteness  of  vision  for  any  other 
object,   but  must  be  blinded  by  its   desire   as    to    all   other 

I  objects  private  or  common,  and  must  so  be  wasted  away,  more 
especially  if  it  fails  in  its  objects.  Moreover,  the  man's 
property  must  be  diminished  on  two  accounts,  both  from  the 
owner's  neglect  and  from  his  expenses  for  the  beloved  object. 

There  is  also  another  greater  evil  which  affects  the  whole 
people,  and  which  grows  up  alongside  of  the  other,  for  men 
who  give  into  such  passions  produce  solitude  in  cities,  and  a 
scarcity  of  the  best  kind  of  men,  and  barrenness,  and  unpro- 
ductiveness, inasmuch  as  they  are  imitating  those  farmers  who 
are  unskilful  in  agriculture,  and  who,  instead  of  the  deep-soiled 
champaign  country,  sow  briny  marshes,  or  stony  and  rugged 
districts,  which  are  not  calculated  to  produce  crops  of  any  kind, 
and  which  only  destroy  the  seed  which  is  put  into  them.  I 
pass  over  in  silence  the  different  fabulous  fictions,  and  the 
stories  of  persons  with  two  bodies,  who  having  originally  been 
stuck  to  one  another  by  amatory  influences,  are  subsequently 
separated  like  portions  which  have  been  brought  together  and 
are  disjoined  again,  the  harmony  having  been  dissolved  by 
which  they  were  held  together ;  for  all  these  things  are  very 
attractive,  being  able  by  the  novelty  of  their  imagination  to 
allure  the  ears,  but  they  are  despised  by  the  disciples  of 
Moses,  who  in  the  abundance  of  their  wisdom  have  learnt 
from  their  earliest  infancy  to  love  truth,  and  also  continue  to 
the  end  of  their  lives  impossible  to  be  deceived. 

VIII.  But  since  the  entertainments  of  the  greatest  celebrity 


ON   A   CONTEMrLATIVE   LIFE.  ]5 

are  full  of  such  trifling  and  folly,  bearing  conviction  in  them- 
selves, if  any  one  should  think  fit  not  to  regard  vague  opinion 
and  the  character  which  has  been  commonly  handed  down 
concerning  them  as  feasts  which  have  gone  off  with  the  most 
eminent  success,  I  will  oppose  to  them  the  entertainments  of 
those  persons  who  have  devoted  their  whole  life  and  themselves 
to  the  knowledge  and  contemplation  of  the  alfairs  of  nature  in 
accordance  with  the  most  sacred  admonitions  and  precepts  of 
the  prophet  Moses. 

In  the  first  place,  these  men  assemble  at  the  end  of  seven 
weeks,  venerating  not  only  the  simple  week  of  seven  days,  but 
also  its  multiplied  power,  for  they  know  it  to  be  pure  and 
always  virgin ;  and  it  is  a  prelude  and  a  kind  of  forefeast  of 
the  greatest  feast,  which  is  assigned  to  the  number  fifty,  the 
most  holy  and  natural  of  numbers,  being  compounded  of  the 
power  of  the  right-angled  triangle,  which  is  the  principle  of  the 
origination  and  condition  of  the  whole. 

Therefore  when  they  come  together  clothed  in  white 
garments,  and  joyful  with  the  most  exceeding  gravity,  when  ; 
some  one  of  the  ephemereutae  (for  that  is  the  appellation  ■* 
which  they  are  accustomed  to  give  to  those  who  are  employed  ' 
in  such  ministrations),  before  they  sit  down  to  meat  standing 
in  order  in  a  row,  and  raising  their  eyes  and  their  hands  to 
heaven,  the  one  because  they  have  learnt  to  fix  their  attention 
on  what  is  worth  looking  at,  and  the  other  because  they  are 
free  from  the  reproach  of  all  impure  gain,  being  never  polluted 
under  any  pretence  whatever  by  any  description  of  criminality 
which  can  arise  from  any  means  taken  to  procure  advantage, 
they  pray  to  God  that  the  entertainment  may  be  acceptable, 
and  welcome,  and  pleasing ;  and  after  having  offered  up  these 
prayers  the  elders  sit  down  to  meat,  still  observing  the  order  in 
which  they  were  previously  arranged,  for  they  do  not  look  on 
those  as  elders  who  are  advanced  in  years  and  very  ancient,  but 
in  some  cases  they  esteem  those  as  very  young  men,  if  they  have 
attached  themselves  to  this  sect  only  lately,  but  those  whom 
they  call  elders  are  those  who  from  their  earliest  infancy  have 
grown  up  and  arrived  at  maturity  in  the  speculative  portion  oi 
philosophy,  which  is  the  most  beautiful  and  most  divine  part/ 
of  it.  / 

And  the  women  also  share  in  this  feast,  the  greater  part  of 
■N\hom,  though  old,  are  vii'gins  in  respect  of  their  purity  (not 


10  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

indeed  through  necessity,  as  some  of  the  priestesses  among  the 
Greeks  are,  who  have  been  compelled  to  preserve  their  chastity 
more  than  they  would  have  done  of  their  own  accord),  but  out 
of  an  admiration  for  and  love  of  wisdom,  with  which  they  are 
desirous  to  pass  their  lives,  on  account  of  which  they  are  indif- 
ferent to  the  pleasures  of  the  body,  desiring  not  a  mortal  but 
an  immortal  offspring,  which  the  soul  that  is  attached  to  God 
is  alone  able  to  produce  by  itself  and  from  itself,  the  Father 
having  sown  in  it  rays  of  light  appreciable  only  by  the  intel- 
lect, by  means  of  wtiich  it  will  be  able  to  perceive  the  doctrines 
of  wisdom. 

IX.  And  the  ordei'  in  which  they  sit  down  to  meat  is  a 
divided  one,  the  men  sitting  on  the  right  hand  and  the  women 
apart  from  them  on  the  left ;  and  in  case  any  one  by  chance 
suspects  that  cushions,  if  not  very  costly  ones,  still  at  all  events 
of  a  tolerably  soft  substance,  are  prepared  for  men  who  are 
well  born  and  well  bred,  and  contemplators  of  philosophy,  he 
must  know  that  they  have  nothing  but  rugs  of  the  coarsest 
materials,  cheap  mats  of  the  most  ordinary  kind  of  the  papyrus 
of  the  land,  piled  up  on  the  ground  and  projecting  a  little  near 
the  elbow,  so  that  the  feasters  may  lean  upon  them,  for  they 
relax  in  a  slight  degree  the  Lacedaemonian  rigour  of  life,  and 
at  all  times  and  in  all  places  they  practise  a  liberal,  gentle- 
manlike kind  of  frugality,  hating  the  allurements  of  pleasure 
with  all  their  might. 

And  they  do  not  use  the  ministrations  of  slaves,  looking 
upon  the  possession  of  servants  or  slaves  to  be  a  thing  abso- 
lutely and  wholly  contrary  to  nature,  for  nature  has  created  all 
men  free,  but  the  injustice  and  covetousness  of  some  men  who 
prefer  inequality,  that  cause  of  all  evil,  having  subdued  some, 
has  given  to  the  more  powerful  authority  over  those  who  are 
weaker. 

Accordingly  in  this  sacred  entertainment  there  is,  as  I  have 
said,  no  slave,  but  free  men  minister  to  the  guests,  perform- 
ing the  offices  of  servants,  not  under  compulsion,  nor  in 
obedience  to  any  imperious  commands,  but  of  their  own 
voluntary  free  will,  with  all  eagerness  and  promptitude  anti- 
cipating all  orders,  for  they  are  not  any  chance  free  men  who 
are  appointed  to  perform  these  duties,  but  young  men  who  are 
selected  from  their  order  with  all  possible  care  on  account  of 
their  excellence,  acting  as  virtuous  and  well-born  youths  ought 


ON  A   CONTEMPLATIVE   LIFE.  17 

to  act  who  are  eager  to  attain  to  the  perfection  of  virtue,  and 
who,  like  legitimate  sons,  with  affectionate  rivalry  minister  to 
their  fathers  and  mothers,  thinking  their  common  parents 
more  closely  connected  with  them  than  those  who  are  related 
by  blood,  since  in  truth  to  men  of  right  principles  there  is 
nothing  more  nearly  akin  than  virtue ;  and  they  come  in  to 
perform  their  service  ungirdled,  and  with  their  tunics  let 
down,  in  order  that  nothing  which  bears  any  resemblance  to  a 
slavish  appearance  may  be  introduced  into  this  festival 

I  know  well  that  some  persons  will  laugh  when  they  hear  i 
this,  but  they  who  laugh  will  be  those  who  do  things  worthy  of  \ 
weeping  and  lamentation.     And  in  those  days  wine  is  not  in-    ^j 
troduced,  but  only  the  clearest  water;  cold  water  for  the  gene-  jj 
rality,  and  hot  water  for  those  old  men  who  are  accustomed  to 
a  luxurious  life.     And  the  table,  too,  bears  nothing  which  has    j 
blood,  but  there  is  placed  upon  it  bread  for  food  and  salt  for    I 
seasoning,  to  which  also  hyssop  is  sometimes  added  as  an  extra    ' 
sauce  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are  delicate  in  their  eating,  for 
just  as  right  reason  commands  the  priest  to  offer  up  sober 
sacrifices,  so  also  these  men  are  commanded  to  live  sober  lives, 
for  wine  is  the  medicine  of  folly,  and  costly  seasonings  and 
sauces  excite  desire,  which  is  the  most  insatiable  of  all  beasts. 

X.  These,  then,  are  the  first  circumstances  of  the  feast ; 
but  after  the  guests  have  sat  down  to  the  table  in  the  order 
which  I  have  been  describing,  and  when  those  who  minister  to 
them  are  all  standing  around  in  order,  ready  to  wait  upon 
them,  and  when  there  is  nothing  to  drink,  some  one  will  say 
....  but  even  more  so  than  before,  so  that  no  one  ventures 
to  mutter,  or  even  to  breathe  at  all  hard,  and  then  some  one 
looks  out  some  passage  in  the  sacred  scriptures,  or  explains 
some  difficulty  which  is  proposed  by  some  one  else,  without 
any  thoughts  of  display  on  his  own  part,  for  he  is  not  aiming 
at  reputation  for  cleverness  and  eloquence,  but  is  only  desirous 
to  see  some  points  more  accurately,  and  is  content  when  he 
has  thus  seen  them  himself  not  to  bear  ill  will  to  others,  who, 
even  if  they  did  not  perceive  the  truth  with  equal  acuteness, 
have  at  all  events  an  equal  desire  of  learning.  And  he,  indeed, 
follows  a  slower  method  of  instruction,  dwelling  on  and  linger- 
ing over  his  explanations  with  repetitions,  in  order  to  imprint 
his  conceptions  deep  in  the  minds  of  his  hearers,  for  as  the 
understanding  of  his  hearers  is  not  able  to  keep  up  with  the 

VOL.  IV.  0 


18  PniLO  JUDiEUS. 

interpretation  of  one  who  goes  on  fluently,  without  stopping  to 
take  breath,  it  gets  behindhand,  and  fails  to  comprehend  what 
is  said ;  but  the  hearers,  fixing  their  e3'es  and  attention  upon 
the  speaker,  remain  in  one  and  the  same  position  listening 
attentively,  indicating  their  attention  and  comprehension  by 
their  nods  and  looks,  and  the  praise  which  they  are  inclined 
to  bestow  on  the  speaker  by  the  cheerfulness  and  gentle 
manner  in  which  they  follow  him  with  their  eyes  and  with  the 
fore-finger  of  the  right  hand. 

And  the  young  men  who  are  standing  around  attend  to  this 
explanation  no  less  than  the  guests  themselves  who  are  sitting 
at  meat.  And  these  explanations  of  the  sacred  scriptures  are 
delivered  by  mystic  expressions  in  allegories,  for  the  whole  of 
the  law  appears  to  these  men  to  resemble  a  living  animal,  and 
its  express  commandments  seem  to  be  the  bodVj_and  the 
invisitilel^meaning  concealed  under  and  lying  beneath  the 
plain  words  resembles  the  soul,  in  which  the  rationansoul 
begins  most  excellently  to  contemplate  what  belongs  to  itself, 
as  in  a  mirror,  beholding  in  these  very  words  the  exceeding 
beauty  of  the  sentiments,  and  unfolding  and  explaining  the 
symbols,  and  bringing  the  secret  meaning  naked  to  the  light 
to  all  who  are  able  by  the  light  of  a  slight  intimation  to  per- 
ceive what  is  unseen  by  what  is  visible. 

When,  therefore,  the  president  appears  to  have  spoken  at 
eufficient  length,  and  to  have  carried  out  his  intentions 
adequately,  so  that  his  explanation  has  gone  on  felicitously 
and  fluently  through  his  own  acuteness,  and  the  hearing 
of  the  others  has  been  profitable,  applause  arises  from  them 
all  as  of  men  rejoicing  together  at  what  they  have  seen 
and  heard  ;  and  then  some  one  rising  up  sings  a  hymn  which 
has  been  made  in  honour  of  God,  either  such  as  he  has  com- 
posed himself,  or  some  ancient  one  of  some  old  poet,  for  they 
have  left  behind  them  many  poems  and  songs  in  trimetre 
iambics,  and  in  psalms  of  thanksgiving  and  in  hymns,  and 
songs  at  the  time  of  libation,  and  at  the  altar,  and  in  regular 
order,  and  in  choruses,  admirably  measured  out  in  various 
and  well  diversified  strophes. 

And  after  him  then  others  also  arise  in  their  ranks,  in 
becoming  order,  while  every  one  else  listens  in  decent  silence, 
except  when  it  is  proper  for  them  to  take  up  the  burden  of  the 
song,  and  to  join  in  at  the  end ;  for  then  they  all,  both  men 


ON   A   CONTEMPLATIVE   LIFE.  19 

and  women,  join  in  the  hymn.  And  when  each  individual 
has  finished  his  psalm,  then  the  young  men  bring  in  the  table 
which  was  mentioned  a  Uttle  while  ago,  on  which  was  placed 
that  most  holy  food,  the  leavened  bread,  with  a  seasoning  of 
salt,  with  which  hyssop  is  mingled,  out  of  reverence  for  the 
sacred  table,  which  lies  thus  in  the  holy  outer  temple ;  for  on 
this  table  are  placed  loaves  and  salt  without  seasoning,  and 
the  bread  is  unleavened,  and  the  salt  unmixed  with  anything 
else,  for  it  was  becoming  that  the  simplest  and  purest  things 
should  be  allotted  to  the  most  excellent  portion  of  the  priests, 
as  a  reward  for  their  ministrations,  and  that  the  others  should 
admire  similar  things,  but  should  abstain  from  the  loaves,  in 
order  that  those  who  are  the  more  excellent  persons  may  have 
the  precedence. 

XI.  And  after  the  feast  they  celebrate  the  sacred  festival 
during  the  whole  night ;  and  this  nocturnal  festival  is  celebrated 
in  the  following  manner :  they  all  stand  up  together,  and  in   . 
the  middle  of  the  entertainment  two  choruses  are  formed  at  | 
first,  the  one  of  men  and  the  other  of  women,  and  for  each 
chorus  there  is  a  leader  and  chief  selected,  who  is  the  most 
honourable  and  most  excellent  of  the  band.     Then  they  sing    ( 
hymns  which  have  been  composed  in  honour  of  God  in  many    » 
metres  and  tunes,  at  one  time  all  singing  together,  and  at 
another  moving  their  hands  and   dancing  in  corresponding 
harmony,  and  uttering  in  an  inspired  manner  songs  of  thanks- 
giving, and  at  another  time  regular  odes,  and  performing  all 
necessary  strophes  and  antistrophes. 

Then,  when  each  chorus  of  the  men  and  each  chorus  of  the 
women  has  feasted  separately  by  itself,  like  persons  in  the 
bacchanalian  revels,  drinking  the  pure  wine  of  the  love  of 
God,  they  join  together,  and  the  two  become  one  chorus,  an 
imitation  of  that  one  which,  in  old  time,  was  established  by 
the  Red  Sea,  on  account  of  the  wondrous  works  which  were 
displayed  there ;  for,  by  the  commandment  of  God,  the  sea 
became  to  one  party  the  cause  of  safety,  and  to  the  other 
that  of  utter  destruction ;  for  it  being  burst  asunder,  and 
dragged  back  by  a  violent  reflux,  and  being  built  up  on  each 
side  as  if  there  were  a  solid  wall,  the  space  in  the  midst  was 
widened,  and  cut  into  a  level  and  dry  road,  along  which  the 
people  passed  over  to  the  opposite  land,  being  conducted 
onwards  to  higher  ground ;  then,  wlien  the  sea  returned  and 

C  2 


•20  PHILO  JUD^US. 

ran  back  to  its  former  channel,  and  was  poured  out  from  both 
sides,  on  what  had  just  before  been  dry  ground,  those  of  tlie 
enemy  who  pursued  were  overwhelmed  and  perished. 

When  the  Israelites  saw  and  experienced  this  great  miracle, 
which  was  an  event  beyond  all  description,  beyond  all  imagi- 
nation, and  beyond  all  hope,  both  men  and  women  together, 
under  the  influence  of  divine  inspiration,  becoming  all  one 
(•horus,  sang  hymns  of  thanksgiving  to  God  the  Saviour, 
Moses  the  prophet  leading  the  men,  and  Miriam  the  prophet- 
ess leading  the  women. 

Now  the  chorus  of  male  and  female  worshippers  being 
formed,  as  far  as  possible  on  this  model,  makes  a  most  humor- 
ous concert,  and  a  truly  musical  symphony,  the  shrill  voices 
of  the  women  mingling  with  the  deep-toned  voices  of  the  men. 
The  ideas  were  beautiful,  the  expressions  beautiful,  and  the 
chorus-singers  were  beautiful ;  and  the  end  of  ideas,  and 
expressions,  and  chorus-singers,  was  piety ;  therefore,  being 
intoxicated  all  night  till  the  morning  with  this  beautiful  in- 
toxication, without  feeling  their  heads  heavy  or  closing  their 
eyes  for  sleep,  but  being  even  more  awake  than  when  they 
came  to  the  feast,  as  to  their  eyes  and  their  whole  bodies,  and 
standing  there  till  morning,  when  they  saw  the  sun  rising  they 
raised  their  hands  to  heaven,  imploring  tranquillity  and  truth, 
and  acuteness  of  understanding. 

And  after  their  prayers  they  each  retired  to  their  own  sepa- 
rate abodes,  with  the  intention  of  again  practising  the  usual 
philosophy  to  which  they  had  been  wont  to  devote  themselves. 
,        This  then  is  what  I   have  to  say  of  those  who  are  called 
I    therapeutae,  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  the  contempla- 
■    tion  of  nature,  and  who  have  lived  in  it  and  in  the  soul  alone, 
j    being  citizens  of  heaven  and  of  the  world,  and  very  acceptable 
to  the  P  ather  and  Creator  of  the  universe  because  of  their  vir- 
tue, which  has  procured  them  his  love  as  their  most  appro- 
priate reward,  which  far  surpasses  all  the  gifts  of  fortune,  and 
conducts  them  to  the  very  summit  and  perfection  of  happiness. 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  21 

A  TEEATISE 

ON    THK 

INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD. 

I.  In  every  uncertain  and  important  business  it  is  proper  to 
invoke  God,  because  he  is  the  good  Creator  of  the  world,  and 
because  nothing  is  uncertain  with  him  who  is  possessed  of  the 
most  accurate  knowledge  of  all  things.  But  of  all  times  it  is 
most  necessary  to  invoke  him  when  one  is  preparing  to  discuss 
the  incorruptibility  of  the  world  ;  for  neither  among  the  things 
which  are  visible  to  the  outward  senses  is  there  anything  more 
admirably  complete  than  the  world,  nor  among  things  appreci- 
able by  the  intellect  is  there  anything  more  perfect  than  God. 
But  the  mind  is  at  all  times  the  governor  of  the  outward 
sense,  and  that  which  is  appreciable  by  the  intellect  is  at  all 
times  superior  to  that  which  is  visible  to  the  outward  senses, 
but  those  persons  in  whom  there  is  implanted  a  vigorous  and 
earnest  love  of  truth  willingly  undergo  the  trouble  of  making 
inquiries  relative  to  the  subordinate  things,  from  that  which  is 
superior  to  and  the  ruler  over  them. 

If  then,  we,  who  have  been  practised  and  trained  in  all  the 
doctrines  of  prudence,  and  temperance,  and  virtue,  have 
discarded  all  the  stains  of  the  passions  and  diseases,  perhaps 
God  would  not  disdain  to  give  to  souls  completely  purified  and 
cleansed,  so  as  to  appear  in  his  image,  a  knowledge  of  heavenly 
things,  either  by  means  of  dreams,  or  of  oracles,  or  of  signs,  or 
of  wonders.  But  since  we  have  on  us  the  marks  of  folly,  and 
injustice,  and  of  all  other  vices  strongly  stamped  upon  us  and 
difficult  to  be  effaced,  we  must  be  content  even  if  we  are  only 
able  by  them  to  discover  some  faint  copy  and  imitation  of  the 
truth.  It  is  right,  therefore,  for  those  who  are  investigating 
the  question  whether  the  world  is  perishable,  since  the  two 
words,  ^'corruption,"  and  *'  the  world,"  will  be  in  continual  use, 
first  of  all  to  investigate  the  precise  meaning  of  both  expres- 
sions, in  order  that  we  may  know  w^hat  is  now  signified,  and 
what  has  been  ordained.  And  we  must  enumerate,  not  indeed 
everything  which  is  signified  by  those  words,  but  so  much  as  is 
useful  for  the  purpose  of  our  present  instruction. 

II.  The  world,  therefore,  is  spoken  of  in  its  primary  sense 


22  PHILO  JUD^EUS. 

as  a  single  system,  consisting  of  the  heaven  and  the  stars  in 
the  circumference  of  the  earth,  and  all  the  animals  and  plants 
which  are  upon  it ;  and  in  another  sense  it  is  spoken  of  merely 
as  the  heaven.  And  Anaxagoras,  having  a  regard  to  this  fact, 
once  made  answer  to  a  certain  person  who  asked  of  him  what 
the  reason  was  why  he  generally  endeavoured  to  pass  the 
night  in  the  open  air,  that  he  did  so  for  the  sake  of  beholding 
the  world,  by  which  expression  he  meant  the  motions  and 
revolutions  of  the  stars. 

And  in  its  third  meaning,  as  the  Stoics  affirm,  it  is  a  certain 
ndmirably-arranged  essence,  extending  to  the  period  of  confla- 
gration, either  beautifully  adorned  or  unadorned,  the  periods 
of  the  motion  of  which  are  called  time. 

But  at  present  the  subject  of  our  consideration  is  the  world, 
taken  in  the  first  sense  of  the  word,  which  being  one  only, 
consists  of  the  heaven,  and  of  the  earth,  and  of  all  that  is 
therein.  And  the  term  corruption  is  used  to  signify  a  change 
for  the  worse ;  it  is  also  used  to  signify  the  utter  destruction  o:' 
that  which  exists,  a  destruction  so  complete  as  to  have  no 
existence  at  all ;  for  as  nothing  is  generated  out  of  nothing,  so 
neither  can  anything  which  exists  be  destroyed  so  as  to  become 
non-existence.*  For  it  is  impossible  that  anything  should  be 
generated  of  that  which  has  no  existence  anywhere,  and  equally 
so  that  what  does  exist  should  be  so  utterly  destroyed  as  never 
to  be  mentioned  or  heard  of  again.  And  indeed  in  this  spirit 
the  tragedian  savs  : — 


*o^ 


**  Nought  that  e'er  has  been 
Completely  dies,  but  things  combined 
Before  another  union  find  ; 
Quitting  their  former  company, 
And  80  again  in  other  forms  are  seen."t 

Nor  is  it  so  veiy  silly  a  thing  to  doubt  whether  the  world  is 
destroyed  so  as  to  pass  into  a  state  of  non-existence,  but  rather 
whether  it  is  subjected  to  a  change  from  a  new  arrangement, 
being  dissolved  as  to  all  the  manifold  forms  of  its  elements  and 
combinations  so  as  to  assume  one  and  the  same  appearance,  or 
whether,  like  a  thing  broken  and  dashed  to  pieces,  it  is 
subjected  to  a  complete  confusion  of  its  different  fragments. 

*  This  is  similar  to  Lucretius's  doctrine — 

Kil  igitur  fieri  de  nihilo  posse  putandum  est. 

t  From  the  Chrysippus  of  Euripidea. 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  23 

III.  And  there  are  three  different  opinions  on  the  subject 
which  we  are  at  present  discussing.  Since  some  persons 
affirm  that  the  world  is  eternal,  and  uncreated,  and  not  liable 
to  any  destruction ;  while  others,  on  the  contrary,  say  that  it 
has  been  created  and  is  destructible.  There  are  also  others 
who  take  a  portion  of  each  of  these  two  opinions,  agreeing  with 
the  last-mentioned  sect  that  it  has  been  created,  but  with  the 
former  class  that  it  is  indestructible ;  and  thus  they  have  left 
behind  them  a  mixed  opinion,  thinking  that  it  is  at  the  same 
time  created  and  imperishable. 

However,  Democritus  and  Epicurus,  and  the  principal 
number  of  the  Stoic  philosophers,  affirm  both  the  creation  and 
the  destructibility  of  the  world,  though  they  do  not  all  speak 
in  similar  senses ;  for  some  give  a  sketch  of  many  worlds,  the 
generation  of  which  they  attribute  to  the  concourse  and  combi- 
natitn  of  atoms,  and  their  destruction  they  impute  to  the 
dissolution  and  breaking  up  of  the  combined  particles. 

But  the  Stoics  speak  of  one  world  only,  and  affirm  that 
God  is  the  cause  of  its  creation,  but  that  the  cause  of  its  cor- 
ruption is  no  longer  God,  but  the  power  of  invincible,  un- 
wearied fire,  which  pervades  all  existing  things,  in  the  long 
periods  of  time  dissolving  everything  into  itself,  while  from  it 
again  a  regeneration  of  the  world  takes  place  through  the 
providence  of  the  Creator.  And  according  to  these  men  there 
may  be  one  world  spoken  of  as  eternal  and  another  as  destruc- 
tible, destructible  in  reference  to  its  present  arrangement,  and 
eternal  as  to  the  conflagration  which  takes  place,  since  it  is 
rendered  immortal  by  regenerations  and  periodical  revolutions 
which  never  cease. 

But  Aristotle,  with  a  knowledge  as  to  which  I  know  not  to 
what  degree  I  may  call  it  holy  and  pious,  affirmed  that  the 
world  was  uncreated  and  indestructible,  and  he  accused  those 
who  maintained  a  contraiy  opinion  of  terrible  impiety,  for 
thinking  that  so  great  a  visible  God  was  in  no  respect  different 
from  things  made  with  hands,  though  he  contains  within  him- 
self the  sun,  and  the  moon,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  planets 
and  fixed  stars,  and,  in  fact,  the  whole  of  the  divine  nature ; 
and  he  said  in  a  cavilling  and  reproachful  tone,  that  formerly 
he  had  feared  for  his  house  lest  it  should  be  overthrown  by 
violent  gales,  or  extraordinary  storms,  or  by  lapse  of  time,  or 
through  the  want  of  the  proper  care  requisite  to  preserve  it, 


24  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

but  that  now  he  had  a  much  greater  fear  hanging  over  him  in 
consequence  of  those  men  who  by  their  reasonings  went  to 
destroy  the  whole  world.  But  some  say  that  it  was  not 
Aristotle  who  invented  this  doctrine,  but  some  of  the  Py- 
thagoreans ;  but  I  have  met  with  a  work  of  Ocellus,  a  Luca- 
nian  by  birth,  entitled,  "  A  Treatise  on  the  Nature  of  the 
Universe,"  in  which  he  has  not  only  asserted  that  the  world  is 
indestructible,  but  he  has  even  endeavoured  to  prove  it  so  by 
demonstrative  proofs. 

IV.  But  some  say  that  the  world  has  been  proved  by  Plato 
in  the  Timaeus  to  be  both  uncreated  and  indestructible,  in  the 
account  of  that  divine  assembly  in  which  the  younger  gods  are 
addressed  by  the  eldest  and  the  governor  of  them  all  in  the 
following  terms  ;*  "  0  ye  gods  of  gods,  those  works  of  which 
I  am  the  father  and  the  creator  are  indissoluble  as  long  as  I 
choose  that  they  shall  be  so.  Now  everything  which  has  ^een 
bound  together  is  capable  of  being  dissolved,  but  it  is  the  part 
of  an  evil  ruler  to  dissolve  that  which  has  been  well  combined 
and  arranged,  and  which  is  in  good  condition.  Wherefore, 
since  you  also  have  been  created,  you  are  not  of  necessity 
immortal  or  utterly  indissoluble ;  nevertheless  you  shall  not 
be  dissolved,  nor  shall  you  be  exposed  to  the  fate  of  death,  in- 
asmuch as  you  have  my  will  to  keep  you  united,  which  is  a 
still  greater  and  more  powerful  bond  than  those  by  which  you 
were  bound  together  when  you  were  first  created." 

But  some  persons  interpret  Plato's  words  sophistically,  and 
think  that  he  affirms  that  the  world  was  created,  not  inas- 
much as  it  has  had  a  beginning  of  creation,  but  inasmuch  as 
if  it  had  been  created  it  could  not  possibly  have  existed  in  any 
other  manner  than  that  in  which  it  actually  does  exist  as  has 
been  described,  or  else  because  it  is  in  its  creation  and  change 
that  the  parts  are  seen.  But  the  forementioned  opinion  is 
better  and  truer,  not  only  because  throughout  the  whole 
treatise  he  affirms  that  the  Creator  of  the  gods  is  also  the  father 
and  creator  and  maker  of  everything,  and  that  the  world  is  a 
most  beautiful  work  of  his  and  his  offspring,  being  an  imita- 
tion visible  to  the  outward  senses  of  an  archetypal  model 
appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  comprehending  in  itself  as 
many  objects  of  the  outward  senses  as  the  model  does  objects 

*  TimacuB,  p.  40. 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  25 

of  the  intellect,  since  it  is  a  most  perfect  impression  of  a 
most  perfect  model,  and  is  addressed  to  the  outward  sense  as 
the  other  is  to  the  intellect.* 

But  also  because  Aristotle  bears  witness  to  this  fact  in  the 
case  of  Plato,  who,  from  his  great  reverence  for  philosophy, 
would  never  have  spoken  falsely,  and  also  because  no  one  can 
possibly  be  more  to  be  credited  in  the  case  of  a  teacher  than 
his  pupil,  especially  when  the  pupil  is  such  a  man  as  this  who 
did  not  apply  himself  to  instruction  lightly  with  an  indifference 
easily  satisfied,  but  who  even  endeavoured  to  surpass  all  the 
discoveries  of  former  men,  and  did  actually  devise  some  novel- 
ties and  enrich  every  part  of  philosophy  with  some  most 
important  discoveries. 

V.  But  some  persons  think  that  the  father  of  the  Platonic 
theory  was  the  poet  Hesiod,  as  they  conceive  that  the  world  is 
spoken  of  by  him  as  created  and  indestructible;  as  created, 
when  he  says, — 

"  First  did  Chaos  rule ; 
Then  the  broad-chested  earth  was  brought  to  light, 
Foundation  firm  and  lasting  for  whatever 
Exists  among  mankind  ;"f 

and  as  indestructible,  because  he  has  given  no  hint  of  its  dis- 
solution or  destruction. 

Now  Chaos  was  conceived  by  Aristotle  to  be  a  place,  because 
it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  a  place  to  receive  them  must  be 
in  existence  before  bodies.  But  some  of  the  Stoics  think  that 
it  is  water,  imagining  that  its  name  has  been  derived  from 
effusion. J  But  however  that  may  be,  it  is  exceedingly  plain 
that  the  world  is  spoken  of  by  Hesiod  as  having  been  created  : 
and  a  very  long  time  before  him  Moses,  the  lawgiver  of  the 
Jews,  had  said  in  his  sacred  volumes  that  the  world  was  both 
created  and  indestructible,  and  the  number  of  the  books  is  five. 
The  first  of  which  he  entitled  Genesis,  in  which  he  begins  in 
the  following  manner :  "  In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  ;  and  the  earth  was  invisible  and  without 
form."  Then  proceeding  onwards  he  relates  in  the  following 
verses,  that  days  and  nights,  and  seasons,  and  years,  and  the 
sun  and  moon,  which  showed  the  nature  of  the  measurement 

*  There  is  probably  some  corruption  in  the  text  here. 

t  Hesiod,  Theogon  116. 

J  XiaiQ,  as  if  chaos  were  derived  from  x^w,  '*  to  pour." 


26  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

of  time,  were  created,  which,  having  received  an  immortal 
portion  in  common  with  the  whole  heaven,  continue  for  ever 
indestructible. 

But  we  must  place  those  arguments  first  which  make  out 
the  world  to  be  uncreated  and  indestructible,  because  of  our 
respect  for  that  which  is  visible,  employing  an  appropriate 
commencement.  To  all  things  which  are  liable  to  destruction 
there  are  two  causes  of  that  destruction,  one  being  internal 
and  the  other  external ;  therefore  you  may  find  iron,  and 
brass,  and  all  other  substances  of  that  kind  destroyed  by 
themselves  when  rust,  like  a  creeping  disease,  overruns  and 
devours  them ;  and  by  external  causes  when,  if  a  house  or  a 
city  is  burnt,  they  also  are  consumed  in  the  conflagration, 
being  melted  by  the  violent  impetuosity  of  the  fire. 

A  similar  end  also  befalls  animals,  partly  when  they  are 
sick  of  diseases  arising  internally,  and  partly  when  they  are 
destroyed  by  external  causes,  being  sacrificed,  or  stoned,  or 
burnt,  or  when  they  endure  an  unclean  death  by  hanging. 

And  if  the  world  also  is  destroyed,  then  it  must  of  necessity 
be  so  either  by  some  external  cause,  or  else  by  some  one  of 
the  powers  which  exist  within  itself;  and  both  these  alter 
natives  are  impossible,  for  there  is  nothing  whatever  outside  of 
the  world,  since  ail  things  are  brought  together  in  order  to 
make  it  complete  and  full,  for  it  is  in  this  way  that  it  will  be 
one,  and  whole,  and  free  from  old  age  ;  it  will  be  one,  because 
if  anything  were  left  outside  of  it,  then  another  world  might 
be  created  resembling  that  which  exists  now ;  and  whole, 
because  the  whole  of  its  essence  is  expended  on  itself ;  and 
exempt  from  old  age  and  from  all  disease,  since  those  bodies 
which  are  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  disease  or  old  age  are 
violently  overthrown  by  external  causes,  such  as  heat,  and 
cold,  and  other  contrary  qualities,  no  power  of  which  is  able  to 
escape  so  as  to  surround  and  attack  the  world,  all  those  being 
entirely  enclosed  within,  without  any  part  whatever  being 
separated  from  the  rest. 

But  if  indeed  there  is  any  external  thing  it  must  by  all 
means  be  a  vacuum,  or  else  a  nature  absolutely  impossible, 
which  it  would  be  impossible  should  either  suffer  or  do  any- 
thing. And  again,  it  will  also  not  be  dissolved  by  any 
cause  existing  within  itself;  first  of  all  because,  if  it  were, 
then  the  part  would  be  greater  and  more  powerful  than  the] 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  27 

w  hole,  which  is  the  greatest  possible  absurdity,  for  the  world, 
<  njoying  an  unsurpassable  power,  influences  all  its  parts,  and 
is  not  itself  influenced  or  moved  by  any  one  of  them ;  in  the 
Second  place  because,  since  there  are  two  causes  of  corruption, 
the  one  being  internal  and  the  other  external,  those  things 
which  are  competent  to  admit  the  one  must  also  by  all  means 
be  liable  to  the  other;  and  a  proof  of  this  may  be  found  in 
oxen,  and  horses,  and  men,  and  other  animals  of  similar  kinds, 
because  it  is  their  nature  to  be  destroyed  by  the  sword,  or  to 
be  liable  to  die  by  disease ;  for  it  is  difficult,  or  I  might  rather 
say  impossible,  to  find  anything  which,  being  by  nature  at  the 
mercy  of  some  external  cause  perceptible  by  the  intellect,  will 
still  not  be  liable  to  corruption  ...  by  itself  when  the  world 
was  not. 

For  that  which  has  no  existence  is  not  put  in  motion,  but  it 
has  been  shown  already  that  time  is  an  interval  of  the  motion 
of  the  world.  It  follows,  therefore,  of  necessity,  that  each  of 
these  things  must  have  subsisted  from  all  eternity,  without 
receiving  any  beginning  of  generation,  and  being  in  conse- 
quence not  liable  to  any  corruption.  Perhaps  some  quibbling 
Stoic  will  say  that  time  is  admitted  to  be  an  interval  of  the 
motion  of  the  world,  but  not  of  that  world  only  which  is 
arranged  and  adorned  by  itself,  but  also  of  that  one  which  is 
conceived  of  in  connection  with  the  conflagration  which  has 
been  spoken  of;  to  whom  we  must  reply, — "  My  good  man, 
you,  misapplying  words,  call  what  is  disorderliness  and  a  want 
of  arrangement  order  {x,6fffMog),  for  if  this  thing  which  we  see 
is  correctly  and  appropriately  called  the  world  (xofffMog)* 
being  arranged  and  adorned  {xixoa/MrjiMsvog)  as  we  see  it  by 
man,  by  the  perfection  of  his  skill,  then  any  one  would  be 
surely  correct  in  calling  the  change  which  is  wrought  in  it  by 
fire  a  want  of  order." 

VI.  But  Critolaus,  a  man  who  devoted  himself  very  much 
to  literature,  and  a  lover  of  the  Peripatetic  philosophy,  agree- 
ing with  the  doctrine  of  the  eternity  of  the  world,  used  the 
following  arguments  to  prove  it:  "If  the  world  was  created, 
then  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the  earth  was  created  also ;  and 
it'  the  earth  was  created,  then  beyond  all  question  the  human 
race  was  so  too.     But  man  was  not  created,  since  he  subsists 

*  Philo  is  playing  here  on  the  two  meaningg  of  the  word  Koff/iof, 
which  signifies  both  "  order  "  and  "  the  world." 


28  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

of  an  everlasting  race,  as  shall  be  proved,  therefore  the  ■world 
is  eternal." 

But  I  must  now  proceed  to  examine  the  argument  which  ] 
postponed  just  now,  if  indeed  things  that  are  so  evident  stand 
in  need  of  any  demonstration ;  but,  indeed,  proofs  are  neces- 
sary on  account  of  the  inventors  of  fables  who,  filling  all  life 
with  their  falsehoods,  have  utterly  driven  truth  out  of  the 
land,  and  have  not  merely  banished  it  from  cities  and  houses, 
but  have  even  deprived  each  separate  individual  of  that  most 
valuable  possession,  and,  for  the  purpose  of  alluring  his  sight, 
have  invented  metres  and  rhythm  as  a  bait  and  a  snare,  by 
which  they  cajole  the  ears  of  fools,  just  as  ugly  and  shapeless 
courtesans  allure  the  eyes  by  necklaces  and  spurious  ornaments 
in  the  absence  of  all  genuine  beauty,  for  they  say  that  the  genera- 
tion of  mankind  by  means  of  one  another  is  a  more  recent  work 
of  nature,  but  that  the  more  original  and  ancient  mode  of  their 
birth  is  out  of  the  earth,  since  she  both  is  and  is  considered 
the  mother  of  all  men.  And  they  say  that  those  men  who  are 
celebrated  among  the  Greeks  as  having  sprung  from  seed  were 
produced  and  grew  up  as  trees  do  now,  being  perfect  and  com- 
pletely armed  sons  of  the  earth.  But  that  this  is  a  mere 
fiction  of  fable  it  is  easy  to  see  from  many  circumstances. 

For  the  very  moment  that  the  first  man  was  born  there  was 
a  necessity  for  his  receiving  growth  in  accordance  with  the 
previously  defined  measures  and  numbers  of  time,  for  nature 
has  arranged  the  different  ages  as  certain  steps  along  which 
man  in  a  manner  ascends  and  descends ;  he  ascends  while  he 
is  growing,  and  he  descends  at  the  period  when  he  is  lessen- 
ing ;  and  the  boundary  of  the  uppermost  steps  is  the  prime 
of  life  at  which  when  a  man  has  arrived  he  no  longer  makes 
any  further  advance  ;  but  as  runners  who  run  the  diaulos  turn 
back  again  upon  the  same  path  which  they  have  already 
travelled,  so  too  does  man  retrace  his  steps,  giving  back  in  the 
weakness  of  old  age  what  he  has  received  from  vigorous  youth ; 
but  to  fancy  that  any  one  has  ever  been  born  absolutely  perfect 
is  the  part  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  the  laws  of  nature, 
which  are  unchangeable  ordinances. 

For  our  minds,  being  vitiated  by  the  contagion  of  the  mortal 
body  which  is  united  to  them,  are  very  naturally  liable  to 
changes  and  alterations,  but  the  works  of  the  nature  of  the 
universe   are   unalterable,  since  she   has  dominion  over  all 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  29 

things,  and  by  means  of  the  stability  of  whatever  desires  she 
has  once  established  she  preserves  the  definitions  which  have 
been  originally  fixed  in  an  unchangeable  state.  If  then  she 
had  originally  thought  it  proper  that  men  should  be  born 
perfect,  now  also  man  would  still  be  born  in  a  perfect  state, 
without  ever  being  an  infant,  or  a  boy,  or  a  youth,  but  he 
would  at  once  be  a  man,  and  perhaps  he  would  be  altogether 
exempt  from  old  age  and  from  death,  for  that  thing  which  has 
no  increase  must  also  of  necessity  be  exempt  from  all  diminu- 
tion, for  up  to  the  prime  of  a  man's  life  all  his  changes  tend 
towards  increase,  but  from  that  period  up  to  old  age  and  death 
they  exist  with  a  gradual  diminution;  and  it  is  natural  to 
suppose  that  he  who  has  no  share  in  the  former  must  also  be 
free  from  the  subsequent  changes. 

And  what  is  there  that  can  hinder  men  from  shooting  up 
now  out  of  the  ground  like  plants,  as  they  say  that  they  did  in 
former  times  ?  For  the  earth  has  not  yet  grown  old  so  as  to 
appear  to  have  become  barren  by  reason  of  the  lapse  of  time, 
but  it  remains  in  the  same  condition  as  before,  being  always 
young,  because  it  is  a  fourth  part  of  the  universe,  and  for  the 
sake  of  ensuring  the  duration  of  the  universe  it  is  bound  not 
to  decay,  because  its  kindred  elements,  water,  air,  and  fire, 
all  remain  for  ever  exempt  from  old  age.  And  there  is  a 
visible  proof  of  the  uninterrupted  and  everlasting  vigour  of 
the  earth  in  the  plants  which  spring  from  it,  for  being  purified, 
either  by  the  overflowing  of  rivers,  as  they  say  that  Egypt  is, 
or  by  annual  rains,  by  such  irrigation  it  refreshes  and  recruits 
its  exhausted  powers,  and  then,  having  rested  for  a  while,  it 
recovers  its  natural  powers  to  the  full  extent  of  its  original 
vigour,  and  then  it  begins  again  with  a  repetition  of  the  pro- 
duction of  similar  things  to  those  which  it  produced  before  to 
supply  abundant  food  to  every  description  of  animal. 

VII.  In  reference  to  which  fact  it  appears  to  me  that  the 
poets  were  very  felicitous  in  the  appellation  which  they  gave 
to  the  earth  when  they  called  it  Pandora,  inasmuch  as  it  gives 
all  things,*  both  such  as  are  required  for  use  and  such  as 
serve  to  pleasure  and  to  enjoyment,  and  that  not  to  some  only 
but  to  all  animals  which  enjoy  life.  Accordingly,  if  any  one, 
when  the  spring  was  in  its  prime,  should  be  borne  on  wings 
and  raised  aloft,  and  look  down  from  his  height  upon  the 
*  ndj/ra  ow^oviiiviiv. 


30  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

mountain  and  champaign  countiy,  and  see  the  one  abounding 
in  rich  grass,  and  verdant,  producing  herbage,  and  fodder,  and 
barley,  and  wheat,  and  innumerable  other  kinds  of  crops  such 
as  are  grown  from  seed  which  the  husbandmen  have  strown, 
and  which  the  season  of  the  year  affords  of  its  own  accord, 
and  the  other  overshadowed  with  branches  and  leaves  by 
which  the  trees  are  adorned,  and  very  full  of  fruits  (not  only 
such  as  are  suitable  for  food,  but  also  of  such  as  are  able  to 
heal  suffering,  for  the  fruit  of  the  olive  relieves  the  fatigue  of  the 
body,  and  that  of  the  vine,  when  drunk  in  moderation,  relaxes 
the  excessive  pains  of  the  soul),  and  rich  also  in  the  fragrant 
airs  which  are  borne  around  from  flowers,  and  the  indescriba- 
ble peculiarities  of  the  various  flowers  which  are  diversified 
by  divine  skill. 

And  then,  if  he  turns  aside  his  eyes  from  those  trees  which 
admit  of  cultivation,  and  beholds  in  their  turn  poplars,  and 
cedars,  and  pines,  and  ashes,  and  the  lofty  oaks,  and  the  dense 
and  unceasing  masses  of  all  the  other  wild  trees  which  over- 
shadow the  most  numerous  and  the  greatest  of  the  mountains, 
and  the  greater  part  of  the  border  country  wherever  there  is 
any  deep  soil,  he  will  then  know  that  the  vigour  of  the  earth, 
which  is  always  young,  is  unremitting,  unsubdued,  and  un- 
wearied. 

So  that  since  it  is  in  no  degree  deprived  of  any  portion  of 
its  former  strength,  if  it  had  ever  done  so  before,  it  would  be 
bringing  forth  men  now  also,  for  two  most  forcible  reasons, 
one  in  order  that  it  might  not  quit  the  classification  belonging 
to  it,  especially  in  the  sowing  and  production  of  that  most 
excellent  of  all  the  creatures  which  dwell  upon  the  earth,  the 
ruler  of  all,  man,  and  secondly  for  the  sake  of  giving  assist- 
ance to  women,  who  after  they  have  conceived  are  for  about 
ten  months  weighed  down  with  the  most  severe  pains,  and 
when  they  are  about  to  bring  forth  do  very  often  die  in  the 
very  pains  of  labour " 

Is  it  not  then  altogether  a  terrible  piece  of  stupidity  to  imagine 
that  the  earth  contains  any  womb  calculated  for  the  production 
of  men  ?  for  the  womb  is  the  place  which  vivifies  the  animal, 
being  as  some  one  has  called  it  the  workshop  of  nature,  in 
which  it  fashions  nothing  but  animals  ;  but  it  is  not  a  portion 
of  the  earth,  but  of  a  female  animal,  carefully  fashioned  so 
as  to  be  adapted  for  the  production  of  living  creatures,  since 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  31 

Otherwise  it  would  be  necessary  for  us  to  attribute  breasts 
to  the  earth  as  to  a  woman,  when  it  produces  men  and  they 
are  born,  so  that  when  first  born  they  may  have  appropriate 
food. 

But  there  is  no  river  nor  fountain  in  the  whole  habitable 
world  which  is  said  ever  to  have  produced  milk  instead  of 
water ;  and  in  addition  to  this,  as  it  is  necessary  that  a  child 
just  bom  must  be  fed  on  milk,  so  also  must  he  avail  himself 
of  the  protection  of  clothing  on  account  of  the  injury  which 
ensues  from  cold  or  heat  to  children  while  they  are  being 
reared,  on  which  account  nurses  and  mothers,  to  whom  the 
care  of  infants  when  just  born  is  of  necessity  committed, 
wrap  them  up  in  swaddling  clothes  ;  but  if  they  were  produced 
out  of  the  earth,  how  would  it  be  possible  that,  being  left  com- 
pletely naked,  they  would  not  be  at  once  destroyed  either  by 
the  coldness  of  the  air  on  the  one  hand,  or  the  burning  heat 
of  the  sun  on  the  other  ?  for  when  great  cold  or  great  heat 
gets  the  mastery,  it  produces  diseases  and  corruptions. 

But  after  the  inventors  of  fables  once  began  to  neglect  the 
truth  they  then  ventured  to  add  to  their  monstrous  stories  the 
fiction  that  those  men  who  sprung  from  seed  were  born  also  in 
complete  armour  ;  for  what  smith,  or  what  new  Vulcan,  was 
there  under  the  earth  so  skilful  as  in  a  moment  to  prepare  so 
many  suits  of  armour?  and  what  experience  had  creatures 
just  born  to  enable  them  to  use  their  weapons  ?  for  man  is  a 
very  peaceful  animal,  nature  having  given  to  him  reason 
as  his  especial  honour,  by  means  of  which  he  charms  and 
tames  the  savage  passions.  It  would  have  been  much  better 
instead  of  arms  to  give  him  a  herald's  wand,  a  symbol  of 
agreement  and  peace  suitable  to  a  reasonable  nature,  in  order 
that  he  might  so  proclaim  peace  instead  of  war  to  all  men 
everywhere. 

VIII.  We  have  now  then  discussed  at  sufficient  length  the 
nonsense  in  opposition  to  truth  which  is  uttered  by  those  who 
build  up  falsehood  and  fables.  But  we  must  be  well  assured 
that  men  have  from  all  eternity  sprung  from  other  men  in 
constant  succession,  the  man  implanting  the  seed  in  the 
woman  as  in  a  field,  and  the  woman  receiving  the  seed  so  as  to 
preserve  it,  and  nature  by  her  unseen  operations  fashioning 
everything,  and  each  separate  part  of  the  body  and  of  the 
Boul,  and  giving  to  the  whole  race  of  mankind  that  which  each 


32  PHILO  JUD.ECJS. 

individual  separately  is  unable  to  receive,  namely,  the  prin- 
ciple of  immortality  ;  for  though  the  individual  members  are 
continually  perishing,  yet  the  race  remains  undying  as  a  truly 
divine  work.  But  if  man,  who  is  but  a  small  portion  of  the 
universe,  is  eternal,  then  certainly  the  world  itself  must  have 
been  uncreated  so  as  to  be  imperishable. 

IX.  But  Critolaus,  in  arguing  in  support  of  his  opinion, 
brought  forward  an  argument  of  this  kind, — "  That  which  is 
the  cause  to  man  of  his  being  in  health  is  itself  free  from 
disease,  and,  in  like  manner,  the  cause  of  his  keeping  awake 
must  itself  be  sleepless  ;  and  if  this  is  the  case,  that  which  is 
the  cause  of  his  existing  for  ever  must  itself  also  be  everlast- 
ing." Now  the  cause  of  man's  existing  for  ever  is  the  world, 
since  it  is  so  to  all  other  things  whatever  ;  therefore  the  world 
also  is  immortal.  Nevertheless,  this  point  also  is  worthy  of 
one  consideration :  that  everything  which  is  born  must  by  all 
means  at  the  beginning  be  imperfect,  but  as  time  advances  he 
must  increase  till  he  arrives  at  complete  perfection,  so  that  if 
the  world  was  born  it  was  at  one  time  (that  I  may  use  the  ex- 
pressions appropriate  to  the  ages  of  men)  a  mere  infant,  and 
subsequently  increasing  in  periods  of  years  and  lapse  of  time, 
it  at  last  and  with  great  difficulty  arrived  at  perfection,  for  of 
necessity  the  period  at  which  that  which  of  all  things  has  the 
longest  existence  must  be  late. 

But  if  any  one  fancies  that  the  world  has  ever  really  been 
subjected  to  such  changes  as  these,  it  is  time  that  he  should 
learn  that  he  has  been  under  the  influence  of  incurable  mad- 
ness, for  it  is  plain  that  if  that  is  the  case  not  only  will  its 
bodily  appearance  be  increased,  but  its  mind  also  will  receive 
growth,  since  they  who  attribute  liability  to  perish  to  it  con- 
ceive it  to  be  a  rational  creature.  Therefore,  just  like  a  man, 
it  will  be  devoid  of  reason  at  the  commencement  of  its  exist- 
ence, but  endowed  with  reason  at  the  age  when  it  is  in  its 
prime,  which  it  is  impious  not  only  to  say,  but  even  to  think, 
for  how  can  we  imagine  the  most  perfect  visible  circumference 
which  surrounds  us,  and  which  contains  within  itself  so  many 
individual  inhabitants,  is  not  always  perfect  both  in  soul  and 
body,  being  exempt  from  all  those  evils  in  which  everything 
which  has  been  born  and  which  is  perishable  is  implicated? 

X.  And  in  addition  to  this  he  says,  that  there  are  three 
caUiSes  of  death  to  living  animals,  besides  the  external  causes 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  33 

which  may  affect  them,  namely,  disease,  old  age,  and  want, 
by  no  one  of  which  is  the  world  liable  to  be  attacked  or  sub- 
dued, for  that  it  is  composed  of  entire  elements,  since  there  is 
no  part  of  them  which  is  left  out  or  which  remains  at  liberty, 
so  that  any  violence  can  be  offered  to  it,  and  it  also  is  superior 
to  those  powers  from  which  diseases  arise ;  and  they  yielding 
keep  the  world  free  from  all  disease,  and  free  from  old  age, 
iiud  in  a  state  of  the  most  perfect  self-sufficiency  as  to  all  its 
requirements,  and  without  need  of  anything,  since  there  is 
nothing  wanting  to  it  which  can  possibly  contribute  to  it!^ 
durability,  and  wholly  exempt  from  all  successions  and  alter- 
nations of  fulness  and  emptiness,  which  animals  being  subject 
to  by  reason  of  their  unregulated  insatiability,  bring  upou 
ihemselves  death  instead  of  life,  or,  to  speak  more  accurately, 
a  life  which  is  more  pitiable  than  any  destruction. 

Moreover,  if  we  saw  that  there  was  no  such  thing  as  any 
eternal  nature  to  be  seen,  those  who  assert  the  liability  of  the 
world  to  destruction  would  not  appear  to  be  so  guilty  of  dis- 
paraging the  world  without  any  excuse,  since  they  would  have 
no  example  whatever  of  anything  being  everlasting ;  but  since 
fate,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  those  who  have  investigated 
the  principles  of  natural  philosophy  most  accurately,  is  a  thing 
without  any  beginning  and  without  any  end,  connecting  all 
the  causes  of  everything,  as  to  leave  no  break  and  no  interrup- 
tion, why  may  we  not  in  like  manner  also  affirm  of  the  nature 
of  the  world  that  it  subsists  for  a  great  length  of  time,  being, 
as  it  were,  an  arrangement  of  what  is  otherwise  in  no  order, 
a  harmony  of  what  is  otherwise  wholly  destitute  of  such  har- 
mony, an  agreement  of  what  is  otherwise  without  agreement, 
a  union  of  things  previously  separated,  a  condition  of  stocks 
and  stones,  a  nature  of  things  growing  from  seed  and  of  trees, 
a  life  of  all  animals,  the  mind  and  reason  of  men,  and  the 
most  perfect  virtue  of  virtuous  men  ? 

But  if  the  nature  of  the  world  is  uncreated  and  indestruc- 
tible, then  it  is  plain  that  the  world  is  held  together  and 
powerfully  preserved  by  an  everlasting  indissoluble  chain. 
But  some  of  those  who  used  to  hold  a  different  opinion,  being 
overpowered  by  truth,  have  changed  their  doctrine ;  for  beauty 
has  a  power  which  is  very  attractive,  and  the  tiiith  is  beyond 
all  things  beautiful,  as  falsehood  on  the  contrary  is  enormously 

VOL.  IV.  D 


84  PHILO  JUDiEtJS. 

Ugly ;  therefore  Boethus,  and  Posidonius,  and  Panaetius,  men 
of  great  learning  in  the  Stoic  doctrines,  as  if  seized  with  a 
sudden  inspiration,  abandoning  all  the  stories  about  conflagra- 
tions and  regeneration,  have  come  over  to  the  more  divine 
doctrine  of  the  incorruptibility  of  the  world;  and  it  is  said 
also  that  Diogenes,  when  he  was  very  young,  agreed  entu-ely 
with  those  authors 

Since,  therefore,  the  aiTangement  of  the  world  is  such  as  I 
have  endeavoured  to  describe  it,  so  that  there  is  no  part  what- 
ever left  out,  so  as  for  any  force  to  be  applied,  it  has  now  been 
proved  that  the  world  will  not  be  destroyed  by  any  external 
thing,  because  in  fact  nothing  whatever  external  has  been  left 
at  all ;  nor  will  it  be  destroyed  by  anything  in  itself  on  account 
of  the  proof  which  has  already  been  considered  and  stated, 
according  to  which  that  which  was  obnoxious  to  the  power  of 
one  of  those  causes  was  also  naturally  susceptible  of  the 
influence  of  the  other. 

XI,  And  there  are  testimonies  also  in  the  Tiraseus  to  the 
fact  of  the  world  being  exempt  from  disease  and  not  liable  to 
destruction,  such  as  these :  "  Accordingly,  of  the  four  ele- 
ments the  constitution  of  the  world  receives  each  in  all  its 
integiity  ;  for  he  who  compounded  it  made  it  to  consist  of  the 
whole  of  fire,  and  the  whole  of  water,  and  the  whole  of  air, 
and  the  whole  of  earth,  not  leaving  any  portion  or  any  power 
of  any  one  of  them  outside,  from  the  following  intentions  : — 
in  the  first  place,  in  order  that  the  whole  might  be  as  far  as 
possible  a  perfect  animal  made  up  of  perfect  parts.  And 
besides  all  these  things,  he  ordained  that  it  should  be  one,  in- 
asmuch as  there  is  nothing  left  out  of  which  another  similar 
world  could  be  composed.  Moreover,  he  willed  that  it  should 
be  exempt  from  old  age,  and  free  from  all  disease,  considering 
that  those  things  which  in  the  body  are  hot  or  cold,  or  which 
have  mighty  powers,  if  standing  all  around  and  falling  upon 
it  unseasonably,  would  be  likely  to  dissolve  it,  and,  by  intro- 
ducing diseases  and  old  age,  cause  it  to  decay  and  perish.  For 
this  cause,  and  because  of  this  reason,  God  made  the  whole 
universe  to  consist  of  entire  and  perfect  elements,  and  exempt  .i 
from  oM  age  and  free  from  disease."  Ij 

Let  this  be  taken  as  a  testimony  delivered  by  Plato  to  the 
imperishable  nature  of  the  world.  Its  uncreated  character 
follows  from  the  truth  of  natural  philosophy ;  for  dissolution 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBIUTY  OF  THE  WORLD.  35 

must  of  necessity  attend  everything  which  is  born,  and  incoi^ 
niptibility  must  inevitably  belong  to  everything  which  is  un- 
born ;  since  the  poet  who  wrote  the  following  iambic  verse, 
"  All  that  is  bom  must  surely  die,"  * 

appears  to  have  spoken  very  correctly  when  he  asserted  this 
connection  of  destructibility  with  birth. 

The  argument  may  be  stated  in  a  different  way  as  follows. 
All  compound  things  which  are  destroyed  are  dissolved  into 
the  elements  of  which  they  were  compounded  ;  accordingly, 
dissolution  is  nothing  else  but  a  return  of  everything  to  its 
original  constituent  parts ;  just  as,  on  the  contrary,  composition 
is  that  which  compels  the  things  combined  to  come  together  in 
a  manner  contrary  to  their  nature  ;  and  indeed,  this  appears 
to  be  the  most  exact  truth ;  for  men  are  composed  of  the  four 
elements  which  together  make  up  the  whole  of  the  universe, 
the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  air,  and  fire,  borrowing  a  few  parts 
of  each  in  a  manner  at  first  sight  hardly  consistent  with 
nature.  But  the  things  which  are  thus  combined  together  are 
necessarily  deprived  of  a  motion  in  accordance  with  nature  ;  for 
instance,  warmth  is  deprived  of  its  upward  motion,  and  coldness 
of  its  downward  tendency,  the  earthy  and  somewhat  weighty 
substance  being  lightened  and  assuming  the  higher  place, 
which  the  most  earth-like  of  our  own  parts,  the  head,  has 
obtained  in  us.  But  of  all  bonds,  that  is  the  worst  which  is 
forged  by  violence,  and  which,  being  violent,  is  also  short- 
lived ;  for  it  is  speedily  broken  by  those  who  are  bound  in  it, 
since  they  become  restive  from  their  desire  for  a  motion  in  ac- 
cordance with  nature,  to  which  they  hasten ;  for  as  the  tragic 
poet  Bays,t — 

"  And  for  things  sprung  from  earth,  they  must 
Return  uuto  their  parent  dust, 
While  those  from  heavenly  seed  which  rise 
Are  borne  uplifted  to  the  skies. 
Nought  that  has  once  existed  dies, 
Though  often  what  has  been  combined 
Before,  we  separated  find, 
Invested  with  another  form." 

And  this  law  and  ordinance  is  established  with  reference  to 

*  Timaeus,  p.  32. 

t  A  fragment  from  the  Chrysippus  of  Euripides. 
D   2 


83  PHILO  JUD^US. 

everything  which  is  destroyed,  that  wherever  composite  things 
are  existing  in  combination  they  are  thrown  into  disorder 
instead  of  into  the  order  in  accordance  with  nature,  which  they 
previously  enjoyed,  and  they  are  removed  to  situations  opposite 
to  those  in  which  they  were  previously  placed,  so  that  they 
seem  in  a  manner  to  be  sojourners ;  and  when  they  are  dis- 
solved again,  then  they  return  to  the  appropriate  parts  allotted 
to  them  by  nature. 

XII.  But  since  the  world  has  no  participation  in  that  irregu- 
larity which  exists  in  the  things  which  I  have  just  been  men- 
tioning, let  us  stop  awhile  and  consider  this  point. 

If  the  world  were  liable  to  corruption  and  destruction,  it 
follows  of  necessity  that  all  its  parts  would  at  present  be 
arranged  in  a  position  not  in  accordance  with  nature  :  but  it  is 
impious  even  to  imagine  such  a  thing  as  this  ;  for  all  the  parts 
of  the  world  have  received  the  most  excellent  position  possible, 
and  an  arrangement  of  the  purest  symmetry  and  harmony  ;  so 
that  each  individual  part,  being  content  with  its  place  as  a 
native  country  to  it,  does  not  seek  any  change  for  the  better. 
On  this  account  it  is  that  the  most  central  position  of  all  has 
been  assigned  to  the  earth,  to  which  all  things  belonging  to 
it  adhere,  and  to  which  they  descend  again  even  if  you  throw 
them  into  the  air :  and  this  is  a  proof  that  their  place  is  in 
accordance  with  nature ;  for  wherever  anything  is  borne  with- 
out any  violence,  and  where  it  then  remains  firm  and  stationary, 
that  is  clearly  its  natural  place.  And  then,  in  the  second 
place,  water  was  poured  over  the  earth,  and  air  and  fire 
have  gone  from  the  central  to  the  upper  part,  air  having 
received  for  its  portion  the  region  which  is  on  the  borders 
between  air  and  fire,  and  fire  having  received  the  highest  place 
of  all :  on  which  account,  if  you  light  a  torch  and  press  it  down 
towards  the  ground,  nevertheless  the  flame  will  still  turn  in  a 
contrary  direction,  and  lightening  itself  in  accordance  with  the 
natural  motion  of  fire,  will  rise  upwards :  if,  then,  motion  con- 
trary to  nature  is  the  cause  of  corruptibility  and  destruction  in 
the  case  of  other  animals,  but  if  in  the  case  of  the  world  every 
one  of  its  parts  is  arranged  in  complete  accordance  with 
nature,  having  had  appropriate  positions  allotted  to  each  of 
them,  then  surely  the  world  must  most  justly  be  pronounced 
incorruptible  and  imperishable. 

Moreover  this  point  is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  every 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  37 

nature  is  desirous  to  keep  and  preserve,  and  if  it  were  possible 
to  make  immortal,  everything  of  which  it  is  the  nature  ;  the 
nature  of  trees,  for  instance,  desires  to  preserve  trees,  and  the 
nature  of  animals  desires  to  preserve  each  individual  animal. 
But  particular  nature  is  of  necessity  unable  to  conduct  what 
it  belongs  to  to  eternity  ;  for  want,  or  heat,  or  cold,  or  innu- 
merable other  ordinary  circumstances,  when  they  affect  parti- 
cular things,  shake  them  and  dissolve  the  bond  which  previ- 
ously held  them  together,  and  at  last  break  them  to  pieces ; 
but  if  nothing  resembling  any  of  these  things  were  lying  in 
wait  outside,  then  in  that  case  nature  itself,  as  far  as  it  is 
possible,  would  preserve  everything  both  great  and  small  free 
from  old  age. 

It  follows  therefore  of  necessity,  that  the  nature  of  the 
world  must  desire  the  durability  of  the  universe  ;  for  it  is  not 
worse  than  particular  natures,  so  that  it  should  run  away  and 
desert  its  proper  duties,  and  attempt  to  produce  disease 
instead  of  health,  and  corruption  and  destruction  instead  of 
complete  safety,  since,* 

"  High  over  all  she  lifts  her  beauteous  face, 
And  towers  above  her  nymphs  with  heavenly  grace, 
Fair  as  they  all  appear." 

But  if  this  be  true,  then  the  world  cannot  be  capable  of 
destruction.  Why  so?  Because  the  nature  which  holds  it 
together  is  itself  invincible  by  reason  of  its  exceeding 
strength  and  power,  by  which  it  gets  the  mastery  over  every 
thing  else  which  might  be  likely  to  injure  it ;  wherefore  Plato 
has  well  said  :t — "  For  nothing  ever  departed  from  it,  nor  did 
anything  ever  come  to  it  from  any  quarter ;  for  that  was  not 
possible  ;  for  there  was  nothing  in  existence  which  could  come  ; 
for  since  it  supplies  itself  with  nutriment  out  of  its  own  con- 
sumption, it  also  does  everything  and  suffers  everything  in 
itself  and  by  itself,  and  is  compounded  with  the  most  consum- 
mate art.  For  he  who  created  it  thought  that  it  would  be 
better  if  wholly  self-sufficient,  than  if  in  continual  need  of 
accessories  from  other  quarters." 

XIII.  However,  this  argument  also  is  a  most  demonstra- 
tive one,  on  which  I  know  that  vast  numbers  of  philosophers 

*  Homer,  Odyssey  vi.  107,  where  the  lines  quoted  are  applied  to 
I^itona  among  her  nymphs, 
t  I'imteus,  p.  33. 


38  PHILO  JUD^US. 

pride  themselves  as  one  most  accurately  worked  out,  and 
altogether  irresistible ;  for  they  inquire  what  reason  there  is 
for  God's  destroying  the  world.  For  if  he  destroys  it  at  all 
he  must  do  so  either  with  the  intention  of  never  making  a 
world  again,  or  with  the  object  of  creating  a  second  fresh  one  ; 
now  the  former  idea  is  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  God; 
for  it  is  proper  to  change  disorder  into  order,  and  not  order 
into  disorder ;  in  the  second  place,  it  is  so  because  it  would 
give  rise  to  repentance,  which  is  an  affliction  and  a  disease  of 
the  soul. 

For  he  ought  either  never  to  have  created  a  world  at  alL 
or  else,  if  he  judged  that  it  was  a  fitting  employment  for  him, 
he  ought  to  have  been  pleased  with  it  after  it  was  made.  But 
the  second  reason  deserves  no  superficial  examination  ;  for  if 
he  were  intending  to  make  another  world  instead  of  that  which 
exists  at  present,  then  of  necessity  this  second  world  that 
would  be  made,  in  that  case,  would  be  either  worse  than,  or 
similar  to,  or  better  than  the  first ;  everyone  of  which  ideas  is 
inadmissible ;  for  if  the  new  world  is  to  be  worse  than  the 
former,  then  the  maker  must  be  also  worse:  but  all  the  works 
of  God  are  without  blemish,  beyond  all  reproach  and  wholly 
faultless,  inasmuch  as  they  are  wrought  with  the  most  consum- 
mate skill  and  knowledge  ;  for  as  the  proverb  says  ; — 

"  For  e'en  a  woman's  wisdom's  not  so  coarse 
As  to  despise  the  good  and  choose  the  worse." 

But  it  is  consistent  with  the  character  of,  and  becoming  to 
God  to  give  form  to  what  is  shapeless,  and  to  invest  what  is 
most  ugly  with  admirable  beauty. 

Again,  if  the  new  world  is  to  be  exactly  like  the  old  one, 
then  the  maker  is  only  wasting  his  labour,  and  differs  in  no 
respect  from  infant  children  who,  very  often  while  playing  on 
the  sea  shore  raise  up  little  mounds  of  sand,  and  then  pull 
them  down  again  with  their  hands  and  destroy  them ;  for  it 
would  have  been  much  better  than  making  another  world 
exactly  like  the  former,  neither  to  take  anything  from,  nor  to 
add  anything  to,  nor  to  change  either  for  the  better  or  for  the 
worse,  what  existed  originally,  but  to  let  it  remain  just  as  it 
was. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  about  to  make  a  world  better 
than  the  former  one,  then  the  maker  too  must  be  better  than 
the  maker  of  the  former  world,  so  that  when  he  made  the 


ON  THE  ix^OORRUrTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  39 

former  world  he  was  inferior  both  in  his  skill  and  in  his  intel- 
lect, which  it  is  impious  even  to  imagine,  for  God  is  at  all 
times  equal  and  similar  to  himself,  being  neither  capable  of 
any  relaxation  which  can  m.ake  him  worse,  nor  of  any  extension 
which  can  make  him  better.  Men,  indeed,  do  admit  of  such 
inequalitiss  in  either  direction,  being  naturally  liable  to  alter 
either  for  the  better  or  for  the  worse,  and  continually  admitting 
of  increase,  and  advance,  and  improvement,  and  everything 
contrary  to  these  states ;  and  besides  this,  the  works  of  us  who 
are  but  mortal  men  may  very  appropriately  be  perishable,  but 
the  works  of  the  immortal  must  in  all  consistency  and  reason 
be  likewise  imperishable,  for  it  is  natural  that  what  is  made 
should  resemble  the  nature  of  the  maker. 

XIV.  And,  indeed,  this  I  imagine  is  evident  to  every  one, 
that  if  the  earth  were  to  be  destroyed,  then  all  land  animals  of 
eveiy  kind  must  also  perish  with  it ;  and  if  the  water  were 
destroyed,  all  aquatic  animals  must  perish ;  and  in  like  manner 
if  the  air  and  fire  were  to  be  destroyed,  all  the  animals  which 
traverse  the  air  or  which  are  born  in  the  fire  must  come  to  an 
end  at  the  same  time.  Therefore,  on  the  same  principle,  if 
the  heaven  is  destroyed,  the  sun  and  moon  will  also  be 
destroyed,  and  all  the  other  planets  likewise  will  be  destroyed, 
and  all  the  fixed  stars,  and  all  that  host  of  gods  visible  to  the 
outward  senses  which  was  formerly  considered  so  happy ;  and 
to  imagine  this  is  nothing  else  than  to  fancy  the  gods  them- 
selves in  a  process  of  destruction,  for  this  is  equivalent  to 
considering  men  immortal.  A  nd  yet  in  a  comparison  between 
different  objects  devoid  of  honour,  if  you  were  to  consider  the 
matter,  you  would  find  it  more  consistent  with  probability  to 
look  on  men  as  immortal  than  to  believe  that  the  gods  are 
perishable,  since  it  might  happen  through  the  grace  of  God, 
for  it  is  not  improbable  that  a  mortal  might  receive  immor- 
tality, but  it  is  impossible  for  gods  to  lose  their  immortality 
even  if  the  sophistries  of  mankind  should  run  on  to  ever  such 
a  degree  of  wicked  insanity. 

And,  moreover,  those  persons  who  allege  conflagrations  and 
regenerations  of  the  world,  think  and  confess  that  the  stars  are 
gods,  which  nevertheless  they  are  not  ashamed  to  destroy  as 
far  as  their  arguments  go ;  for  they  are  bound  to  prove  them 
to  be  either  red  hot  pieces  of  iron,  as  some  do  affirm,  who 
argue  about  the  whole  of  the  heaven  as  if  it  were  a  prison, 


40  PUILO  JTTDMVS. 

talking  utter  nonsense,  or  else  to  look  upon  them  as  divine 
find  godlike  natures,  and  then  to  attribute  to  them  that  immor- 
tality which  belongs  to  gods. 

But  as  it  is,  they  have  wandered  so  far  from  true  doctrine, 
that  without  being  aware  of  it  they  have  attributed  corrupti- 
bility and  perishableness  to  providence  (and  that  is  the  soul  of 
the  world)  by  the  inconsistent  principles  which  they  advocate. 
Therefore  Chrysippus,  the  most  celebrated  philosopher  of  that 
sect,  in  his  treatise  about  Increase,  utters  some  such  prodigious 
assertions  as  these,  and  after  he  has  prefaced  his  doctrines 
with  the  assertion  that  it  is  impossible  for  two  makers  of  a 
species  to  exist  in  the  same  substance,  he  proceeds,  "  Let  it  be 
granted  for  the  sake  of  argument  and  speculation  that  there  is 
one  person  entire  and  sound,  and  another  wanting  one  foot 
from  his  birth,  and  that  the  sound  man  is  called  Dion  and  the 
cripple  Theon,  and  afterwards  that  Dion  also  loses  one  of  his 
feet,  then  if  the  question  were  asked  which  had  been  spoiled,  it 
would  be  more  natural  to  say  this  of  Theon ;"  but  this  is  the 
assertion  of  one  who  delights  in  paradox  rather  than  in  truth, 
for  how  could  it  be  said  that  he  who  had  suffered  no  mutilation 
whatever,  namely  Theon,  was  taken  off,  and  that  Dion,  who 
had  lost  a  foot,  was  not  injured  ?  Very  appropriately,  he  will 
reply,  for  Dion,  who  had  had  his  foot  cut  off,  falls  back  upon 
the  original  imperfection  of  Theon,  and  there  cannot  be  two 
specific  differences  in  the  same  subject,  therefore  it  follows  of 
necessity  that  Dion  must  remain,  and  that  Theon  must  be 
taken  off. 

"  So  are  we  slain  by  arrows  winged 
With  our  own  feathers,"  * 

as  the  tragic  poet  says.  For  any  one,  copying  the  form  of  this 
argument  and  adapting  it  to  the  entire  world,  may  prove  in 
the  clearest  manner  that  providence  itself  is  liable  to  corrup- 
tion. Consider  the  matter  thus  :  let  the  world  be  the  subject 
of  our  argument,  as  Dion  was  just  now,  for  it  is  perfect,  and 
let  the  soul  of  the  world  take  the  place  of  Theon,  who  was 

*  From  the  Myrmidons  of  -^Eschylus.     The  passage  is  evidently  the 
original  of  the  stanza  in  Waller's  Ode  to  a  Lady  Singing — 
"That  eagle's  fate  and  mine  are  one, 

Who  on  the  shaft  that  made  him  die. 
Espied  a  feather  of  his  own, 

Wherewith  he  wont  to  soar  so  high." 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  41 

imperfect,  since  a  part  is  less  than  the  whole ;  and  as  the  foot 
was  cut  off  from  Dion,  so  also  let  everything  which  resembles 
a  body  be  cut  off  from  the  world ;  therefore  it  is  necessary  to 
say  that  the  world  has  not  been  destroyed  though  its  body  has 
been  taken  away,  j  ust  as  Dion  was  not  destroyed  by  having  his 
foot  cut  off,  but  the  soul  of  the  world  it  is  that  has  perished, 
like  Theon,  who  suffered  no  artificial  mutilation,  for  the  world 
also  receded  to  a  lesser  substance  when  all  of  it  that  resembled 
a  body  was  taken  away.  And  the  soul  was  destroyed  because 
there  could  not  be  two  specific  differences  affecting  the  same 
subject.  But  it  is  impiety  to  say  that  providence  perishes, 
and  since  it  is  imperishable  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the 
world  also  must  be  imperishable. 

XV.  However,  time  also  affords  a  very  great  argument  in 
favour  of  the  eternity  of  the  world,  for  if  time  is  uncreated, 
then  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the  world  also  must  be 
uncreated.  Why  so  ?  Because,  as  the  great  Plato  says,  it  is 
days,  and  nights,  and  months,  and  the  periods  of  years  which 
have  shown  time,  and  it  is  surely  impossible  that  time  can 
exist  without  the  motion  of  the  sun,  and  the  rotary  progress 
of  the  whole  heaven.  So  that  it  has  been  defined  very  felici- 
tously by  those  who  are  in  the  habit  of  giving  definitions  of 
things,  that  time  is  the  interval  of  the  motion  of  the  world, 
and  since  this  is  a  sound  definition,  then  the  world  must  be 
co-eval  with  time  and  also  the  cause  of  its  existence. 

And  it  is  the  most  absurd  of  all  ideas  to  fancy  that  there 
ever  was  a  time  when  the  world  did  not  exist,  for  its  nature  is 
without  any  beginning  and  without  any  end,  since  these  very 
expressions,  "  there  was,"  "  when,"  "  formerly,"  all  indicate 
time ;  and  keeping  to  this  view,  then,  according  to  the  theory 

of  the  conflagration* he  at  a  late  period  of  his  life 

entertained  doubts  and  withheld  any  positive  opinion ;  for  it 
does  not  belong  to 'youth,  but  to  old  age,  to  see  clearly  things 
of  solemn  importance  which  it  is  desirable  to  understand,  and 
especially  as  to  matters  which  it  is  not  the  outer  sense,  which 
is  irrational  and  deceitful,  that  determines,  but  the  pure  and 
unalloyed  intellect. 

XVI.  But  Boethus  adduces  the  most  convincing  arguments, 
which  we  shall  proceed  to  mention  immediately;  for  if,  says  he, 
the  world  was  created  and  is  liable  to  destruction,  then  some- 

*  There  is  supposed  to  be  a  very  large  hiatus  here. 


42  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

thing  will  be  made  out  of  nothing,  which  appears  to  be  most 
absurd  even  to  the  Stoics.  Why  so  ?  Because  it  is  not 
possible  to  discover  any  cause  of  destruction  either  within  or 
without,  which  will  destroy  the  world.  For  on  the  outside 
there  is  nothing  except  perhaps  a  vacuum,  inasmuch  as  all  the 
elements  in  their  integrity  are  collected  and  contained  within 
it,  and  within  there  is  no  imperfection  so  great  as  to  be  the 
cause  of  dissolution  to  so  great  a  thing. 

Again,  if  it  is  destroyed  without  any  cause,  then  it  is  plain 
that  from  something  which  has  no  existence  will  arise  the 
engendering  of  destruction,  which  is  an  idea  quite  inadmissible 
by  reason ;  and,  indeed,  they  say  that  there  are  altogether 
three  generic  manners  of  corruption,  one  which  arises  from 
division,  another  which  proceeds  from  a  destruction  of  the 
distinctive  quality  which  holds  the  thing  together,  and  the 
third  from  confusion  ;  therefore  the  things  which  consist  of  a 
union  of  separate  members,  such  as  flocks  of  goats,  herds  of 
oxen,  choruses,  armies ;  or,  again,  bodies  which  are  com- 
pounded of  limbs  joined  together,  are  dissolved  by  disjunction 
and  separation.  But  wax,  when  stamped  with  a  new  impres- 
sion, or  softened  before  being  remodelled  so  as  to  present  a 
new  and  different  appearance,  is  corrupted  by  a  destruction  of 
the  distinctive  quality  which  previously  held  it  together.  Other 
things  are  corrupted  by  confusion,  as  the  medicine  which  the 
physicians  call  tetrapharmacon,  for  the  powers  of  the  drugs 
brought  together  and  combined  were  destroyed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  produce  one  perfect  medicine  of  especial  virtue. 

By  which,  then,  of  these  modes  of  corruption  is  it  becoming 
to  say  that  the  world  is  destroyed  ?  By  that  which  is  caused 
by  separation  ?  No,  for  it  is  not  compounded  of  separate 
members  so  that  its  different  parts  can  be  dispersed,  nor  of 
portions  joined  tx)gether  so  that  they  can  be  dissolved ;  nor  is 
it  united  together  in  a  similar  manner  to  our  own  bodies,  for 
they  have  the  seeds  of  decay  in  themselves,  and  they  are 
subject  to  influence  of  a  great  variety  of  things  by  which  they 
are  at  times  injured ;  but  the  power  of  the  world  is  mvmcible, 
since  by  its  great  superiority  to  other  things  it  has  dominion 
over  everv'thing. 

Is  it  then  destroyed  by  a  complete  destruction  of  its  dis- 
tinctive qualities  ?  This  again  is  impossible,  for  there  remains, 
as  the  adversaries  afi&rm,  a  quality  of  arrangement  which  by 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  43 

the  process  of  conflagration  is  only  diminished  to  a  lesser  sub- 
stance ...  Is  it  destroyed  then  by  confusion  ?  Away  with 
such  an  idea,  for  in  that  case  it  would  be  necessary  to  confess 
that  the  corruption  of  a  body  can  be  reduced  to  a  state  of 
nonexistence.  Why  so  ?  Because  if  each  of  the  particular 
elements  were  destroyed  separately,  it  would  be  possible  for  it 
to  become  changed  into  another ;  but  if  they  are  altogether 
destroyed  at  one  and  the  same  moment  by  confusion,  then  it 
would  be  necessary  to  imagine  what  is  absolutely  impossible. 

Again,  besides  these  arguments,  if  all  things,  say  they,  were 
destroyed  by  fire,  then  what  will  God  have  to  do  during  all 
that  time,  except  absolutely  nothing?  And  is  it  not  reasonable 
to  say  so?  For  at  present,  he  overlooks  and  presides  over 
everything,  and  regulates  everything  like  a  genuine  father, 
and  if  one  is  to  say  the  truth,  he  guides  and  directs  everything, 
sitting  as  it  were  by  the  side  of  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  the 
other  planets,  and  fixed  stars,  and  also  by  the  air,  and  the 
other  parts  of  the  world,  and  he  co-operates  with  them  in 
everything  which  can  conduce  to  the  durability  of  the  universe 
and  to  its  blameless  management,  in  accordance  with  right 
reason.  But  if  everything  is  destroyed,  then  he  will  have  an 
existence  which  will  be  rendered  absolutely  miserable,  by  in- 
activity and  irremediable  want  of  employment ;  than  which 
what  idea  can  be  more  absurd?  I  hesitate  to  add,  what  it 
would  be  impious  to  say,  that  death  will  ensue  to  God  if 
absolute  inactivity  falls  to  his  lot ;  for  if  you  take  away  the 
perpetual  motion  of  the  soul,  then  you  will  beyond  all  question 
also  destroy  the  soul  itself.  And  the  soul  of  the  world,  in  the 
opinion  of  those  who  maintain  the  opposite  doctrine,  is  God. 

XVII.  Is  it  not  however  worth  while  to  examine  this  question, 
in  what  manner  there  can  be  a  regeneration  of  all  those  things 
which  have  been  destroyed  by  fire,  and  resolved  into  fire?  for 
when  their  substance  has  been  wholly  destroyed  by  the  fire,  it 
follows  of  necessity  that  the  fire  itself  must  also  be  extinguished 
as  no  longer  having  any  nourishment.  Therefore,  as  long  as 
it  remained  the  seminal  principle  of  arrangement  was  likewise 
preserved,  but  when  it  is  destroyed  that  principle  is  destroyed 
with  it.  But  it  would  be  impious,  and  an  impiety  of  double 
dye,  not  only  to  attribute  destruction  to  the  world,  but  also  to 
take  away  the  possibility  of  its  regeneration ;  as  if  God 
delighted  in  disorder,  and  irregularity,  and  all  kinds  of  evil 


44  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

things.     But  we  must  examine  this  question  more  accurately, 
in  the  following  manner. 

There  are  three  species  in  fire  ;  the  coal,  and  the  flame,  and 
the  light.  Now  coal  is  the  fire  in  its  earthy  substance,  which, 
like  a  sort  of  spiritual  habit,  couches  and  lies  hid  in  a  sort  of 
cavern,  pervading  it  all  to  its  very  extremities.  And  the  flame 
is  that  part  which,  being  raised  on  high,  is  lifted  up  from  its 
fuel.  And  the  light  is  that  which  is  emitted  from  the  flame, 
so  as  to  co-operate  with  the  eyes,  in  order  to  enable  them  to 
comprehend  what  is  seen.  And  the  flame  occupies  the  middle 
position  between  the  coal  and  the  light ;  for  when  it  is  extin- 
guished it  ends  in  coal,  and  when  it  is  kindled  it  excites  the 
light,  which,  being  deprived  of  its  burning  power,  blazes.  If 
therefore,  we  affirm  that  the  world  is  dissolved  by  conflagration, 
it  would  not  be  coal,  because,  in  that  case  there  will  be  a  great 
deal  of  the  earthy  substance  left  behind,  in  which  also  fire 
must  necessarily  be  contained.  But  we  must  agree,  that  none 
of  the  other  bodies  subsist  any  longer,  but  that  earth,  and 
water,  and  air,  are  all  dissolved  into  unmixed  fire.  Nor,  again, 
would  it  become  flame ;  for  that  can  only  exist  in  connexion 
with  nourishment ;  and,  if  nothing  is  left  behind,  being  de- 
prived of  all  nourishment  it  will  immediately  be  extinguished. 
It  follows  from  all  this,  that  it  cannot  become  hght  either ;  for 
light  by  itself  has  no  substance  at  all,  but  flows  from  the  things 
before  mentioned,  coal  and  flame,  not  in  a  great  degree  from 
the  coal,  but  very  much  from  the  flame  ;  for  it  is  diff"used  over 
a  very  great  space  indeed.  But  if,  as  has  been  already  proved, 
those  things  had  no  existence  from  the  conflagration  of  all 
things,  then  there  could  not  be  any  light  either.  For  the 
abundant,  and  vast,  and  extensive  brilliancy  of  mid-day,  when 
the  sun  proceeds  under  the  earth,  is  at  once  caused  to  disappear 
by  night,  especially  if  it  be  a  moonless  night.  Therefore  the 
world  is  not  destroyed  by  fire,  but  is  indestructible.  And  if  it 
should  be  destroyed  by  fire,  there  could  not  be  another  created. 

XVIII.  On  which  account  some  of  the  Stoics  also,  being 
gifted  with  a  more  acute  discernment,  and  perceiving  that  they 
would  infiilhbly  be  convicted,  thought  it  well  to  be  beforehand 
in  preparing  assistance  as  it  were  for  a  defunct  proposition. 
But  what  they  prepared  was  of  no  use ;  for,  since  fire  is  the 
cause  of  all  motion,  and  since  motion  is  the  beginning  of 
generation,  for  it  is  impossible  that  anything  whatever  should 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  45 

be  generated  without  motion,  they  said  that  before  the  new 
world  began  to  be  formed,  when  it  was  beginning  to  be 
fashioned,  the  whole  fire  would  not  be  extinguished  in  that 
conflagration  ;  that  they  affirmed  that  some  would  still  remain, 
but  yet  only  a  small  portion.  For  they  were  exceedingly 
cautious,  lest  if  it  should  be  wholly  extinguished,  the  conse- 
quence would  be  that  everything  would  remain  motionless  and 
devoid  of  ornament,  inasmuch  as  the  cause  of  motion  would  no 
longer  be  in  any  existence.  But  all  these  ideas  are  the 
invention  of  quibblers,  who  employ  all  their  artifices  in 
opposition  to  the  truth.  Why  so  ?  Because  it  is  impossible,  as 
has  been  proved  already,  that  the  world,  after  it  has  been 
destroyed  by  conflagration,  should  become  similar  to  coal,  inas- 
much as  there  is  a  vast  quantity  of  earthy  substance  left  in 
which  the  fire  must  of  necessity  lie  in  ambush.  And  perhaps 
too  the  conflagration  could  not  prevail  in  every  quarter,  if  the 
heaviest  and  most  invincible  of  the  elements,  namely  the  earth, 
still  remains,  without  being  dissolved  ;  but  it  must  of  necessity 
change,  either  into  flame  or  into  light :  into  flame,  as  Cleanthes 
thought;  into  light,  as  Chrysippus  conceived.  But  if  it 
becomes  flame,  then,  when  it  approaches  extinction,  it  will  be 
extinguished  all  at  once,  and  not  partially  or  gradually.  For 
the  nutriment  exists  along  with  it ;  on  which  account,  while 
there  is  a  great  deal  of  it,  it  increases  and  is  diff'used ;  but 
when  it  is  stunted  it  becomes  less. 

And  any  one  might  conjecture  the  truth  of  what  takes  place 
from  what  he  sees  happen  among  us.  A  lamp,  when  any  one 
pours  oil  upon  it,  gives  forth  a  most  brilliant  flame  ;  but  when 
any  one  ceases  to  supply  it  with  that  nutriment,  and  leaves  only 
a  small  portion  in  the  lamp,  then  the  lamp  is  at  once  extin- 
guished, and  does  not  give  out  the  smallest  portion  of  flame. 

If  again  this  is  not  the  case,  but  if  the  world  becomes  light, 
then  again  it  changes  altogether.  Why  so  ?  Because  it  has  no 
substance  or  character  of  its  own,  but  is  generated  from  flame, 
and  when  this  is  wholly  and  completely  extinguished  in  all  its 
parts,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  the  light  also  must  be  extin- 
guished, and  that  not  partially,  but  altogether.  For  what 
flame  is  to  nourishment,  that  also  is  light  to  flame.  As  there- 
fore the  flame  is  extinguished  concurrently  with  the  want  of 
nourishment,  so  also  is  the  light  simultaneously  with  the  flame, 
30  that  it  is  actually  impossible  for  the  world  to  be  capable  of 


46  PniLO  JUDiEUS. 

regeneration,  if  there  is  no  seminal  principle  lurking  and 
kindled  within  it,  but  if  all  things  are  expended  and  destroyed, 
some  by  fire,  and  some  by  want.  From  all  which  arguments 
it  is  plain  that  the  world  is  for  ever  uncreated  and  imperishable. 

XIX.  Nevertheless,  as  Chrysippus  says,  some  suppose  that 
fire  resolves  all  the  arrangement  of  the  universe  when  the 
elements  are  separated  into  itself,  so  that  it  becomes  the  seed 
of  the  world  which  is  about  to  be  made ;  and  suppose  in  conse- 
quence that,  of  all  the  ideas  which  he  and  his  sect  have 
entertained  on  the  subject,  none  are  falsified.  Granting,  in  the 
first  place,  that  generation  proceeds  from  seed,  and  that  all 
dissolution  is  a  resolving  back  into  seed ;  in  the  second  place, 
because  it  is  argued  by  natural  philosophers  that  the  world  is 
a  rational  nature,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  only  possessed  of  life, 
but  is  also  endowed  with  intellect,  and  moreover  even  with 
wisdom ;  by  these  arguments  he  establishes  the  contrary 
proposition  to  that  which  he  intends,  namely,  that  it  will  never 
be  destroyed.  But  the  proofs  are  ready  at  hand  to  those  who 
do  not  fear  to  join  in  the  investigation. 

Therefore  the  world  resembles  either  a  plant  or  an  animal. 
But  whether  it  is  a  plant  or  whether  it  is  an  animal,  still,  if  it 
be  destroyed  by  conflagration,  it  will  never  be  itself  its  own 
seed.  And  the  circumstances  which  take  place  among  our- 
selves bear  witness  that  nothing,  whether  greater  or  less,  when 
destroyed,  has  ever  been  separated  in  such  a  manner  as  to 
engender  seed.  Do  you  not  see  how  many  materials  of  plants 
susceptible  of  cultivation  there  are,  and  how  many  kinds  of 
wild  plants  too  are  diffused  over  every  portion  of  the  earth? 
Every  one  of  these  trees,  as  long  as  the  trunk  is  in  good  health, 
together  with  its  fruit,  produces  also  a  seed  to  propagate  its 
species ;  but  becoming  destroyed  after  a  lapse  of  time,  and 
being  wholly  withered,  roots  and  all,  it  never  becomes  resolved 
into  a  ripened  seed.  And  so  too  in  the  same  manner  the 
different  kinds  of  animals,  which  it  is  not  easy  even  to  enume- 
rate by  reason  of  their  multitude,  as  long  as  they  survive  and 
flourish  vigorously,  produce  a  seed,  which  is  calculated  to 
propagate  their  species ;  but  when  they  are  dead  there  is  no 
longer  any  seed. 

For  it  would  be  absurd  for  a  man  when  he  is  alive  to  employ 
only  the  eighth  part  of  his  soul,  which  is  called  the  generative 
power,  for  the  propagation  of  a  being  like  himself,  but  after  he 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  47 

is  dead  to  exert  the  whole  of  himself  for  the  same  purpose ;  for 
death  can  never  be  more  energetic  or  efficacious  than  life. 
And  besides,  there  is  no  single  existing  thing  which  is  brought 
to  perfection  by  seed  alone  without  its  appropriate  nourishment. 
For  seed  resembles  the  beginning,  and  the  beginning  by  itself 
does  not  make  perfect ;  for  beware  of  imagining  that  the  ear 
of  corn  blossoms  and  ripens  solely  from  the  seed,  which  is  cast 
by  the  husbandman  on  the  ploughed  field ;  for  in  truth,  dry- 
ness and  moisture,  the  twofold  moisture  which  is  derived  from 
the  earth,  co-operate  in  the  greatest  degree  towards  its  growth. 
And  so  the  creature  which  is  fashioned  in  the  womb  is  not 
permitted  by  nature  to  be  brought  to  life  and  perfection  by  the 
seed  alone,  but  also  by  the  nourishment  shed  upon  it  from 
without,  which  the  woman  who  has  conceived  supplies. 

Why  then  do  I  say  this  ?  Because  in  the  case  of  such  a 
conflagration  as  that  of  which  I  have  been  speaking,  the  seed 
alone  will  be  left,  there  being  no  nutriment  remaining,  since 
everything  which  was  to  have  supplied  nutriment  will  have 
been  resolved  into  fire ;  so  that  the  world,  which  would  be  to 
be  formed,  according  to  the  principle  of  regeneration,  will 
have  a  lame  and  imperfect  form  and  character,  since  that 
which  is  chiefly  required  to  cooperate  towards  its  perfection, 
on  which,  as  on  a  staff,  the  seminal  origin  ought  to,  and 
naturally  does,  lean,  is  destroyed  ;  but  this  would  be  absurd, 
as  is  shown,  and  made  manifest  from  the  clearest  evidence. 

Again,  all  those  things  which  derive  their  origin  from  seed 
are  of  a  greater  magnitude  than  the  seed  which  gives  them 
their  existence,  and  are  seen  to  fill  a  more  extended  space; 
for  very  often  trees,  whose  tops  reach  to  heaven  itself,  shoot 
up  out  of  a  very  small  grain  of  seed ;  and  the  fattest  and 
tallest  animals  grow  from  a  very  small  quantity  of  moisture, 
which  is  laid  as  their  foundation ;  but  there  happens  that 
which  was  mentioned  a  little  while  ago,  that  these,  at  the 
time  nearest  to  their  birth  are  very  little,  but  that  subse- 
quently they  keep  on  increasing  in  size  till  they  arrive  at 
complete  perfection. 

But  in  the  case  of  the  universe  the  exact  contrary  will  take 
place,  for  here  the  seed  will  both  be  greater  and  will  also  fill 
a  larger  space  ;  and  the  ultimate  perfection  at  which  the  thing 
formed  arrives  will  be  smaller,  and  will  appear  in  a  smaller 
space ;  and  the  world,  originally  derived  from  a  seed,  will  not 


48  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

progress  from  a  very  small  thing  towards  increase,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  will  be  diminished  from  a  greater  magnitude  to  a 
smaller ;  and  it  is  easy  to  see  the  truth  of  what  is  here  said. 

Every  body,  when  it  is  resolved  into  fire,  is  dissolved,  and 
melted,  and  diffused ;  and  when  the  flame  which  is  in  it  is 
extinguished,  it  is  then  contracted  and  shrunk  up  to  nothing ; 
but  there  is  no  need  of  arguments  to  prove  a  thing  which  is  so 
clear,  as  if  it  were  obscure ;  and,  indeed,  the  world,  if  con- 
sumed by  fire,  will  become  greater,  inasmuch  as  all  its  essence 
will  then  be  dissolved  into  the  thinnest  air ;  and  it  appears  to 
me  that  the  Stoics  have  foreseen  this,  and  on  that  account 
have,  in  their  arguments,  assumed  that  a  vacuum  of  infinite 
extent  will  be  left  abandoned  on  the  outside  of  the  world  ;  that 
so,  since  it  is  fated  to  be  subjected  to  a  certain  diffusion  of 
boundless  extent,  it  may  not  be  in  want  of  a  place  which  may 
be  capable  of  receiving  that  diffusion.  When  therefore  it  has 
been  extended  and  increased  to  such  a  degree,  as  to  be  very 
nearly  equal  to  the  infinite  extent  of  the  vacuum  by  the  bound- 
less and  illimitable  extension  of  its  own  diffusion,  it  then, 
according  to  them,  is  itself  the  principle  of  seed  to  itself;  but 
when,   according  to  a  perfect  regeneration  of  the  parts,  its 

entire  substance* being  contracted  in  the  extinction 

of  the  fire  into  dense  air ;  but  when  the  air  again  is  contracted, 
and  when  it  settles  down  into  water,  then  again  the  water  is 
still  further  condensed,  so  as  to  be  changed  into  earth,  which 
is  the  best  of  all  the  elements.  But  all  these  arguments  are 
beyond  the  ordinary  ideas  of  those  who  are  able  to  consider 
and  argue  upon  the  consequences  of  these  things. 

XX.  However,  besides  what  has  been  here  said,  any  one 
may  use  this  argument  also  in  corroboration  of  his  opinion, 
which  will  certainly  convince  all  those  who  are  not  deter- 
mined to  be  obstinate  beyond  all  bounds  ;  of  those  things 
which  in  pairs  are  exactly  contrary  to  one  another  it  is  impos-  | 
sible  that  one  thing  should  be,  and  that  the  other  should  not 
be ;  for  since  there  is  white  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  absolute 
necessity  that  there  must  also  be  black,  and  since  there  is  a 
great  there  must  likewise  be  a  little ;  since  there  is  an  odd 
there  must  inevitably  be  an  even  ;  since  there  is  a  sweet  there 
must  be  a  bitter ;  since  there  is  day  there  must  be  night ;  and 
so  on  in  an  infinite  number  of  similar  cases ;  but  if  a  conflagra- 
There  seems  a  line  or  two  lost  here. 


ON  TEE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  49 

tion  should  take  place,  then  something  would  ensue  which  is 
impossible ;  for  then,  of  things  in  a  pair,  the  one  will  happen 
and  the  other  will  not. 

Come,  now,  let  us  consider  the  matter  thus :  if  everything 
is  resolved  into  fire,  there  is  then  something  light,  and  rare, 
and  warm ;  for  all  these  are  the  especial  properties  of  fire ;  but 
there  can  be  nothing  heavy,  or  cold,  or  thick,  which  are  the 
opposites  of  the  qualities  which  I  have  just  enumerated.  Hov/ 
then  can  any  one  more  completely  overturn  the  idea  of  the 
universal  disorder  which  would  be  involved  in  such  a  confla- 
gration than  by  showing  that  those  things  which  by  a  law  of 
nature  must  exist  together,  are  by  this  process  separated  from 
their  natural  conjunction?  And  the  separation  has  extended 
to  such  a  degree,  that  those  who  maintain  this  doctrine  attri-. 
bute  eternal  durability  to  the  one  and  deny  any  existence  at 
all  to  the  other. 

Again,  there  is  this  assertion  made  by  some  of  those  who 
diligently  employ  themselves  in  investigating  truth  which 
appears  to  me  to  be  a  sufficiently  felicitous  one ;  if  the  world 
is  destroyed  it  will  either  be  destroyed  by  some  other  efficient 
cause,  or  by  God  ;  now  there  is  certainly  nothing  else  whatever 
from  which  it  can  receive  its  destruction,  for  there  is  nothing 
whatever  which  it  does  not  surround  and  contain  ;  but  that 
which  is  surrounded  and  confined  within  something  else  is 
manifestly  inferior  in  power  to  that  which  surrounds  and 
confines  it,  by  which  it  is  therefore  mastered ;  on  the  other 
hand,  to  say  that  it  is  destroyed  by  God  is  the  most  impious  of 
all  possible  assertions ;  for  God  is  the  cause  not  of  disorder, 
and  irregularity,  and  destruction,  but  of  order,  and  beautiful 
regularity,  and  life,  and  of  eveiy  good  thing,  as  is  confessed  by 
all  those  whose  opinions  are  based  on  truth. 

XXI.  But  a  person  may  very  likely  wonder  at  those  who 
talk  about  conflagrations  and  regenerations,  not  only  on 
account  of  the  arguments  which  I  have  just  been  adducing,  by 
which  they  are  convicted  of  maintaining  erroneous  opinions, 
but  also  above  all  other  reasons  for  this  one ;  for  since  there 
are  four  elements  of  which  the  world  consists,  namely,  earth, 
water,  air,  and  fire,  why  is  it  that  they  are  to  separate  fire 
from  all  the  others,  and  to  affirm  that  all  the  others  are 
dissolved  into  that  one?  For  some  one  may  say,  if  it  is 
necessary  that  they  should  all  be  resolved  into  one,  why 
VOL.  IV.  E 


60  PHILO  JUD^US. 

should  they  not  be  resolved  into  air,  or  water,  or  earth  ?  For 
these  elements  also  contain  powers  of  great  magnitude  ;  but 
yet  no  one  has  ever  said  that  the  world  was  to  pass  away  into 
air,  or  into  water,  or  into  earth ;  so  that  it  would  be  equally 
natural  to  deny  that  it  is  resolved  into  fire. 

Moreover,  it  would  have  become  them,  perceiving  the  beau- 
tiful equality  which  exists  in  the  world,  to  fear  and  to  feel  too 
great  awe  to  venture  to  condemn  so  divine  a  thing  to  death  : 
for  there  is  a  most  admirable  system  of  compensation  existing 
in  the  four  elements  which  arrange  and  dispense  their  vicissi- 
tudes by  the  rules  of  equality,  and  the  definitions  of  justice; 
for  as  the  seasons  of  the  year,  in  their  proper  alternations  of 
revolutions,  go  through  their  regular  cycle,  completing  their 
periodical  changes  without  any  cessation ;  in  the  same  manner 
suppose  that  the  elements  of  the  world  in  the  course  of  their 
continual  interchanges  with  one  another  (though  it  is  a  most 
paradoxical  assertion),  when  they  appear  to  be  perishinf^  are 
in  reality  being  made  immortal,  passing  over  the  same  course 
again  and  again,  so  as  to  have  their  existence  infinitely  pro- 
tracted. 

Therefore  the  steep  road  begins  with  the  earth ;  for  when  it 
is  wasted  away  it  endures  a  change  to  water,  and  the  water 
when  it  has  evaporated  is  changed  into  air,  and  the  air  when 
rarefied  is  changed  into  fire ;  but  the  downward  road  descends 
from  the  head,  when  the  fire  in  consequence  of  the  conflagra- 
tion which  ensues  settles  down  into  air,  and  again  when  the 
air  being  closely  pressed  settles  down  into  water,  and  when 
the  water  by  its  copious  effusion  is  condensed  so  as  to  be 
changed  into  earth. 

Heraclitus  therefore  spoke  very  correctly  when  he  said  that, 
"  Water  was  the  death  of  the  soul,  and  earth  the  death  of 
water."     For  thinking  that  the  breath  was  the  soul,  he  indi' 
cates,  by  this  figurative  and  enigmatical  expression,  that  th 
end  of  air  is  the  production  of  water,  and  again  that  the  end 
of  water  is  the  production  of  earth ;   and  when  he  speaks  o] 
death  he  does  not  mean  utter  destruction,  but  a  change  intc 
some  other  element ;  that  equalised  proportion  of  the  elements 
which  is  attempered  by  itself  being  thus  preserved  eternal  anc 
uninjured,  as  is  not  only  probable  but  absolutely  inevitable 
since  what  is  unequal  is  essentially  unjust,  and  injustice  is  th< 
offspring  of  wickedness,  and  wickedness  is  banished  from  th( 


'f 


I 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  V/ ORLD.  5  1 

abode  of  immortality.  But  the  world  is  of  a  divine  magnitude, 
and  has  been  shown  to  be  the  abode  of  those  gods  which  are 
visible  to  the  outward  senses ;  and  to  affirm  that  this  world  is 
destroyed  is  the  part  of  those  who  do  not  see  the  connection 
of  nature  and  the  united  consequence  and  coherence  of  things. 

XXII.  But  some  of  those  persons  who  have  fancied  that 
the  world  is  everlasting,  inventing  a  variety  of  new  arguments, 
employ  also  such  a  system  of  reasoning  as  this  to  establish 
their  point :  they  affirm  that  there  are  four  principal  manners 
in  which  corruption  is  brought  about,  addition,  taking  away, 
transposition,  and  alteration ;  accordingly,  the  number  two  is 
by  the  addition  of  the  unit  corrupted  so  as  to  become  the 
number  three,  and  no  longer  remains  the  number  two ;  and 
the  number  four  by  the  taking  away  of  the  unit  is  corrupted 
so  as  to  become  the  number  three  ;  again,  by  transposition  the 
letter  Z  becomes  the  letter  H  when  the  parallel  lines  which 
were  previously  horizontal  |lj  are  placed  perpendicularly  II, 
and  when  the  line  wliich  did  before  pass  upwards  I,  so  as  to 
connect  the  two  is  now  made  horizontal,  and  still  extended 
between  them  so  as  to  join  them.  And  by  alteration  the  word 
ohog,  wine,  becomes  o^og,  vinegar. 

But  of  the  manner  of  corruption  thus  mentioned  there  is 
not  one  which  is  in  the  least  degree  whatever  applicable  to  the 
world,  since  otherwise  what  could  we  say?  Could  we  affirm 
that  anything  is  added  to  the  world  so  as  to  cause  its  destruc- 
tion ?  But  there  is  nothing  whatever  outside  of  the  world 
which  is  not  a  portion  of  it  as  the  whole,  for  everj'thing  is 
surrounded,  and  contained,  and  mastered  by  it.  Again,  can 
we  say  that  anything  is  taken  from  the  world  so  as  to  have 
that  effect?  In  the  first  place  that  which  would  be  taken 
away  would  again  be  a  world  of  smaller  dimensions  than  the 
existing  one,  and  in  the  second  place  it  is  impossible  that  any 
body  could  be  separated  from  the  composite  fabric  of  the 
whole  world  so  as  to  be  completely  dispersed.  Again,  are  we 
to  say  that  the  constituent  parts  of  the  world  are  transposed  ? 
But  at  all  events  they  remain  in  their  original  positions  without 
any  change  of  place,  for  never  at  any  time  shall  the  whole 
earth  be  raised  up  above  the  water,  nor  the  water  above  the 
air,  nor  the  air  above  the  fire.  But  those  things  which  are 
by  nature  heavy,  namely  the  earth  and  the  water,  v/ill  have 
the  middle  place,  the  earth  supporting  everything  like  a  solid 

E  2 


52  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

foundation,  and  the  water  being  above  it ;  and  the  air  and  the 
fire,  which  are  by  nature  hght,  will  have  the  higher  position, 
but  not  equally,  for  the  air  is  the  vehicle  of  the  fire  ;  and  that 
which  is  carried  by  anything  is  of  necessity  above  that  which 
carries  it. 

Once  more  :  w^e  must  not  imagine  that  the  world  is  de- 
stroyed by  alteration,  for  the  change  of  any  elements  is  equi- 
pollent, and  that  which  is  equipollent  is  the  cause  of  unvarying 
steadiness,  and  of  untroubled  durability,  inasmuch  as  it 
neither  seeks  any  advantage  itself,  and  is  not  subject  to  the 
inroads  of  other  things  which  seek  advantages  at  its  expense ; 
so  that  this  retribution  and  compensation  of  these  powers  is 
equalized  by  the  rules  of  pro])ortion,  being  the  produce  of 
health  and  endless  preservation,  by  all  which  considerations 
the  world  is  demonstrated  to  be  eternal. 

XXIII.  Theophrastus,  moreover,  says  that  those  men  who 
attribute  a  beginning  and  destructibility  to  the  world  are 
deceived  by  four  particulars  of  the  greatest  importance,  the 
inequalities  of  the  earth,  the  retreat  of  the  sea,  the  dissolution 
of  each  of  the  parts  of  the  universe,  and  the  destruction  of 
different  terrestrial  animals  in  their  kinds ;  and  he  proceeds  to 
establish  the  first  point  thus :  if  the  earth  had  never  had  any 
beginning  of  its  creation,  then  there  would  have  been  no 
portion  of  it  rising  above  the  rest  so  as  to  be  conspicuous,  but 
all  the  mountains  would  have  been  level,  and  all  the  pieces  of 
rising  ground  would  have  been  even  with  the  plain. 

For  as  there  are  such  vast  showers  falling  from  heaven 
throughout  all  ages,  it  would  be  natural  that  of  any  places 
which  were  originally  raised  on  high  some  would  be  broken 
down  and  washed  away  by  torrents,  and  others  would  subside 
of  their  own  accord  and  so  become  lowered,  and  that  every 
place  everywhere  would  be  smoothed  ;  but  now,  as  things  are, 
the  constant  inequalities  which  exist,  and  the  vast  heights  of 
many  mountains,  reaching  up  even  to  the  sky,  are  so  many 
proofs  that  the  earth  is  not  eternal. 

For  otherwise,  as  I  have  said  before,  all  the  earth  would 
long  since  have  been  rendered  level  from  one  extremity  to  the 
other  by  the  vast  rains  which  would  have  fallen  from  the 
eternal  commencement  of  time ;  for  it  is  the  character  of  the 
nature  of  water,  and  especially  of  such  as  descends  in  a  heavy 
fall  from  lofty  places,  to  push  some  things  away  by  force,  and 


I 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  53 

to  cut  out  and  hollow  other  places  by  its  continual  dropping, 
and  in  this  manner  to  operate  on  the  hard,  rugged,  stony 
ground  not  less  than  men  digging.  And  again,  the  sea,  as 
they  affirm,  is  already  somewhat  diminished,  and  for  proof  of 
this  fact  we  can  appeal  to  the  most  celebrated  islands,  Rhodes 
and  Delos,  for  these  were  in  ancient  times  invisible,  being 
overwhelmed  by  and  sunk  under  the  sea,  but  by  lapse  of  time, 
as  the  sea  gradually  diminished,  they  by  slow  degrees  rose 
above  it  and  came  into  sight,  as  the  histories  which  are 
written  concerning  them  record.  And  they  used  to  call  Delos 
Anaphe,  confirming  the  account  here  given  by  both  names, 
since  when  it  appeared  above  the  waters  *  it  became  evident,t 
having  been  formerly  invisible  and  unseen. 

And  in  addition  to  these  arguments  they  adduce  the  facts 
that  many  great  and  deep  bays  and  gulfs  of  vast  seas  have 
been  dried  up,  and  have  become  land,  and  have  so  turned  out 
no  insignificant  addition  to  the  adjacent  country  when  sown 
and  planted,  and  on  that  soil  there  is  still  left  plenty  of  proof 
of  such  spots  having  formerly  been  sea,  in  the  pebbles,  and 
shells,  and  other  things  which  are  commonly  washed  up  on 
the  sea-shore  being  found  in  them  ;  on  which  account  Pindar 
says  respecting  Delos — 

"  Hail,  island  raised  by  God, 

Chosen  abode 
Of  fair  Latona's  son  with  golden  hair. 

Hail,  ocean's  youngest  child. 
The  last  immoveable  domain 

That  o'er  his  bosom  smiled. 
Upraised  from  beneath  the  billowy  main 

Mortals  may  call  you  Delos,  but  the  choir 
That  dwells  upon  Olympus'  height, 

Their  chosen  bards  inspire 
To  praise  thee  as  earth's  brightest,  holiest  light."  J 

For  Pindar  has  here  called  Delos  the  daughter  of  the  ocean, 
intending  by  this  enigmatical  expression  to  convey  the  idea 
which  I  have  mentioned.  But  if  the  sea  is  gradually  being 
diminished  then  the  earth  also  w'ill  be  diminished  ;  and  in 
long  revolutions  of  years  every  one  of  the  elements  will  be 
entirely  consumed  and  destroyed ;  and  the  whole  air  will  bo 

*  The  Greek  word  is  ava^artto-a,  from  which  'Ai/a^/)  ia  derived. 
T  A»'/Xr;,  from  which  AT/Xog  is  derived. 
X  This  ia  part  of  an  ode  now  lost. 


64  PHILO  JUD-^US. 

consumed,  being  diminished  by  little  and  little  ;  and  all  things 
will  be  absorbed  and  dissolved  into  the  one  substance  of  fire. 

XXIV.  And  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  third 
alternative  of  this  question  they  use  the  following  argument : 
beyond  all  question  that  thing  is  destroyed  all  the  parts  of 
which  are  liable  to  destruction ;  but  all  the  parts  of  the  world 
are  liable  to  destruction,  therefore  the  world  also  is  liable  to 
destruction. 

But  we  must  now  proceed  to  consider  the  question  which 
we  postponed  till  the  present  time.  What  sort  of  a  part  of 
the  earth  is  that,  that  we  may  begin  from  this,  whether  it  is 
greater  or  less,  that  is  not  dissolved  by  time  ?  Do  not 
the  very  hardest  and  strongest  stones  become  hard  and  de- 
cayed through  the  weakness  of  their  conformation  (and  this 
conformation  is  a  sort  of  course  of  a  highly  strained  spirit,  a 
bond  not  indissoluble,  but  only  very  difficult  to  unloose),  in 
consequence  of  which  they  are  broken  up  and  made  fluid,  so 
that  they  are  dissolved  first  of  all  into  a  thin  dust,  and  after- 
wards are  wholly  wasted  away  and  destroyed  ?  Again,  if  the 
water  were  never  agitated  by  the  winds,  but  were  left  immove- 
able for  ever,  would  it  not  from  inaction  and  tranquillity 
become  dead  ?  at  all  events  it  is  changed  by  such  stagnation,  and 
becomes  very  foetid  and  foul-smelling,  like  an  animal  deprived 
of  life.  And  so  also  the  corruptions  of  the  air  are  plain  to 
everyone,  for  it  is  the  nature  of  the  -atmosphere  to  become 
sick  and  to  decay,  and,  as  one  may  say,  in  a  manner  to  die  ; 
since  what  else  is  it  which  a  man,  who  is  not  aiming  at  select- 
ing plausible  language,  but  only  at  truth,  would  call  a  plague 
except  a  death  of  the  atmosphere,  which  diffuses  its  own 
disease  and  suffering  to  the  destruction  of  everything  which  is 
endowed  with  life  ? 

And  why  need  I  speak  at  great  length  concerning  fire  ?  for 
if  it  is  deprived  of  nourishment  it  is  immediately  extinguished, 
becoming,  as  the  poets  say,  tame  by  its  own  natural  qualities, 
on  which  account  it  depends  upon,  and  is  raised  up  by  the 
duration  of  the  fuel  which  is  supplied  and  kindled,  but  when 
that  is  expended  the  fire  also  disappears.  And  they  say  that 
the  dragons  in  India  are  exposed  to  the  same  kind  of  fate,  for 
that  they  crawl  upon  the  greatest  of  all  beasts,  namely  ele- 
phants, and  creep  over  their  backs  and  the  whole  of  their 
bellies,  and  then,  if  they  can  find  a  vein,  they  divide  that  and 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  5  5 

chink  the  blood,  sucking  it  insatiably,  with  a  strong  breath  and 
a  vigorous  noise.  Meantime  the  elephants,  though  greatly 
drained,  and  though  becoming  gradually  exhausted,  hold  out 
for  some  time,  leaping  about  in  their  perplexity,  and  lashing 
their  sides  with  their  trunks  in  the  hope  of  being  able  to 
shake  off  the  dragons.  After  a  time,  as  the  vital  principle  is 
continually  becoming  more  and  more  exhausted,  they  are  no 
longer  able  to  leap  about,  but  stand  trembling  and  quivering, 
and  after  a  little  more  time  their  legs  become  too  weak  to 
support  them,  and  they  are  thrown  down  and  die  for  want  of 
blood.  And  when  they  are  fallen  down  those  animals  w4iich 
were  the  causes  of  their  death  die  with  them  in  the  following 
manner  :  since  the  dragons  have  no  longer  any  nourishment, 
they  attempt  to  loosen  the  bonds  with  which  they  twined  them- 
selves round  the  elephants,  wishing  now  to  get  released  from 
them,  but  they  are  pressed  down  by  the  weight  of  the  ele- 
phants and  crushed,  and  much  more  so  when  the  animal  has 
become  a  lifeless,  hard,  and  stone-like  substance  ;  for  though 
they  wriggle  about  and  try  every  expedient  in  order  to  effect 
their  release  from  the  power  of  the  animal  which  weighs  them 
down,  and  by  which  they  are  entangled,  though  they  have  long 
practised  themselves  in  every  variety  of  wile,  amid  all  kinds 
of  difficulties  and  distresses,  they  at  last  become  too  weak  to 
resist,  like  men  who  have  been  starved  to  death,  or  who  have 
been  caught  by  a  wall  which  has  suddenly  fallen  down  upon 
them,  and  not  being  able  even  to  lift  up  their  heads  they  die  of 
suffocation. 

If  then,  each  of  the  separate  parts  of  the  world  awaits  utter 
destruction,  it  is  plain  that  the  w'orld  which  is  compounded  of 
these  can  not  be  itself  exempt  from  destruction. 

We  must  now  consider  with  accuracy  the  fourth  and  remain- 
ing argument.  Thus  they  argue:  if  the  world  were  eternal  then 
the  animals  also  would  be  eternal,  and  much  more  the  human 
race,  in  proportion  as  that  is  more  excellent  than  the  other 
animals ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  those  who  take  delight  in  inves- 
tigating the  mysteries  of  nature  consider  that  man  has  only 
been  created  in  the  late  ages  of  the  world  ;  for  it  is  likely,  or  I 
should  rather  say  it  is  inevitably  true,  that  the  arts  co-exist 
with  man,  so  as  to  be  exactly  co-eval  with  him,  not  only  because 
methodical  proceedings  are  appropriate  to  a  rational  nature, 
but  also  because  it  is  not  possible  to  live  without  them ;  let  us 


56  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

therefore  examine  the  dates  of  each  of  these,  disregarding  the 
fables  invented  by  the  tragedians  about  the  gods ;  but  if  man 
is  not  eternal  then  neither  is  any  other  animal,  so  that  then 
neither  are  the  places  which  receive  them,  the  earth,  or  the 
water,  or  the  air ;  from  all  which  considerations  it  is  plain  that 
this  world  is  liable  to  destruction. 

XXV.  But  it  is  necessary  to  encounter  such  quibbling 
arguments  as  these,  lest  some  persons  of  too  little  experience 
should  yield  to  and  be  led  away  by  them  ;  and  we  must  begin 
our  refutation  of  them  from  the  same  point  from  which  the 
Sophists  begin  their  deceit.  They  say,  "  There  could  no  longer 
be  any  inequalities  existing  on  the  earth,  if  the  world  were 
eternal."  Why  not,  my  most  excellent  friends  ?  For  other 
persons  will  come  up  and  say  that  the  natures  of  trees  are  in 
no  respect  different  from  mountains;  but  just  as  they  at 
certain  seasons  lose  their  leaves,  and  again  at  certain  seasons 
recover  their  verdure  again ;  (on  which  account  there  is  admi- 
rable truth  in  those  lines  of  the  poet : — 

"  Like  leaves  on  trees  the  race  of  man  is  found, 
Now  green'  in  youth,  now  withering  on  the  ground ; 
Another  race  the  following  spring  supplies ; 
They  fall  successive  and  successive  rise."  * 

And  so  in  like  manner  some  portions  of  the  mountains  are 
broken  off,  and  others  grow  in  their  stead  :  but  after  a  long 
lapse  of  time  the  additional  growth  becomes  conspicuous 
because  the  trees  having  a  more  rapid  nature,  display  their 
increase  with  great  rapidity  ;  but  mountains  have  a  slower 
character,  on  which  account  it  happens  that  the  additions 
which  take  place  in  their  case  are  not  perceptible  by  the 
outward  senses  except  after  a  long  time. 

And  these  men  appear  to  be  ignorant  of  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  produced,  since  if  they  had  not  been,  perhaps 
they  would  have  been  silent  out  of  shame  ;  but  still  there  is 
no  reason  why  we  should  not  teach  them ;  but  there  is  nothing 
new  in  what  is  now  said,  neither  are  they  our  words  but  the 
ancient  sayings  of  wise  men,  by  whom  nothing  which  was 
necessary  for  knowledge  has  been  left  uninvestigated ;  when 
the  fiery  principle  which  is  contained  beneath,  in  the  earth,  is  ' 
thrust  upwards  by  the  natural  power  of  fire,  it  proceeds  to  its 
own  appropriate  place  ;  and  if  it  meets  with  any  respite  or 
*  Homer,  II.  vi.  147.  "; 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  57 

relaxation,  though  ever  so  slight,  it  draws  up  with  it  a  large 
portion  of  the  earthy  substance,  as  much  as  it  can  ;  and  when 
it  has  emerged  from  the  earth  it  proceeds  more  slowly ;  but 
the  earthy  substance  being  compelled  to  follow  it  for  a  long 
time,  being  at  last  raised  to  an  immense  height,  is  contracted 
at  the  top,  and  at  last  comes  to  end  on  a  sharp  point  imitating 
the  general  appearance  of  the  flame  of  fire ;  for  there  arises 
then  a  most  violent  contention  between  two  things  which  are 
natural  adversaries,  the  lightest  and  the  heaviest  of  things, 
each  of  them  pressing  onwards  to  reach  its  own  place,  and 
each  striving  against  the  violent  efforts  of  the  other  ;  accord- 
ingly the  fire,  which  is  drawing  up  the  earth  with  it,  is  com- 
pelled to  sink  down  by  its  descending  power ;  and  the  earth 
naturally  inclining  to  the  lowest  point  is  nevertheless  to  a 
certain  degree  made  light,  and  lifted  up  by  the  upward  ten- 
dencies of  fire,  and  so  is  raised  on  high,  and  being  at  last 
overpowered  by  the  more  influential  power  which  lightens  it  is 
thrust  upwards  towards  the  natural  seat  of  fire,  and  established 
on  high. 

Why  then  need  we  wonder  if  the  mountains  are  not  entirely 
washed  away  by  the  impetuosity  of  the  rains,  when  so  great 
a  power,  which  keeps  them  together,  and  by  which  they  are 
raised  up,  is  very  firmly  and  steadfastly  connected  with  them  ? 
For  if  they  were  released  from  the  bond  which  holds  them 
together,  it  would  be  natural  for  them  to  be  entirely  dissolved 
and  to  be  dispersed  by  the  water ;  but  since  they  are  bound 
together  by  this  power  of  fire,  they  resist  the  impetuosity  of 
the  rains  more  surely. 

XXVI.  These  things,  then,  may  be  said  by  us  with  respect 
to  the  argument  that  the  inequalities  of  the  surface  of  the 
earth  are  no  proof  of  the  world  having  heen  created  and  being 
liable  to  destruction  ;  but  with  respect  to  that  argument  which 
was  endeavoured  to  be  established  by  the  diminution  of  the 
sea,  we  may  reasonably  adduce  this  statement  in  opposition  to 
it :  "  Do  not  look  only  at  the  islands  which  have  risen  up  out 
of  the  sea,  nor  at  any  portions  of  land  which,  having  been  for- 
merly buried  by  the  waters,  have  in  subsequent  times  become 
dry  land  ;  for  obstinate  contention  is  very  unfavourable  to  the 
consideration  of  natural  philosophy,  which  considers  the  search 
after  truth  to  be  the  chief  object  of  rational  desire ;  but  look 
lather  at  the  contrary  effects  :  consider  how  many  districts  on 


58  PHILO   JUD^US. 

the  main-land,  not  only  such  as  were  near  the  coast,  but  even 
such  as  were  completely  in-land,  have  been  swallowed  up  by 
the  waters  ;  and  consider  how  great  a  portion  of  land  has 
become  sea  and  is  now  sailed  over  by  innumerable  ships." 
Are  3^ou  ignorant  of  the  celebrated  account  which  is  given  of 
that  most  sacred  Sicilian  strait,  which  in  old  times  joined 
Sicily  to  the  continent  of  Italy?*  and  where  vast  seas  on  each 
side  being  excited  by  violent  storms  met  together,  coming 
from  opposite  directions,  the  land  between  them  was  over- 
whelmed and  broken  away ;  from  which  circumstance  the 
city  built  in  the  neighbourhood  was  called  Rhegium.f  and 
the  result  was  quite  different  from  what  any  one  would  have 
expected ;  for  the  seas  which  had  formerly  been  separated 
now  flowed  together  and  were  united  in  one  expanse ;  and  the 
laud  which  had  previously  united  was  now  separated  into  two 
portions  by  the  strait  which  intersected  it,  in  consequence  of 
which  Sicily,  which  had  previously  formed  a  part  of  the  main- 
land, was  now  compelled  to  be  an  island. 

And  it  is  said  that  many  other  cities  also  have  disappeared, 
having  been  swallowed  up  by  the  sea  which  overwhelmed 
them  ;  since  they  speak  of  three  in  Peloponnesus —  }} 

**  ^gira  and  fair  Bura's  walls, 
And  Helica's  lofty  halls, 
And  many  a  once  reno-wTied  town,  • 

With  wreck  and  seaweed  overgrown," 

*  This  is  alluded  to  by  Virgil — 

Hsec  loca  vi  quondam,  et  vasta  convulsa  ruina 
Tautum  sevi  longinqua  valet  mutare  vetustas, 
Dissiluisse  feruut,  quum  protenus  utraque  tellus 
Una  foret  :  venit  medio  vi  pontus,  et  undis 
Hesperium  Siculo  latus  abscidit,  arvaque  et  urbes 
Litore  diductas  angusto  iuterluit  sestu. — ^n.  iii.  419. 
Or,  as  it  is  translated  by  Dryden, 

"  The  Italian  shore 
And  fair  Sicilia's  coast  were  one  before 
An  earthquake  caused  the  flaw  ;  the  roaring  tides 
The  passage  broke  that  land  from  land  divides, 
And  where  the  lands  retired  the  rushing  ocean  rides 
Distinguished  by  the  straits  on  either  hand 
Now  rising  cities  in  long  order  stand, 
And  fruitful  fields ;  so  much  can  time  invade 
The  mouldering  work  that  beauteous  nature  made." 
•f*  ''pTjyior,  from  prjyiwfxi,  "  to  break." 


ON  THE  INCORRUPTIBILITY  OF  THE  WORLD.  69 

having  been  formerly  prosperous,  but  now  overwhelmed  by 
violent  influx  of  the  sea.     And  the  island  of  Atalantes 
which  was  greater  than  Africa  and  Asia,  as  Plato  says  in  the 
'iMiaeus,  in  one  day  and  night  was  overwhelmed  beneath  the 
in  consequence  of  an  extraordinary  earthquake  and  inun- 
liition  and  suddenly  disappeared,  becoming  sea,  not  indeed 
navigable,  but  full  of  gulfs  and  eddies.     Therefore  that  imagi- 
nary and  fictitious  diminution  of  the  sea  has  no  connection  with 
the  destruction  or  durability  of  the  world  ;  for  in  fact  it  ap- 
pears to  recede  indeed  from  some  parts,  but  to  rise  higher  in 
others ;  and  it  would  have  been  proper  rather  not  to  look  at 
only  one  of  these  results  but  at  both  together,  and  so  to  form 
one's  opinion,  since  in  all  the  disputed  questions  which  arise 
in  human  life,  a  wise  and  honest  judge  will  not  deliver  his 
opinion  before  he  has  heard  the  arguments  of  the  advocates  ou 
both  sides. 

XVJI.  And  as  for  the  third  argument,  it  is  convicted  by 
itself,  as  being  derived  only  from  an  unsound  system  of  ques- 
tioning proceeding  from  the  assertions  originally  made ;  for  in 
truth  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  thing,  all  the  parts 
of  which  are  liable  to  corruption,  is  likewise  perishable  itself ; 
but  this  is  only  inevitably  true  of  that  thing  of  which  all 
the  parts  are  perishable  when  taken  collectively  and  together 
in  the  same  place  and  at  the  same  time,  since  in  the  case  of  a 
person  who  has  the  tip  of  his  finger  cut  off,  he  is  not  disabled 
from  living,  but  if  he  had  the  whole  collection  of  all  his  parts 
and  limbs  cut  off  at  once,  he  would  die  immediately.  There- 
fore in  the  same  manner,  if  all  the  elements  of  the  world 
together  were  all  to  disappear  at  one  and  the  same  moment, 
then  it  would  be  necessary  to  admit  that  the  world  was  liable  to 
corruption  and  destruction;  but  if  each  of  these  elements 
separately  only  changes  its  nature  so  as  to  assimilate  to  that  of 
its  nature,  it  is  then  rendered  immortal  rather  than  destroyed, 
according  to  the  philosophical  statement  of  the  tragic  poet — 

"  Nought  that  has  once  existed  dies, 
Though  often  what  has  been  combined 
Before,  we  separated  find, 
Invested  with  another  form." 

For  it  is  the  greatest  folly  imaginable  to  estimate  the  antiquity 
of  tlie  human  race  from  the  state  of  art ;  for  if  any  one  were  to 
follow  the  absurdity  of  such  a  system  of  reasoniug  as  this,  he 


GO  PHILO  JUD^US.  M 

will  prove  the  world  to  be  very  young  indeed,  and  to  have  been 
made  scarcely  a  thousand  years,  since  all  those  men  whom  we 
have   heard  of   traditionally  as    the    discoverers  in   differentj 
branches  of  science  do  not  go  back  to  a  greater  number  off 
years  than  that  which  I  have  mentioned. 

But  if  we  must  speak  of  the  arts  as  co-eval  with  the  race  of 
mankind,  then  we  must  speak,  drawing  our  arguments  from 
natural  history,  and  not  inconsiderately  or  carelessly.  And 
what  is  this  history  ?  The  destruction  of  the  things  on  the 
earth,  not  all  together,  but  of  the  greatest  number  of  them,  is 
attributed  to  two  principal  causes,  the  indescribable  violence 
and  power  of  fire  and  water.  And  they  say  that  each  of  these 
elements  attacks  them  in  its  turn,  after  very  long  periods  of 
revolving  years.  When,  therefore,  a  conflagration  seizes  upo 
things,  a  stream  of  ethereal  fire  being  poured  down  from  above 
is  frequently  diffased  over  them,  overrunning  many  districts  of 
the  habitable  world ;  and  when  a  deluge  draws  down  the  whole 
of  the  rainy  nature  of  water,  the  regular  rivers  and  torrents 
overflowing,  and  not  only  that,  but  even  far  exceeding  the 
ordinary  measure  of  a  common  flood,  and  breaking  down  their 
banks  with  their  violence,  or  else  overleaping  them,  and  rising 
to  an  enormous  height,  from  which  they  swell  and  are  difl'iised 
over  all  the  adjacent  champaign  country,  and  the  land  is  in  the 
first  instance  divided  into  huge  lakes,  as  the  water  is  con- 
tinually settling  down  into  the  more  hollow  parts,  and  after- 
wards flows  still  higher,  and  inundates  the  isthmuses  which 
separate  the  lakes,  till  at  last  everything  presents  the  appear- 
ance of  one  vast  sea  from  the  union  of  so  many  waters. 

And  then  it  happens  that,  tbfrough  the  violence  of  these  powers 
contending  against  one  another  in  turn,  the  inhabitants  of  the 
places  exposed  to  it  are  destroyed ;  those  who  dwell  on  the 
mountains  and  higher  ground,  and  in  ill-watered  districts, 
being  destroyed  by  fire,  as  not  having  a  sufiiciency  of  water, 
which  is  the  natural  weapon  "^ith  which  to  repel  fire,  and 
those,  on  the  other  hand,  being  destroyed  by  water  who  live 
on  the  banks  of  rivers  or  lakes,  or  on  the  shores  of  the  sea,  for 
evils  like  to  attack  those  who  are  nearest  first,  or  indeed 
solely. 

Accordingly,  when  the  greater  part  of  mankind  is  destroyed 
in  the  mannefs  above  mentioned,  besides  an  infinity  of  other 
ways  of  less  power  and  importance,  it  follows  of  necessity  that 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  61 

the  arts  also  must  fail,  for  it  cannot  be  possible  to  discuss 
science  by  itself  without  some  one  to  reduce  it  to  method  and 
practice.  But  when  those  common  pestilences  relax  their 
fury,  and  when  the  human  race  begins  again  to  recover  vigour 
and  to  flourish,  descending  from  those  who  have  not  been 
previously  destroyed  by  the  evils  which  pressed  upon  them, 
then  the  arts  also  begin  again  to  exist,  not  indeed  as  they  were 
at  first,  but  in  thinner  numbers  from  the  diminution  of  the 
numbers  of  those  who  practise  them. 

I  have  now  then  set  forth  to  the  best  of  my  ability  what  I 
have  been  able  to  learn  or  to  understand  concerning  the 
indestructibility  of  the  world,  and  in  the  subsequent  treatises 
I  shall  proceed  to  show  what  may  be  said  against  each  of  the 
arguments  here  stated. 


A  TEEATISE 

AGAINST  FLACCUS. 


I.  Flaccus  Avillius  succeeded  Sejanus  in  his  hatred  of 
and  hostile  designs  against  the  Jewish  nation.  He  was  not, 
indeed,  able  to  injure  the  whole  people  by  open  and  direct 
means  as  he  had  been,  inasmuch  as  he  had  less  power  for 
such  a  purpose,  but  he  inflicted  the  most  intolerable  evils  on 
all  who  came  within  his  reach. 

Moreover,  though  in  appearance  he  only  attacked  a  portion 
of  the  nation,  in  point  of  lact  he  directed  his  aims  against  all 
whom  he  could  find  anywhere,  proceeding  more  by  art  than  by 
force ;  for  those  men  who,  though  of  tyrannical  natures  and 
dispositions,  have  not  strength  enough  to  accomplish  their 
designs  openly,  seek  to  compass  them  by  manoeuvres. 

This  Flaccus  being  chosen  by  Tiberius  Csesar  as  one  of  his 
intimate  companions,  after  the  death  of  Severus,  who  had  been 
lieutenant-governor  in  Egypt,  was  appointed  viceroy  of  Alex- 
andria and  the  country  round  about,  being  a  man  who  at  the 
beginning,  as  far  as  appearance  went,  had  given  innumerable 
instances  of  his  excellence,  for  he  was  a  man  of  prudence  and 
diligence,  and  great  acuteness  of  perception,  very  energetic  in 
executing  what  he  had  determined  on,  very  eloquent  as  a 
speaker,  and  sldlful  too  at  discerning  what  was  suppressed  as 


62  PHILO  JUDi^EUS. 

well  as  at  understanding  what  was  said.  Accordingly  in  a 
short  time  he  became  perfectly  acquainted  with  the  affairs  of 
Egypt,  and  they  are  of  a  very  various  and  diversified  character, 
so  that  they  are  not  easily  comprehended  even  by  those  who 
from  their  earliest  infancy  have  made  them  their  study. 

The  scribes  vrere  a  superfluous  body  when  he  had  made 
such  advances  towards  the  knowledge  of  all  things,  whether 
important  or  trivial,  by  his  extended  experience,  that  he  not 
only  surpassed  them,  but  from  his  great  accuracy  was  qualified 
instead  of  a  pupil  to  become  the  instructor  of  those  who  had 
hitherto  been  the  teachers  of  all  other  persons.  However,  all 
those  things  in  which  he  displayed  an  admirable  system  and 
great  wisdom  concerning  the  accounts  and  the  general  arrange- 
ment of  the  revenues  of  the  land,  though  they  were  serious 
matters  and  of  the  last  importance,  were  nevertheless  not 
such  as  gave  any  proofs  of  a  soul  fit  for  the  task  of  governing  ; 
but  those  things  which  exhibited  a  more  brilliant  and  royal 
disposition  he  also  displayed  with  great  freedom.  For  instance, 
he  bore  himself  with  considerable  dignity,  and  pride  and  pomp 
are  advantageous  things  for  a  ruler ;  and  he  decided  all  suits 
of  importance  in  conjunction  ^\ith  the  magistrates,  he  pulled 
down  the  overproud,  he  forbade  promiscuous  mobs  of  men  from 
all  quarters  to  assemble  together,  and  prohibited  all  associa- 
tions and  meetings  which  were  continually  feasting  together 
under  pretence  of  sacrifices,  making  a  drunken  mockery  of 
public  business,  treating  with  great  vigour  and  severity  all  who 
resisted  his  commands. 

Then  when  he  had  filled  the  whole  city  and  country  with  his 
wise  legislation,  he  proceeded  in  turn  to  regulate  the  military 
affairs  of  the  land,  issuing  commands,  arranging  matters, 
training  the  troops  of  every  kind,  infantry,  cavalry,  and  light- 
armed,  teaching  the  commanders  not  to  deprive  the  soldiers  of 
their  pay,  and  so  drive  them  to  acts  of  piracy  and  rapine,  and 
teaching  each  individual  soldier  not  to  proceed  to  any  actions 
unauthorised  by  his  military  service,  remembering  that  he  was 
appointed  with  the  especial  object  of  preserving  peace. 

II.  Perhaps  some  one  may  say  here :  "  Do  you  then,  my 
good  man,  you  who  have  determined  to  accuse  this  man,  bring 
no  accusation  whatever  against  him,  but  on  the  contrary,  weave 
long  panegyrics  in  his  honour  ?     Arc  you  not  doting  and  mad  ?" 

"  I  am  not  mad,  my  friend,  nor  am  I  a  downright  fool,  so  as 


AGAINST  FLACCUS.  63 

to  be  unable  to  see  the  consequences  or  connexion  of  things. 
I  praise  Flaccus,  not  because  it  is  right  to  praise  an  enemy, 
but  in  order  to  make  his  wickedness  more  conspicuous ;  for 
pardon  is  given  to  a  man  who  does  wrong  from  ignorance  of 
what  is  right;  but  he  who  does  wrong  knowingly  has  no 
excuse,  being  already  condemned  by  the  tribunal  of  his  own 
conscience." 

III.  For  having  received  a  government  which  was  intended 
to  last  six  years,  for  the  first  five  years,  while  Tiberius  Caesar 
was  alive,  he  both  preserved  peace  and  also  governed  the 
country  generally  with  such  vigour  and  energy  that  he  was 
superior  to  all  the  governors  who  had  gone  before  him.  But 
in  the  last  year,  after  Tiberius  was  dead,  and  when  Caius  had 
succeeded  him  as  emperor,  he  began  to  relax  in  and  to  be 
indifferent  about  everything,  whether  it  was  that  he  was  over- 
whelmed with  most  heavy  grief  because  of  Tiberius  (for  it  was 
evident  to  everyone  that  he  grieved  exceedingly  as  if  for  a  near 
relation,  both  by  his  continued  depression  of  spirits  and  his 
incessant  weeping,  pouring  forth  tears  without  end  as  if  from 
an  inexhaustible  fountain),  or  whether  it  was  because  he  was 
disaffected  to  his  successor,  because  he  preferred  devoting  him- 
self to  the  party  of  the  real  rather  than  to  that  of  the  adopted 
children,  or  whether  it  was  because  he  had  been  one  of  those 
who  had  joined  in  the  conspiracy  against  the  mother  of  Caius, 
having  joined  against  her  at  the  time  when  the  accusations 
were  brought  against  her,  on  account  of  which  she  was  put  to 
death,  and  having  escaped  through  fear  of  the  consequence  of 
proceeding  against  him. 

However,  for  a  time  he  still  paid  some  attention  to  the 
affairs  of  the  state,  not  wholly  abandoning  the  administration  of 
his  government ;  but  when  he  heard  that  the  grandson  of 
Tiberius  and  his  partner  in  the  government  had  been  put  to 
death  at  the  command  of  Caius,  he  was  smitten  with  intolerable 
anguish,  and  threw  himself  on  the  ground,  and  lay  there 
speechless,  being  utterly  deprived  of  his  senses,  for  indeed  his 
mind  had  long  since  been  enervated  by  grief. 

For  as  long  as  that  child  lived  he  did  not  despair  of  some 
sparks  still  remaining  of  his  own  safety,  but  now  that  he  was 
dead,  he  considered  that  all  his  own  hopes  had  likewise  died 
with  him,  even  if  a  slight  breeze  of  assistance  might  still  be 
left,  such  as  liis  friendship  with  Macro,  who  had  unbounded 


04  PniLO  JUDiEUS. 

influence  with  Caius  in  his  authority ;  and  who,  as  it  is  said, 
liad  very  greatly  contributed  to  his  obtaining  the  supreme 
power,  and  in  a  still  higher  degree  to  his  personal  safety,  since 
Tiberius  had  frequently  thought  of  putting  Caius  out  of  the 
way,  as  a  wicked  man  and  one  who  was  in  no  respects  calcu- 
lated by  nature  for  the  exercise  of  authority,  being  influenced 
also  partly  by  his  apprehensions  for  his  grandson  ;  for  he  feared 
lest,  when  he  himself  was  dead,  his  death  too  would  be  added  to 
the  funerals  of  his  family. 

But  Macro  had  constantly  bade  him  discard  these  apprehen- 
sions from  his  mind,  and  had  praised  Caius,  as  a  man  of  a 
simple,  and  honest,  and  sociable  character  ;  and  as  one  who  was 
very  much  attached  to  his  cousin,  so  that  he  would  willingly 
yield  the  supreme  authority  to  him  alone,  and  the  first  rank  in 
everything.  And  Tiberius,  being  deceived  by  all  these  repre-  | 
sentations,  without  being  aware  of  what  he  was  doing,  left 
behind  him  a  most  irreconcileable  enemy,  to  himself,  and  his  - 
grandson,  and  his  whole  family,  and  to  Macro,  who  was  his 
chief  adviser  and  comforter,  and  to  all  mankind;  for  when  ^ 
Macro  saw  that  Caius  was  forsaking  the  way  of  virtue  and  [ 
yielding  to  his  unbridled  passions,  following  them  wherever 
they  led  him  and  against  whatever  objects  they  led  him,  he 
admonished  and  reproved  him,  looking  upon  him  as  the  same 
Caius  who,  while  Tiberius  was  alive,  w^as  mild-tempered  and 
docile ;  but  to  his  misery  he  suffered  most  terrible  punishment 
for  liis  exceeding  good-will,  being  put  to  death  with  his  wife, 
and  children,  and  all  his  family,  as  a  grievous  and  troublesome 
object  to  his  new  sovereign.  For  whenever  he  saw  him  at  a 
distance  coming  towards  him,  he  used  to  speak  in  this 
manner  to  those  who  were  with  him :  "  Let  us  not  smile ;  let 
us  look  sad  :  here  comes  the  censor  and  monitor ;  the  all-wise 
man,  he  who  is  beginning  now  to  be  the  schoolmaster  of  a 
full-grown  man,  and  of  an  emperor,  after  time  itself  has  sepa- 
rated him  from  and  discarded  the  tutors  of  his  earliest 
infancy." 

IV.  When,  therefore,  Flaccus  learnt  that  he  too  was  put 
to  death,  he  utterly  abandoned  all  other  hope  for  the  future, 
and  was  no  longer  able  to  apply  himself  to  public  affairs  as  he 
had  done  before,  being  enervated  and  wholly  broken  down  in 
spirit.  But  when  a  magistrate  begins  to  despair  of  his  power 
of  exerting  authority,  it  follows  inevitably,  that  his  subjects 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  65 

must  quickly  become  disobedient,  especially  those  who  are 
naturally,  at  every  trivial  or  common  occurrence,  inclined  to 
show  insubordination,  and,  among  people  of  such  a  disposition, 
the  Egyptian  nation  is  pre-eminent,  being  constantly  in  tho 
habit  of  exciting  great  seditions  from  very  small  sparks. 

And  being  placed  in  a  situation  of  great  and  perplexing  dif- 
ficulty he  began  to  rage,  and  simultaneously,  with  the  change 
of  his  disposition  for  the  worse,  he  also  altered  everything 
which  had  existed  before,  beginning  with  his  nearest  friends 
and  his  most  habitual  customs ;  for  he  began  to  suspect  and 
to  drive  from  him  those  who  were  well  affected  to  him,  and 
who  were  most  sincerely  his  friends,  and  he  reconciled  himself 
to  those  who  were  originally  his  declared  enemies,  and  he 
used  them  as  advisers  under  all  circumstances ;  but  they,  for 
they  persisted  in  their  ill-will,  being  reconciled  with  him  only 
in  words  and  in  appearance,  but  in  their  actions  and  in  their 
hearts  they  bore  him  incurable  enmity,  and  though  only  pre- 
tendnig  a  genuine  friendship  towards  him,  like  actors  in  a 
theatre,  they  drew  him  over  wholly  to  their  side ;  and  so  the 
governor  became  a  subject,  and  the  subjects  became  the 
governor,  advancing  the  most  unprofitable  opinions,  and  im- 
mediately confirming  and  insisting  upon  them ;  for  they  be- 
came executors  of  all  the  plans  which  they  had  devised, 
ti'eating  him  like  a  mute  person  on  the  stage,  as  one  who  was 
only,  by  way  of  making  up  the  show,  inscribed  with  the  title 
of  authority,  being  themselves  a  lot  of  Dionysiuses,  dema- 
gogues, and  of  Lampos,  a  pack  of  cavillers  and  word-splitters ; 
and  of  Isidoruses,  sowers  of  sedition,  busy-bodies,  devisers  of 
evil,  troublers  of  the  state ;  for  this  is  the  name  which  has,  at 
last,  been  given  to  them. 

All  these  men,  having  devised  a  most  grievous  design 
against  the  Jews,  proceeded  to  put  it  in  execution,  and  coming 
privately  to  Flaccus  said  to  him,  "  All  your  hope  from  tho 
child  of  Tiberius  Nero  has  now  perished,  and  that  which  was 
your  second  best  prospect,  your  companion  Macro,  is  gone  too, 
and  you  have  no  chance  of  favour  with  the  emperor,  therefore 
we  must  find  another  advocate,  by  whom  Caius  may  be  mado 
propitious  to  us,  and  that  advocate  is  the  city  of  Alexandria, 
which  all  the  family  of  Augustus  has  honoured  from  the  very 
beginning,  and  our  present  master  above  all  the  rest ;  and  it 
will  be  a  suflicient  mediator  in  our  behalf,  if  it  can  obtain  ono 

VOL.  IV  F 


66  PHILO  JUDiEDS. 

boon  from  you,  and  you  cannot  confer  a  greater  benefit  upon 
it  than  by  abandoning  and  denouncing  all  the  Jews." 

Now  though  upon  this  he  ought  to  have  rejected  and  driven 
away  the  speakers  as  workers  of  revolution  and  common  ene- 
mies, he  agrees  on  the  contrary  to  what  they  say,  and  at  first 
he  made  his  designs  against  the  Jews  less  evident,  only 
abstaining  from  listening  to  causes  brought  before  his  tribunal 
with  impartiality  and  equity,  and  inclining  more  to  one  side 
than  to  the  other,  and  not  allow^ing  to  both  sides  an  equal 
freedom  of  speech  ;  but  whenever  any  Jew  came  before  him 
he  showed  his  aversion  to  him,  and  departed  from  his  habitual 
affability  in  their  case ;  but  afterwards  he  exhibited  his  hos- 
tihty  to  them  in  a  more  conspicuous  manner. 

V.  Moreover,  some  occurrences  of  the  following  description 
increased  that  folly  and  insolence  of  his  which  was  derived 
from  instruction  rather  than  from  nature.  Caius  Caesar  gave 
Agrippa,  the  grandson  of  Herod  the  king,  the  third  part  of  his 
paternal  inheritance  as  a  sovereignty,  which  Philip  the  tetrarch, 
who  was  his  uncle  on  his  father  s  side,  had  previously  enjoyed. 
And  when  he  was  about  to  set  out  to  take  possession  of  his 
kingdom,  Caius  advised  him  to  avoid  the  voyage  from  Brun- 
dusium  to  Syria,  which  was  a  long  and  troublesome  one,  and 
rather  to  take  the  shorter  one  by  Alexandria,  and  to  wait  for 
the  periodical  winds  ;  for  he  said  that  the  merchant  vessels 
which  set  forth  from  that  harbour  were  fast  sailers,  and  that 
the  pilots  were  most  experienced  men,  who  guided  their  ships 
like  skilful  coachmen  guide  their  horses,  keeping  them  straight 
in  the  proper  course.  And  he  took  his  advice,  looking  upon 
him  both  as  his  master  and  also  as  a  giver  of  good  counsel. 

Accordingly,  going  down  to  Dicaearchia,  and  seeing  some 
Alexandrian  vessels  in  the  harbour,  looking  all  ready  and  fit 
to  put  to  sea,  he  embarked  with  his  followers,  and  had  a  fair 
voyage,  and  so  a  few  days  afterwards  he  arrived  at  his  journey's 
end,  unforeseen  and  unexpected,  having  commanded  the  cap- 
tains of  his  vessels  (for  he  came  in  sight  of  Pharos  about 
twilight  in  the  evening)  to  furl  their  sails,  and  to  keep  a  short 
distance  out  of  sight  in  the  open  sea,  until  it  became  late  in 
the  evening  and  dark,  and  then  at  night  he  entered  the  port, 
that  when  he  disembarked  he  might  find  all  the  citizens  buried  I 
in  sleep,  and  so,  without  any  one  seeing  him,  he  might  arrive 
at  the  house  of  the  man  who  was  to  be  his  entertainer.     With 


I 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  67 

80  much  modesty  then  did  this  man  arrive,  wishing  if  it  were 
possible  to  enter  without  being  perceived  by  any  one  in  the 
city. 

For  he  had  not  come  to  see  Alexandria,  since  he  had  so- 
journed in  it  before,  when  he  was  preparing  to  take  his  voyage 
10  Ilome  to  see  Tiberius,  but  he  desired  at  this  time  to  take 
the  quickest  road,  so  as  to  arrive  at  his  destination  with  the 
smallest  possible  delay.  But  the  men  of  Alexandria  being 
ready  to  burst  with  envy  and  ill-will  (for  the  Egyptian  dispo- 
sition is  by  nature  a  most  jealous  and  envious  one  and  inclined 
to  look  on  the  good  fortune  of  others  as  adversity  to  itself),  and 
being  at  the  same  time  filled  with  an  ancient  and  what  I  may 
in  a  manner  call  an  innate  enmity  towards  the  Jews,  were  in- 
dignant at  any  one's  becoming  a  king  of  the  Jews,  no  less 
than  if  each  individual  among  them  had  been  deprived  of  an 
ancestral  kingdom  of  his  own  inheritance. 

And  then  again  his  friends  and  companions  came  and  stirred 
up  the  miserable  Flaccus,  inviting,  and  exciting,  and  stimu- 
lating him  to  feel  the  same  envy  with  themselves  ;  saying, 
"  The  arrival  of  this  man  to  take  upon  him  his  government  is 
equivalent  to  a  deposition  of  yourself.  He  is  invested  with  a 
greater  dignity  of  honour  and  glory  than  you.  He  attracts 
all  eyes  towards  himself  when  they  see  the  array  of  sentinels 
and  body-guards  around  him  adorned  with  silvered  and  gilded 
arms.  For  ought  he  to  have  come  into  the  presence  of 
another  governor,  when  it  was  in  his  power  to  have  sailed  over 
the  sea,  and  so  to  have  arrived  in  safety  at  his  own  govern- 
ment? For,  indeed,  if  Caius  did  advise  or  rather  command 
him  to  do  so,  he  ought  rather  with  earnest  solicitations  to  have 
deprecated  any  visit  to  this  country,  in  order  that  the  real 
governor  of  it  might  not  be  brought  into  disrepute  and  appear 
to  have  his  authority  lessened  by  being  apparently  disre- 
garded." 

When  he  heard  this  he  was  more  indignant  than  before,  and 
in  public  indeed  he  pretended  to  be  his  companion  and  his 
friend,  because  of  his  fear  of  the  man  who  directed  his  course, 
but  secretly  he  bore  him  much  ill-will,  and  told  every  one  how 
he  hated  him,  and  abused  him  behind  his  back,  and  insulted 
him  indirectly,  since  he  did  not  dare  to  do  so  openly ;  for  he 
encouraged  the  idle  and  lazy  mob  of  the  city  (and  the  mob  of 
Alexandria  is  one  accustomed  to  great  license  of  speech,  and 

F  2 


68  PHILO   JUD.'EUS. 

one  which  delights  above  measure  in  calumny  and  evil-speakf 
ing),  to  abuse  the  king,  either  beginning  to  revile  him  in  his 
own  person,  or  else  exhorting  and  exciting  others  to  do  so  by 
the  agency  of  persons  who  were  accustomed  to  serve  him  in 
business  of  this  kind.  And  they,  having  had  the  cue  given 
them,  spent  all  their  days  reviling  the  king  in  the  public 
schools,  and  stringing  together  all  sorts  of  gibes  to  turn  him 
into  ridicule. 

And  at  times  they  employed  poets  who  compose  farces,  and 
managers  of  puppet  shows,  displaying  their  natural  aptitude 
for  every  kind  of  disgraceful  employment,  though  they  were 
very  slow  at  learning  anything  that  was  creditable,  but  very 
acute,  and  quick,  and  ready  at  learning  anything  of  an 
opposite  nature.  For  why  did  he  not  show  his  indignation, 
why  did  he  not  commit  them  to  prison,  why  did  he  not  chas- 
tise them  for  their  insolent  and  disloyal  evil  speaking?  And 
even  if  he  had  not  been  a  king  but  only  one  of  the  household 
of  Caesar,  ought  he  not  to  have  had  some  privileges  and  espe- 
cial honours?  The  fact  is  that  all  these  circumstances  are  an 
undeniable  evidence  that  Flaccus  was  a  participator  in  all  this 
abuse ;  for  he  who  might  have  punished  it  with  the  most 
extreme  severity,  and  entirely  checked  it,  and  who  yet  took  no 
steps  to  restrain  it,  was  clearly  convicted  of  having  permitted 
and  encouraged  it ;  but  whenever  an  ungoverned  multitud( 
begins  a  course  of  evil  doing  it  never  desists,  but  proceeds 
from  one  wickedness  to  another,  continually  doing  somf 
monstrous  thing. 

VI.  There  was  a  certain  madman  named  Carabbas,  afflicted 
not  with  a  wild,  savage,  and  dangerous  madness  (for  that  comes 
on  in  fits  without  being  expected  either  by  the  patient  or  by 
bystanders),  but  with  an  intermittent  and  more  gentle  kind ;  1 
this  man  spent  all  his  days  and  nights  naked  in  the  roads, 
minding  neither  cold  nor  heat,  the  sport  of  idle  children  and 
wanton  youths  ;  and  they,  driving  the  poor  wretch  as  far  as  th? 
public  gymnasium,  and  setting  him  up  there  on  high  that  he- 
might  be  seen  by  everybody,  flattened  out  a  leaf  of  papyruF 
and  put  it  on  his  head  instead  of  a  diadem,  and  clothed  the 
rest  of  his  body  with  a  common  door  mat  instead  of  a  cloak, 
and  instead  of  a  sceptre  they  put  in  his  hand  a  small  stick  oi' 
the  native  papyrus  which  they  found  lying  by  the  wayside  and 
gav%  to  him ;  and  when,  like  actors  in  theatrical  spectacles,  he 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  69 

had  received  all  the  insignia  of  royal  authorit/,  and  had  been 
dressed  and  adorned  like  a  king,  the  young  men  bearing  sticks 
on  their  shoulders  stood  on  each  side  of  him  instead  of  spear- 
bearers,  in  imitation  of  the  body-guards  of  the  king,  and  then 
others  came  up,  some  as  if  to  salute  him,  and  others  making 
as  though  they  wished  to  plead  their  causes  before  him,  and 
others  pretending  to  wish  to  consult  with  him  about  the  affairs 
of  the  state. 

Then  from  the  multitude  of  those  who  were  standing  around 
there  arose  a  wonderful  shout  of  men  calling  out  Maris ;  and 
this  is  the  name  by  which  it  is  said  that  they  call  the  kings 
among  the  Syrians ;  for  they  knew  that  Agrippa  was  by  birth  a 
Syrian,  and  also  that  he  was  possessed  of  a  great  district  of  Syria 
of  which  he  was  the  sovereign  ;  when  Flaccus  heard,  or  rather 
when  he  saw  this,  he  would  have  done  right  if  he  had  appre- 
hended the  maniac  and  put  him  in  prison,  that  he  might  not 
give  to  those  who  reviled  him  any  opportunity  or  excuse  for 
insulting  their  superiors,  and  if  he  had  chastised  those  who 
dressed  him  up  for  having  dared  both  openly  and  disguisedly, 
both  with  words  and  actions,  to  insult  a  king  and  a  friend  of 
Caesar,  and  one  who  had  been  honoured  by  the  Ptoman  senate 
with  imperial  authority ;  but  he  not  only  did  not  punish  them, 
but  he  did  not  think  fit  even  to  check  them,  but  gave  complete 
license  and  impunity  to  all  those  who  designed  ill,  and  who 
were  disposed  to  show  their  enmity  and  spite  to  the  king, 
pretending  not  to  see  what  he  did  see,  and  not  to  hear  what 
he  did  hear. 

And  when  the  multitude  perceived  this,  I  do  not  mean  the 
ordinary  and  Avell-regulated  population  of  the  city,  but  the  mob 
which,  out  of  its  restlessness  and  love  of  an  unquiet  and  disor- 
derly life,  was  always  filling  every  place  with  tumult  and  con- 
fusion, and  who,  because  of  their  habitual  idleness  and  laziness, 
were  full  of  treachery  and  revolutionary  plans,  they,  flocking 
to  the  theatre  the  first  thing  in  the  morning,  having  already 
jHU'chased  Flaccus  for  a  miserable  price,  which  he  with  his 
mad  desire  for  glory  and  with  his  slavish  disposition,  conde- 
scended to  take  to  the  injury  not  only  of  himself,  but  also  of 
tlie  safety  of  the  commonwealth,  all  cried  out,  as  if  at  a  signal 
I  given,  to  erect  images  in  the  synagogues,  proposing  a  most 
\  novel  and  unprecedented  violation  of  the  law. 

And  though  they  knew  this  (for  they  are  very  shrewd  in 


70  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

their  wickedness),  they  adopted  a  deep  design,  putting  forth 
the  name  of  Caesar  as  a  screen,  to  whom  it  would  be  impiety 
to  attribute  the  deeds  of  the  guilty ;  what  then  did  the  gover- 
nor of  the  country  do  ?  Knowing  that  the  city  had  two  classes 
of  inhabitants,  our  own  nation  and  the  people  of  the  country, 
and  that  the  whole  of  Egypt  was  inhabited  in  the  same  man- 
ner, and  that  Jews  who  inhabited  Alexandria  and  the  rest  of 
the  country  from  the  Catabathmos  on  the  side  of  Libya  to 
the  boundaries  of  Ethiopia  were  not  less  than  a  million  of 
men ;  and  that  the  attempts  which  were  being  made  were 
directed  against  the  whole  nation,  and  that  it  was  a  most 
mischievous  thing  to  distress  the  ancient  hereditary  customs 
of  the  land  ;  he,  disregarding  all  these  considerations,  permitted 
the  mob  to  proceed  with  the  erection  of  the  statues,  though 
he  might  have  given  them  a  vast  number  of  admonitory  pre- 
cepts instead  of  any  such  permission,  either  commanding  them 
as  their  governor,  or  advising  them  as  their  friend. 

VII.  But  he,  for  he  was  eagerly  co-operating  in  all  that  was 
being  done  amiss,  thought  fit  to  use  his  superior  power  to  face 
the  seditious  tumult  with  fresh  additions  of  evil,  and  as  far  as 
it  depended  on  him,  one  may  almost  say  that  he  filled  the 
whole  of  the  inhabited  world  with  civil  wars ;  for  it  was  suffi- 
ciently evident  that  the  report  about  the  destruction  of  the 
synagogues,  which  took  its  rise  in  Alexandria  would  be  imme- 
diately spread  over  all  the  districts  of  Egypt,  and  would 
extend  from  that  country  to  the  east  and  to  the  oriental 
nations,  and  from  the  borders  of  the  land  in  the  other  direc- 
tion, and  from  the  Mareotic;  district  which  is  the  frontier  of 
Libya,  towards  the  setting  of  the  sun  and  the  western  nations. 
For  no  one  country  can  contain  the  whole  Jewish  nation,  by 
reason  of  its  populousness ;  on  which  account  they  frequent  all 
the  most  prosperous  and  fertile  countries  of  Europe  and  Asia, 
wi]ether  islands  or  continents,  looking  indeed  upon  the  holy 
city  as  their  metropolis  in  which  is  erected  the  sacred  temple 
of  the  most  high  God,  but  accounting  those  regions  which 
have  been  occupied  by  their  fathers,  and  grandfathers,  and 
great  grandfathers,  and  still  more  remote  ancestors,  in  which 
they  have  been  born  and  brought  up,  as  their  country ;  and 
there  are  even  some  regions  to  which  they  came  the  very 
moment  that  they  were  originally  settled,  sending  a  colony  of 
their  people  to  do  a  pleasure  to  the  founders  of  the  colony. 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  71 

And  there  was  reason  to  fear  lest  all  the  populace  in  eveiy 
country,  taking  what  was  done  in  Egypt  as  a  model  and  as  an 
excuse,  might  insult  those  Jews  who  were  their  fellow  citizens, 
by  introducing  new  regulations  with  respect  to  their  synagogues 
and  their  national  customs  ;  but  the  Jews,  for  they  were  not 
inclined  to  remain  quiet  under  everything,  although  naturally 
entirely  disposed  towards  peace,  not  only  because  contests  for 
natural  customs  do  among  all  men  appear  more  important  than 
those  which  are  only  for  the  sake  of  life,  but  also  because  they 
alone  of  all  the  people  under  the  sun,  if  they  were  deprived  of 
their  houses  of  prayer,  would  at  the  same  time  be  deprived  of 
all  means  of  showing  their  piety  towards   their  benefactors, 
which  they  would  have  looked  upon  as  worse  than  ten  thousand 
deaths,  inasmuch  as  if  their  synagogues  were  destroyed  they 
would  no  longer  have  any  sacred  places  in  which  they  could 
declare  their  gratitude,  might  have  reasonably  said  to  those 
who  opposed  them :  You,  without  being  aware  of  it,  are  taking 
away  honour  from  your  lords  instead  of  conferring  any  on  them. 
Our  houses  of  prayer  are  manifestly  incitements  to  all  the  Jews 
in  every  part  of  the  habitable  world  to  display  their  pi<3ty  and 
loyalty  towards  the  house  of  Augustus  ;  and  if  they  are  destroyed 
from  among  us,  what  other  place,  or  what  other  manner  of  show- 
ing that  honour,  will  be  left  to  us  ?    For  if  we  were  to  neglect 
the  opportunity  of  adhering  to  our  national  customs  when  it 
is  afforded  to  us,  we  should  deserve  to  meet  with  the  severest 
punishment,  as  not  giving  any  proper  or  adequate  return  for 
the  benefits  which  we  have  received ;   but  if,  while  it  is  in  our 
power  to  do  so,  we,  in  conformity  with  our  own  laws  which 
Augustus  himself  is  in  the  habit  of  confirming,  obey  in  every- 
thing, then  I  do  not  see  what  great,  or  even  what  small  offence 
can  be  laid  to  our  charge  ;  unless  any  one  were  to  impute  to 
us  that  we  do  not  transgress  the  laws  of  deliberate  purpose, 
and  that  we  do  not  intentionally  take  care  to  depart  from  our 
national  customs,  which  practices,  even  if  they  at  firet  attack 
others,  do  often  in  the  end  visit  those  who  are  guilty  of  them. 

l^ut  Flaccus,  saying  nothing  that  he  ought  to  have  said,  and 
everything  which  he  ought  not  to  have  said,  has  sinned  against 
us  in  this  manner ;  but  those  men  whom  he  has  studied  to 
gratify,  what  has  been  their  design  ?  Have  they  had  the  feel- 
ings of  men  wishing  to  do  honour  to  Caesar '?  Was  there  then 
a  scarcity  of  temples  in  the  city,  the  greatest  and  most  import- 


7'2  pniLo  JUD^us. 

ant  parts  of  ^vllicll  are  all  allotted  to  one  or  other  of  the  gods, 
in  which  they  might  have  erected  any  statues  they  pleased  ? 
We  have  been  describing  the  evidence  of  hostile  and  unfriendly 
men,  who  seek  to  injure  us  with  such  artifice,  that  even  when 
injuring  us  they  may  not  appear  to  have  been  acting  iniqui- 
tously,  and  yet  that  we  who  are  injured  by  them  cannot  resist 
with  safety  to  ourselves ;  for,  my  good  men,  it  does  not  con- 
tribute to  the  honour  of  the  emperor  to  abrogate  the  laws,  to 
disturb  the  national  customs  of  a  people,  to  insult  those  who 
live  in  the  same  country,  and  to  teach  those  who  dwell  in  other 
cities  to  disregard  unanimity  and  tranquillity. 

VIII.  Since,  therefore,  the  attempt  which  was  being  made 
to  violate  the  law  appeared  to  him  to  be  prospering,  while  he 
was  destroying  the  synagogues,  and  not  leaving  even  their 
name,  he  proceeded  onwards  to  another  exploit,  namely,  the 
utter  destruction  of  our  constitution,  that  when  all  those  things 
to  which  alone  our  life  was  anchored  were  cut  away,  namely, 
our  national  customs  and  our  lawful  political  rights  and  social 
privileges,  we  might  be  exposed  to  the  very  extremity  of 
calamity,  without  having  any  stay  left  to  which  we  could  cling 
for  safety,  for  a  few  days  afterwards  he  issued  a  notice  in  which 
he  callediis  all  foreigners  and  aliens,  without  giving  us  an  oppor- 
tunity of  being  heard  in  our  own  defence,  but  condemning  us 
without  a  trial ;  and  what  command  can  be  more  full  of  tyranny 
than  this  ? 

He  himself  being  everything — accuser,  enemy,  witness, 
judge,  and  executioner,  added  then  to  the  two  former  appel- 
lations a  third  also,  allowing  any  one  who  was  inclined  to 
proceed  to  exterminate  the  Jews  as  prisoners  of  war.  So  when 
the  people  had  received  this  license,  what  did  they  do  ?  There 
are  five  districts  in  the  city,  named  after  the  first  five  letters 
of  the  written  alphabet,  of  these  two  are  called  the  quarters  of 
the  Jews,  because  the  chief  portion  of  the  Jews  lives  in  them. 
There  are  also  a  few  scattered  Jews,  but  only  a  very  few,  living 
in  some  of  the  other  districts.  What  then  did  they  do  ?  They 
drove  the  Jews  entirely  out  of  four  quarters,  and  crammed 
them  all  into  a  very  small  portion  of  one ;  and  by  reason  of 
their  numbers  they  were  dispersed  over  the  sea-shore,  and 
desert  places,  and  among  the  tombs,  being  deprived  of  all  their 
property ;  while  the  populace,  overrunning  their  desolate 
houses,  turned  to  plunder,  and  divided  the  booty  among  them- 


AGAINST  FLACCUS.  73 

selves  as  if  they  had  obtained  it  in  war.  And  as  no  ono 
hindered  them,  they  broke  open  even  the  workshops  of  the 
Jews,  which  were  all  shut  up  because  of  their  mourning  for 
Drusilla,*  and  carried  off  all  that  they  found  there,  and  bore 
it  openly  through  the  middle  of  the  market-place  as  if  they 
had  only  been  making  use  of  their  own  property. 

And  the  cessation  of  business  to  which  they  were  compelled 
to  submit  was  even  a  worse  evil  than  the  plunder  to  which 
they  were  exposed,  as  the  consequence  was  that  those  who  had 
lent  money  lost  what  they  had  lent,  and  as  no  one  was  per- 
mitted, neither  farmer,  nor  captain  of  a  ship,  nor  merchant, 
nor  artisan,  to  employ  himself  in  his  usual  manner,  so  that 
poverty  was  brought  on  them  from  two  sides  at  once,  both  from 
rapine,  as  when  license  was  thus  given  to  plunder  them  they 
were  strfpped  of  everything  in  one  day,  and  also  from  the 
circumstance  of  their  no  longer  being  able  to  earn  money  by 
their  customary  occupations. 

.IX.  And  though  these  were  evils  sufficiently  intolerable, 
yet  nevertheless  they  appear  actually  trifling  when  compared 
with  those  which  were  subsequently  inflicted  on  them,  for 
poverty  indeed  is  a  bitter  evil,  especially  when  it  is  caused  by 
the  machinations  of  one's  enemies,  still  it  is  less  than  insult 
and  personal  ill  treatment  even  of  the  slightest  character.  But 
now  the  evils  which  were  heaped  upon  our  people  were  so 
excessive  and  inordinate,  that  if  a  person  were  desirous  to  use 
appropriate  language,  he  would  never  call  them  insults  or 
assaults,  but,  as  it  appears  to  me,  he  would  actually  be  wholly 
at  a  loss  for  suitable  expressions,  on  account  of  the  enormity  of 
the  cruelties  now  newly  invented  against  them,  so  that  if  the 
treatment  which  men  experience  from  enemies  who  have  sub- 
dued them  in  war,  however  implacable  they  may  be  by  nature, 
were  to  be  compared  with  that  to  which  the  Jews  were  sub- 
jected, it  would  appear  most  merciful.  Enemies,  indeed, 
plunder  their  conquered  foes  of  their  money,  and  lead  away 
multitudes  in  captivity,  having  incurred  the  same  risk  of  losing 
all  that  they  had  if  they  themselves  had  been  defeated.  Not  but 
that  iu  all  such  cases  there  are  very  many  persons  for  whom 
their  relations  and  friends  put  down  a  ransom,  and  who  are 
thus  emancipated  from  captivity,  inasmuch  as  though  their 

•  She  waa  tlie  sister  of  the  emperor,  and  at  her  death  her  brotiier 
ordered  that  diviue  honours  should  be  i^aid  to  her. 


74  PHILO   JUD/EQS. 

enemies  could  not  be  worked  upon  by  compassion,  they  could 
by  love  of  money. 

But  what  is  the  use  of  going  on  in  this  way,  some  one  will 
say,  for  as  long  as  men  escape  from  danger  it  signifies  but  little 
in  what  way  their  preservation  is  brought  to  pass  ?  Moreover, 
it  h;i,s  often  happened  that  enemies  have  granted  to  those  who 
have  fallen  in  battle  the  honour  of  funeral  rites,  those  who 
were  gentle  and  humane  burying  them  at  their  own  expense, 
and  those  who  have  carried  on  their  enmity  even  against  the 
dead  giving  up  their  bodies  to  their  friends  under  a  truce,  in 
order  that  they  might  not  be  deprived  of  the  last  honour  of  all, 
the  customary  ceremonies  of  sepulture. 

This,  then,  is  the  conduct  of  enemies  in  time  of  war ;  let  us 
now  see  what  was  done  by  those  who  a  little  while  before  had 
been  friends  in  time  of  peace. 

For  after  plundering  them  of  everything,  and  driving  them 
from  their  homes,  and  expelling  them  by  main  force  from  most 
of  the  quarters  of  the  city,  our  people,  as  if  they  were  block- 
aded and  hemmed  in  by  a  circle  of  besieging  enemies,  being 
oppressed  by  a  terrible  scarcity  and  want  of  necessary  things, 
and  seeing  their  wives  and  their  children  dying  before  their  eyes 
by  an  unnatural  famine  (for  every  other  place  was  full  of  pros- 
perity and  abundance,  as  the  river  had  irrigated  the  corn  lands 
plentifully  with  its  inundations,  and  as  all  the  champaign 
country,  which  is  devoted  to  the  purposes  of  bearing  wheat, 
was  this  year  supplying  a  most  abundant  over-crop  of  corn  with 
very  unusual  fertility),  being  no  longer  able  to  support  their 
want,  some,  though  they  had  never  been  used  to  do  so  before, 
came  to  the  houses  of  their  friends  and  relations  to  beg  them 
to  contribute  such  food  as  was  absolutely  necessary  as  a 
charity ;  others,  who  from  their  high  and  free-born  spirit  could 
not  endure  the  condition  of  beggars,  as  being  a  slavish  state 
unbecoming  the  dignity  of  a  freeman,  came  down  into  the 
market  with  no  other  object  than,  miserable  men  that  they 
were,  to  buy  food  for  their  families  and  for  themselves. 

And  then,  being  immediately  seized  by  those  who  had  excited 
the  seditious  multitude  against  them,  they  were  treacherously 
put  to  death,  and  then  were  dragged  along  and  trampled  under 
foot  by  the  whole  city,  and  completely  destroyed,  without  the 
least  portion  of  them  being  left  which  could  possibly  receive 
burial ;  and  in  this  way  their  enemies,  who  in  their  savage 


AGAlNST  FLACCUS.  75 

madness  had  become  transformed  into  the  nature  of  wild  beasts, 
slew  them  and  thousands  of  others  with  all  kinds  of  agony  and 
tortures,  and  'newly  invented  cruelties,  for  wherever  they  met 
with  or  caught  sight  of  a  Jew,  they  stoned  him,  or  beat  him 
with  sticks,  not  at  once  delivering  their  blows  upon  mortal 
parts,  lest  they  should  die  speedily,  and  so  speedily  escape 
from  the  sufferings  which  it  was  their  design  to  inflict  upon 
them. 

Some  persons  even,  going  still  greater  and  greater  lengths 
in  the  iniquity  and  license  of  their  barbarity,  disdained  all 
blunter  weapons,  and  took  up  the  most  efficacious  arms  of  all, 
fire  and  iron,  and  slew  many  with  the  sword,  and  destroyed 
not  a  few  with  flames.  And  the  most  merciless  of  all  their 
persecutors  in  some  instances  burnt  whole  families,  husbands 
with  their  wives,  and  infant  children  with  their  parents,  in  the 
middle  of  the  city,  sparing  neither  age  nor  youth,  nor  the 
innocent  helplessness  of  infants.  And  when  they  had  a 
scarcity  of  fuel,  they  collected  faggots  of  green  wood,  and  slew 
them  by  the  smoke  rather  than  by  fire,  contriving  a  still  more 
miserable  and  protracted  death  for  those  unhappy  people,  so 
that  their  bodies  lay  about  promiscuously  in  every  direction 
half  burnt,  a  grievous  and  most  miserable  sight. 

And  if  some  of  those  who  were  employed  in  the  collection 
of  sticks  were  too  slow,  they  took  their  own  furniture,  of 
which  they  had  plundered  them,  to  burn  their  persons,  robbing 
them  of  their  most  costly  articles,  and  burning  with  them 
things  of  the  greatest  use  and  value,  which  they  used  as  fuel 
instead  of  ordinary  timber.  Many  men  too,  who  w^ere  alive, 
they  bound  by  one  foot,  fastening  them  round  the  ankle,  and 
thus  they  dragged  them  along  and  bruised  them,  leaping  on 
them,  designing  to  inflict  the  most  barbarous  of  deaths  upon 
them,  and  then  when  they  were  dead  they  raged  no  less  against 
them  with  interminable  hostility,  and  inflicted  still  heavier 
insults  on  their  persons,  dragging  them,  I  had  almost  said, 
through  all  the  alleys  and  lanes  of  the  city,  until  the  corpse, 
being  lacerated  in  all  its  skin,  and  flesh,  and  muscles  from  the 
inequality  and  roughness  of  the  ground,  all  the  previously 
united  portions  of  his  composition  being  torn  asunder  and 
separated  from  one  another,  was  actually  torn  to  pieces. 

And  those  who  did  these  things,  mimicked  the  sufferers, 
like  people  employed  in  the  representation  of  theatrical  farces ; 


70  PHILO  JUD.?:US. 

but  the  relations  and  friends  of  those  who  were  the  real 
victims,  merely  because  they  sympathized  with  the  misery  of 
their  relations,  were  led  away  to  prison,  were  scourged,  were 
tortured,  and  after  all  the  ill  treatment  which  their  living 
bodies  could  endure,  found  the  cross  the  end  of  all,  and  the 
punishment  from  which  they  could  not  escape. 

X.  But  after  Flaccus  had  broken  through  every  right,  and 
trampled  upon  every  principle  of  justice,  and  had  left  no 
portion  of  the  Jews  free  from  the  extreme  severity  of  his 
designing  malice,  in  the  boundlessness  of  his  wickedness  he 
contrived  a  monstrous  and  unprecedented  attack  upon  them, 
being  ever  an  inventor  of  new  acts  of  iniquity,  for  he  arrested 
•  thirty-eight  members  of  our  council  of  elders,  which  our 
saviour  and  benefactor,  Augustus,  elected  to  manage  the 
affairs  of  the  Jewish  nation  after  the  death  of  the  king  of  our- 
own  nation,  having  sent  written  commands  to  that  effect  to 
Manius  Maximus  when  he  was  about  to  take  upon  himself  for 
the  second  time  the  government  of  Egypt  and  of  the  country, 
he  arrested  them,  I  say,  in  their  own  houses,  and  commanded 
them  to  be  thrown  into  prison,  and  arranged  a  splendid  pro- 
cession to  send  througli  the  middle  of  the  market-place  a  body 
of  old  men  prisoners,  with  their  hands  bound,  some  with  thongs 
and  others  with  iron  chains,  whom  he  led  in  this  plight  into 
the  theatre,  a  most  miserable  spectacle,  and  one  wholly 
unsuited  to  the  times.  And  then  he  commanded  them  all  to 
stand  in  front  of  their  enemies,  who  were  sitting  down,  to 
make  their  disgrace  the  more  conspicuous,  and  ordered  them 
all  to  be  stripped  of  their  clothes  and  scourged  with  stripes,  in 
a  way  that  only  the  most  wicked  of  malefactors  are  usually 
treated,  and  they  were  flogged  with  such  severity  that  some  of 
them  the  moment  they  were  carried  out  died  of  their  wounds, 
^yhile  others  were  rendered  so  ill  for  a  long  time  that  their 
recovery  was  despaired  of. 

And  the  enormity  of  this  cruelty  is  proved  by  many  other 
circumstances,  and  it  will  be  further  proved  most  evidently 
and  undeniably  by  the  circumstance  which  I  am  about  to 
mention.  Three  of  the  members  of  this  council  of  elders, 
Euodius,  and  Trypho,  and  Audro,  had  been  stripped  of  all 
their  property,  being  plundered  of  everything  that  was  in  their 
houses  at  one  onset,  and  he  was  well  aware  that  they  had  been 
exposed  to  this  treatment,  for  it  had  been  related  to  him  when 


AGAINST  FLACOUS.  77 

he  had  in  the  first  instance  sent  for  our  rulers,  under  pretence 
of  wishing  to  promote  a  reconciliation  between  them  and  the 
rest  of  the  city ;  but  nevertheless,  though  he  well  knew  that 
they  had  been  deprived  of  all  their  property,  he  scourged  them 
in  the  very  sight  of  those  who  had  plundered  them,  that  thus 
they  might  endure  the  twofold  misery  of  poverty  and  personal 
ill  treatment,  and  that  their  persecutors  might  reap  the  double 
pleasure  of  enjoying  riches  which  did  in  no  respect  belong  to 
them,  and  also  of  feasting  their  eyes  to  satiety  on  the  disgrace 
of  those  whom  they  had  plundered. 

Now,  though  I  desire  to  mention  a  circumstance  which  took 
place  at  that  time,  I  am  in  doubt  whether  to  do  so  or  not,  lest 
if  it  should  be  looked  upon  as  unimportant,  it  may  appear  to 
take  off  from  the  enormity  of  these  great  iniquities  ;  but  even 
if  it  is  unimportant  in  itself,  it  is  nevertheless  an  indication 
of  no  trifling  wickedness  of  disposition.  There  are  different 
kinds  of  scourges  used  in  the  city,  distinguished  with  reference 
to  the  deserts  or  crimes  of  those  who  are  about  to  be  scourged. 
Accordingly,  it  is  usual  for  the  Egyptians  of  the  country  them- 
selves to  be  scourged  with  a  different  kind  of  scourge,  and  by 
a  different  class  of  executioners,  but  for  the  Alexandrians  in 
the  city  to  be  scourged  with  rods  by  the  Alexandrian  lictors, 
and  this  custom  had  been  preserved,  in  the  case  also  of  our 
own  people,  by  all  the  predecessors  of  Flaccus,  and  by  Flaccus 
himself  in  the  earlier  periods  of  his  government ;  for  it  is  pos- 
sible, it  really  is  possible,  even  in  ignominy,  to  find  some 
slight  circumstance  of  honour,  and  even  in  ill  treatment  to 
find  something  which  is,  to  some  extent,  a  relaxation,  when 
any  one  allows  the  nature  of  things  to  be  examined  into  by 
itself,  and  to  be  confined  to  its  own  indispensable  require- 
ments, without  adding  from  his  own  ingenuity  any  additional 
cruelty  or  treachery,  to  separate  and  take  from  it  all  that  is 
mingled  with  it  of  a  milder  character. 

How  then  can  it  be  looked  upon  as  anything  but  most 
infamous,  that  when  Alexandrian  Jews,  of  the  lowest  rank, 
had  always  been  previously  beaten  with  the  rods,  suited  to 
freemen  and  citizens,  if  ever  they  were  convicted  of  having 
done  anything  worthy  of  stripes,  yet  now  the  very  rulers  of  the 
nation,  the  council  of  the  elders,  who  derived  their  very  titles 
from  the  honour  in  which  they  were  held  and  the  offices  which 
they  filled,  should,  in  this  respect,  be  treated  with  more  iudig- 


78  PHILO   JUD^US. 

nity  than  their  own  servants,  like  the  lowest  of  the  Egyptian 
rustics,  even  when  found  guilty  of  the  very  worst  of  crimes  ? 
I  omit  to  mention,  that  even  if  they  had  committed  the  most 
countless  iniquities,  nevertheless  the  governor  ought,  out  of 
respect  for  the  season,  to  have  delayed  their  punishment ;  for 
with  all  rulers,  who  govern  any  state  on  constitutional  prin- 
ciples, and  who  do  not  seek  to  acquire  a  character  for  audacity, 
but  who  do  really  honour  their  benefactors,  it  is  the  custom 
to  punish  no  one,  ev^en  of  those  who  have  been  lawfully  con- 
demned, until  the  famous  festival  and  assembly,  in  honour  of 
the  birth-day  of  the  illustrious  emperor,  has  passed.    But  he 
committed  this  violation  of  the  laws  at  the  very  season  of  this 
festival,  and  punished  men  who  had  done  no  wrong ;  though 
certainly,  if  he  ever  determined  to  punish  them,  he  ought  to 
have  done  so  at  a  subsequent  time ;  but  he  hastened,  and 
would  admit  of  no  delay,  by  reason  of  his  eagerness  to  please 
the  multitude  who  w-as  opposed  to  them,  thinking  that  in  this 
way  he  should  be  able,  more  easily,  to  gain  them  over  to  the 
objects  which  he  had  in  view. 

I  have  known  instances  before  now  of  men  who  bad  been 
crucified  when  this  festival  and  holiday  was  at  hand,  being 
taken  down  and  given  up  to  their  relations,  in  order  to  receive 
the  honours  of  sepulture,  and  to  enjoy  such  observances  as  are 
due  to  the  dead ;  for  it  used  to  be  considered,  that  even  the 
dead  ought  to  derive  some  enjoyment  from  the  natal  festival 
of  a  good  emperor,  and  also  that  the  sacred  character  of  the 
festival  ought  to  be  regarded.     But  this  man  did  not  order 
men  who  had  already  perished  on  crosses  to  be  taken  down, 
but  he  commanded  living  men  to  be  crucified,  men  to  whom 
the  very  time  itself  gave,  if  not  entire  forgiveness,  still,  at  all 
events,  a  brief  and  temporary  respite  from  punishment ;  and 
he  did  this  after  they  had  been  beaten  by  scourgings  in  the 
middle  of  the  theatre  ;  and  after  he  had  tortured  them  with 
fire   and   sword ;  and   the    spectacle   of  their   sufferings  was 
divided  ;  for  the  first  part  of  the  exhibition  lasted  from  the 
morning  to  the  third  or  fourth  hour,  in  which  the  Jews  were 
scourged,  were  hung  up,  were  tortured  on  the  wheel,  were  con- 
demned, and  were  dragged  to  execution  through  the  middle 
of  the  orchestra ;  and  after  this  beautiful  exhibition  came  the 
dancers,  and  the  buffoons,  and  the  flute-players,  and  all  the 
other  diversions  of  the  theatrical  contests. 


J 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  79 

XL  And  why  do  I  dwell  on  these  things?  for  a  second 
mode  of  barbarity  was  afterwards  devised  against  us,  because 
the  governor  wished  to  excite  the  whole  multitude  of  the  army 
against  us,  in  accordance  with  the  contrivance  of  some  foreign 
informer.  Now  the  information  which  was  laid  against  the 
nation  was,  that  the  Jews  had  entire  suits  of  armour  in  their 
houses ;  therefore,  having  sent  for  a  centurion,  in  whom  he 
placed  the  greatest  confidence,  by  name  Castor,  he  ordered 
him  to  take  with  him  the  boldest  soldier  of  his  own  band,  to 
go  with  haste,  and,  without  saying  a  word  to  any  one,  to  enter 
the  houses  of  the  Jews,  and  to  search  them,  and  see  whether 
there  was  any  store  of  arms  laid  up  in  them ;  and  he  ran  with 
great  speed  to  perform  the  commands  which  had  been  given 
him.  But  they,  having  no  suspicion  of  his  intentions,  stood 
at  first  speechless  with  astonishment,  their  wives  and  their 
children  clinging  to  them,  and  shedding  abundance  of  tears, 
because  of  their  fear  of  being  carried  into  captivity,  for  they 
were  in  continual  expectation  of  that,  looking  upon  it  as  all 
that  was  wanting  to  complete  their  total  misery,  liut  when 
they  heard  from  some  of  those  who  were  sent  to  make  the 
search  an  inquiry  as  to  where  they  had  laid  up  their  arms, 
they  breathed  awhile,  and  opening  all  their  secret  recesses 
displayed  everything  which  they  had,  being  partly  delighted 
and  partly  grieving ;  delighted  at  the  opportunity  of  repelling 
the  false  accusation  which  was  thus  brought  against  them  by 
its  own  character,  but  indignant,  in  the  first  place,  because 
calumnies  of  such  a  nature,  when  concocted  and  urged  against 
them  by  their  enemies,  were  believed  beforehand ;  and, 
secondly,  because  their  wives,  who  were  shut  up,  and  who  did 
not  actually  come  forth  out  of  their  inner  chambers^  and  their 
virgins,  who  were  kept  in  the  strictest  privacy,  shunning  the 
eyes  of  men,  even  of  those  who  were  their  nearest  relations, 
out  of  modesty,  were  now  alarmed  by  being  displayed  to  the 
public  gaze,  not  only  of  persons  who  were  no  relations  to  them, 
but  even  of  common  soldiers. 

Nevertheless,  though  a  most  rigorous  examination  took  place, 
how  great  a  quantity  of  defensive  and  offensive  armour  do  you 
think  was  found  ?  Helmets,  and  breast-plates,  and  shields, 
and  daggers,  and  javelins,  and  weapons  of  every  description, 
were  brought  out  and  piled  up  in  heaps  ;  and  also  how  great  a 
variety  of  missile  weapons,  javelins,  slings,  bows,  and  dai'ts  ? 


80  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

Absolutely  not  a  single  thing  of  the  kind ;  scarcely  even  knives 
sufficient  for  the  daily  use  of  the  cooks  to  prepare  and  dress  the 
food.  From  which  circumstance,  the  simplicity  of  their  daily 
manner  of  life  was  plainly  seen :  as  they  made  no  pretence  to 
magnificence  or  delicate  luxury ;  the  nature  of  which  things  is 
to  engender  satiety,  and  satiety  is  apt  to  engender  insolence, 
which  is  the  beginning  of  all  evils. 

And  indeed  it  was  not  a  long  time  before  that,  that  the  arms 
had  been  taken  away  from  the  Egyptians  throughout  the  whole 
country  by  a  man  of  the  name  of  Bassus,  to  whom  Flaccus  had 
committed  this  employment.  But  at  that  time  one  might 
have  beheld  a  great  fleet  of  ships  sailing  down  and  anchor- 
ing in  the  harbours  afforded  by  the  mouths  of  the  river, 
full  of  arms  of  every  possible  description,  and  numerous  beasts 
of  burden  loaded  with  bags  made  of  skins  sewn  together  and 
hanging  like  panniers  on  each  side  so  as  to  balance  better,  and 
also  almost  all  the  waggons  belonging  to  the  camp  filled  with 
weapons  of  every  sort,  whicn  were  brought  in  rows  so  as  to  be 
all  seen  at  once,  and  arranged  together  in  order.  And  the 
distance  between  the  harbour  and  the  armoury  in  the  king's 
palace  in  which  the  arms  were  commanded  to  be  deposited  was 
about  ten  stadia ;  it  was  then  very  proper  to  investigate  the 
houses  of  the  men  who  had  amassed  such  quantities  of  arms ; 
for  as  they  had  often  actually  revolted,  they  were  naturally 
liable  to  be  suspected  of  designing  revolutionary  measures,  and 
it  was  quite  fitting  that,  in  imitation  of  the  sacred  games,  those 
who  had  superintended  the  collection  of  the  arms  should  keep 
a  new  triennial  festival  in  Egypt,  in  order  that  they  might  not 
again  be  collected  without  any  one  being  aware  of  it,  or  else 
that  at  all*  events  only  a  few  might  be  collected  instead  of  a 
great  number,  froni  the  people  not  having  time  enough  to 
assemble  any  great  number. 

But  why  were  we  to  be  exposed  to  any  treatment  of  the  sort  ? 
For  when  were  we  ever  suspected  of  any  tendency  to  revolt? 
And  when  did  we  bear  any  other  than  a  most  peaceful  charac- 
ter among  all  men  ?  And  the  habits  in  which  we  daily  and 
habitually  indulge,  are  they  not  irreproachable,  tending  to  the 
lawful  tranquillity  and  stability  of  the  state  ?  In  fact,  if  the 
Jews  had  had  arms  in  their  houses,  would  they  have  submitted 
to  be  stripped  of  above  four  hundred  dwellings,  out  of  which 
they  were  turned  and  forcibly  expelled  by  those  who  plundered 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  81 

them  of  all  their  properties  ?  Why  then  was  not  this  search 
made  in  the  houses  of  those  people  who  had  arms,  if  not  of 
their  own  private  property,  at  all  events  such  as  they  had  car- 
ried off  from  others  ? 

The  truth  is,  as  I  have  said  already,  the  whole  business  was 
a  deliberate  contrivance  designed  by  the  cruelty  of  Flaccus  and 
of  the  multitude,  in  which  even  women  were  included ;  for 
they  were  dragged  away  as  captives,  not  only  in  the  market- 
place, but  even  in  the  middle  of  the  theatre,  and  dragged  upon 
the  stage  on  any  false  accusation  that  might  be  brought  against 
them  with  the  most  painful  and  intolerable  insults ;  and  then, 
when  it  was  found  that  they  were  of  another  race,  they  were 
dismissed ;  for  they  apprehended  many  women  as  Jewesses 
who  were  not  so,  from  want  of  making  any  careful  or  accurate 
investigation.  And  if  they  appeared  to  belong  to  our  nation, 
then  those  who,  instead  of  spectators,  became  tyrants  and  mas- 
ters, laid  cruel  commands  on  them,  bringing  them  swine's  flesh, 
and  enjoining  them  to  eat  it  Accordingly,  all  who  were 
wrought  on  by  fear  of  punishment  to  eat  it  were  released 
without  suffering  any  ill  treatment ;  but  those  who  were  more 
obstinate  were  given  up  to  the  tormentors  to  suffer  intole- 
rable tortures,  which  is  the  clearest  of  all  possible  proofs  that 
they  had  committed  no  offence  whatever  beyond  what  I  have 
mentioned. 

XII.  But  it  was  not  out  of  his  own  head  alone,  but  also 
because  of  the  commands  and  in  consequence  of  the  situation 
of  the  emperor  that  he  sought  and  devised  means  to  injure  and 
oppress  us ;  for  after  we  had  decreed  by  our  votes  and  carried 
out  by  our  actions  all  the  honours  to  the  emperor  Caius,  which 
were  either  within  our  power  or  allowable  by  our  laws,  we 
brought  the  decree  to  him,  entreating  him  that,  as  it  was  not 
permitted  to  us  to  send  an  embassy  ourselves  to  bear  it  to  the 
emperor,  he  would  vouchsafe  to  forward  it  himself.  And,  after 
he  had  read  all  the  articles  contained  in  the  decree,  and  having 
often  nodded  his  head  in  token  of  his  approbation  of  them, 
smiling,  and  being  very  much  delighted,  or  else  pretending  to 
be  pleased,  he  said :  "  I  approve  of  you  very  greatly  in  all 
things,  for  your  piety  and  loj'alty,  and  I  will  forward  it  as  you 
request,  or  else  I  myself  will  act  the  part  of  your  ambassador, 
that  Caius  may  be  aware  of  your  gratitude.  And  I  myself 
will  bear  witness  in  your  favour  to  all  that  I  know  of  the 

VOL.  IV  G 


82  PfllLO  JUDiEUS. 

orderly  disposition  and  obedient  character  of  your  nation,  with- 
out exaggerating  anything  ;  for  truth  is  the  most  sufficient  of 
all  panegyrics." 

At  these  promises  we  were  greatly  delighted,  and  we  gave 
him  thanks,  hoping  that  the  decree  would  be  thoroughly  read 
and  appreciated  by  Caius.  And  indeed  it  was  natural  enough, 
since  all  the  things  that  are  promptly  and  carefully  sent  by 
the  lieutenant-governors  are  read  and  examined  without  delay  by 
you ;  but  Flaccus,  wholly  neglecting  all  our  hopes,  and  all  his 
own  words,  and  all  his  own  promises,  retained  the  decree,  in 
order  that  you,  above  all  the  men  under  the  sun,  might  be 
looked  upon  as  enemies  to  the  emperor. 

Was  not  this  the  conduct  of  one  who  had  been  vigilant  afar 
off,  and  who  had  long  been  contriving  his  design  against  us, 
and  who  was  not  now  yielding  to  some  momentary  impulse, 
and  attacking  us  on  a  sudden  without  any  previous  contrivance 
with  unreasonable  impetuosity,  being  led  away  by  some  fresh 
motive  ?  But  God,  as  it  seems,  he  who  has  a  care  for  all 
human  affairs,  scattered  his  flattering  speeches  cunningly 
devised  to  mislead  the  emperor,  and  baffled  the  counsels  of 
his  lawless  disposition  and  the  manoeuvres  which  he  was  em- 
ploying, taking  pity  on  us,  and  very  soon  he  brought  matters 
into  such  a  train  that  Flaccus  was  disappointed  of  his  hopes. 

For  when  Agrippa,  the  king,  came  into  the  country,  we  set 
before  him  all  the  designs  which  Flaccus  had  entertained 
against  us ;  and  he  set  himself  to  rectify  the  business,  and, 
having  promised  to  forward  the  decree  to  the  emperor,  he 
taking  it,  as  we  hear,  did  send  it,  accompanied  with  a  defence 
relating  to  the  time  at  which  it  was  passed,  showing  that  it  was 
not  lately  only  that  we  had  learnt  to  venerate  the  family  of  our 
benefactors,  but  that  we  had  from  the  very  first  beginning 
shown  our  zeal  towards  them,  though  we  had  been  deprived  of 
the  opportunity  of  making  any  seasonable  demonstration  of  it 
by  the  insolence  of  our  governor.  And  after  these  events 
justice,  the  constant  champion  and  ally  of  those  who  are 
injured,  and  the  punisher  of  everything  impious,  whether  it  be 
action  or  man,  began  to  labour  to  work  his  overthrow.  For  at 
first  they  endured  the  most  unexampled  insults  and  miseries, 
such  as  had  never  happened  under  any  other  of  our  governors, 
ever  since  the  house  of  Augustus  first  acquired  the  dominion 
over  earth  and  sea ;  for  some  men  of  those  who,  in  the  time  of 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  83 

Tiberius,  and  of  Caesar  his  father,  had  the  government,  se'^king 
to  convert  their  governorship  and  viceroyalty  into  a  sovereignty 
and  tyranny,  filled  all  the  country  with  intolerable  evils,  with 
corruption,  and  rapine,  and  condemnation  of  persons  who  had 
done  no  wrong,  and  with  banishment  and  exile  of  such  innocent 
j  men,  and  with  the  slaughter  of  the  nobles  without  a  trial ;  and 
i  then,  after  the  appointed  period  of  their  government  had 
expired,  when  they  returned  to  Rome,  the  emperors  exacted  of 
them  an  account  and  relation  of  all  that  they  had  done, 
especially  if  by  chance  the  cities  which  they  had  been  oppressing 
sent  any  embassy  to  complain ;  for  then  the  emperors,  behaving 
like  impartial  judges,  listening  both  to  the  accusers  and  to  the 
defendant  on  equal  terms,  not  thinking  it  right  to  pre-judge 
and  pre-condemn  anyone  before  his  trial,  decided  without  being 
influenced  either  by  enmity  or  favour,  but  according  to  the 
nature  of  truth,  and  pronouncing  such  a  judgment  as  seemed  to 
be  just.  But  in  the  case  of  Flaccus,  that  justice  which  hates 
iniquity  did  not  wait  till  the  term  of  his  goveniment  had 
expired,  but  went  forward  to  meet  him  before  the  usual  time, 
being  indignant  at  the  immoderate  extravagance  of  his  lawless 
iniquity. 

XIII.  And  the  manner  in  which  he  was  cut  short  in  his 
tyranny  was  as  follows.  He  imagined  that  Caius  was  already 
made  favourable  to  him  in  respect  of  those  matters,  about  which 
suspicion  was  sought  to  be  raised  against  him,  partly  by  his 
letters  which  were  full  of  flattery,  and  partly  by  the  harangues 
which  he  was  continually  addressing  to  the  people,  in  which  he 
courted  the  emperor  by  stringing  together  flattering  sentences 
and  long  series  of  cunningly  imagined  panegyrics,  and  partly 
too  because  he  was  very  highly  thought  of  by  the  greater  part  of 
the  city.  But  he  was  deceiving  himself  without  knowing  it ; 
for  the  hopes  of  wicked  men  are  unstable,  as  they  guess  what  is 
more  favourable  to  them  while  they  suffer  what  is  quite  contrary 
to  it,  as  in  fact  they  deserve, ' 

For  Bassus,  the  centurion,  was  sent  from  Italy  by  the 
appointment  of  Caius  with  the  company  of  soldiers  which  he 
commanded.  And  having  embarked  on  board  one  of  the  fastest 
sailing  vessels,  he  arrived  in  a  few  days  at  the  harbour  of 
Alexandria,  off  the  island  of  Pharos,  about  evening ;  and  he 
ordered  the  captain  of  the  ship  to  keep  out  in  the  open  sea  till 

G  2 


81  PHILO   JUD.^US. 

sunset,  intending  to  enter  the  city  unexpectedly,  in  order  that 
Flaccus  might  not  be  aware  of  his  coming  beforehand,  and  so  be 
led  to  adopt  any  violent  measures,  and  render  the  service  which 
he  was  commanded  to  perform  fruitless. 

And  when  the  evening  came,  the  ship  entered  the  harbour, 
and  Bassus,  disembarking  with  his  own  soldiers,  advanced, 
neither  recognizing  nor  being  recognized  by  any  one  ;  and  on 
his  road  finding  a  soldier  who  was  one  of  the  quaternions  of  the 
guard,  he  ordered  him  to  show  him  the  house  of  his  captain ; 
for  he  wished  to  communicate  his  secret  errand  to  him,  that,  if 
he  required  additional  force,  he  might  have  an  assistant  ready. 

And  when  he  heard  that  he  was  supping  at  some  person's 
house  in  company  with  Flaccus,  he  did  not  relax  in  his  speed, 
but  hastened  onward  to  the  dwelling  of  his  entertainer;  for 
the  man  with  whom  they  were  feasting  was  Stephanion,  one  of 
the  freedmen  of  Tiberius  Csesar ;  and  withdrawing  to  a  short 
distance,  he  sends  forward  one  of  his  own  followers  to  recon- 
noitre, disguising  him  like  a  servant  in  order  that  no  one  might 
notice  him  or  perceive  what  was  going  forward.  So  he, 
entering  in  to  the  banqueting-room,  as  if  he  were  the  servant 
of  one  of  the  guests,  examined  everything  accurately,  and  then 
returned  and  gave  information  to  Bassus.  And  he,  when  he 
had  learnt  the  unguarded  condition  of  the  entrances,  and  the 
small  number  of  the  people  who  were  with  Flaccus  (for  he  was 
attended  by  not  more  than  ten  or  fifteen  slaves  to  wait  upon 
him),  gave  the  signal  to  his  soldiers  whom  he  had  with  him, 
and  hastened  forward,  and  entered  suddenly  into  the  supper- 
room,  he  and  the  soldiers  with  him,  who  stood  by  with  their 
swords  girded  on,  and  surrounded  Flaccus  before  he  was  aware 
of  it,  for  at  the  moment  of  their  entrance  he  was  drinking 
health  with  some  one,  and  making  merry  with  those  who  were 
present. 

But  when  Bassus  had  made  his  way  into  the  midst,  the 
moment  that  he  saw  him  he  became  dumb  with  amazement 
and  consternation,  and  wishing  to  rise  up  he  saw  the  guards 
all  round  him,  and  then  he  perceived  his  fate,  even  before  he 
heard  what  Caius  wanted  with  him,  and  what  commands  had 
been  given  to  those  who  had  come,  and  what  he  was  about  to 
endure,  for  the  mind  of  man  is  very  prompt  at  perceiving  at 
once  all  those  particulars  which  take  a  long  time  to  happen, 
and  at  hearing  them  all  to^^ether.     Accordingly,  every  one  of 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  85 

those  who  were  of  this  supper  party  rose  up,  heing  through 
fear  unnerved,  and  shuddering  lest  some  punishment  miglit 
be  affixed  to  the  mere  fact  of  having  been  supping  with  the 
culprit,  for  it  was  not  safe  to  flee,  nor  indeed  was  it  possible  to 
do  so,  since  all  the  entrances  were  already  occupied.  So 
Flaccus  was  led  away  by  the  soldiers  at  the  command  of 
Bassus,  this  being  the  manner  in  which  he  returned  from  the 
banquet,  for  it  was  fitting  that  justice  should  begin  to  visit  him 
at  a  feast,  because  he  had  deprived  the  houses  of  innumerable 
innocent  men  of  all  festivity. 

XIV.  This  was  the  unexampled  misfortune  which  befell 
Flaccus  in  the  country  of  which  he  was  governor,  being  taken 
prisoner  like  an  enemy  on  account  of  the  Jews,  as  it  appears 
to  me,  whom  he  had  determined  to  destroy  utterly  in  his  desire 
for  glory.  And  a  manifest  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the 
time  of  his  arrest,  for  it  was  the  general  festival  of  the  Jews  at 
the  time  of  the  autumnal  equinox,  during  which  it  is  the  custom 
of  the  Jews  to  live  in  tents  ;  but  none  of  the  usual  customs  at 
this  festival  were  carried  out  at  all,  since  all  the  rulers  of  the 
people  were  still  oppressed  by  irremediable  and  intolerable 
injuries  and  insults,  and  since  the  common  people  looked  upon 
the  miseries  of  their  chiefs  as  the  common  calamity  of  the 
whole  nation,  and  were  also  depressed  beyond  measure  at  the 
individual  afflictions  to  which  they  were  each  of  them  sepa- 
rately exposed,  for  griefs  are  redoubled  when  they  happen  at 
the  times  of  festival,  when  those  who  are  afflicted  are  unable 
to  keep  the  feast,  both  by  reason  of  the  deprivation  of  their 
mirthful  cheerfulness,  which  a  general  assembly  requires,  and 
also  from  the  presence  of  sorrow  by  which  they  were  now  over- 
come, without  being  able  to  find  any  remedy  for  such  terrible 
disasters. 

And  while  they  were  yielding  to  excessive  sorrow,  and  feel- 
ing overwhelmed  by  most  severe  anguish,  and  they  were  all 
collected  in  their  houses  at  the  approach  of  night,  some  persons 
came  in  to  inform  them  of  the  apprehension  of  the  governor 
which  had  then  taken  place.  And  they  thought  that  this  was 
to  try  them,  and  was  not  the  truth,  and  were  grieved  all  the 
more  from  thinking  themselves  mobbed,  and  that  a  snare  was 
thus  laid  for  them  ;  but  when  a  tumult  arose  through  the  citv, 
and  the  guards  of  the  night  began  to  inin  about  to  and  fro,  and 
when  some  of  the  cavaliy  were  heard  to  be  galloping  with  the 


86  pniLO  JUDiEus. 

utmost  speed  and  with  all  energy  to  the  camp  and  from  the 
camp,  some  of  them,  being  excited  by  the  strangeness  of  the 
event,  went  forth  from  their  houses  to  inquire  what  had 
happened,  for  it  was  plain  that  something  strange  had  occurred. 
And  when  they  heard  of  the  arrest  that  had  taken  place,  and 
that  Flaccus  was  now  within  the  toils,  stretching  up  their 
hands  to  heaven,  they  sang  a  hymn,  and  began  a  song  of  praise 
to  God,  who  presides  over  all  the  affairs  of  men,  saying,  "  We 
are  not  delighted,  0  Master,  at  the  punishment  of  our  enemy, 
being  taught  by  the  sacred  laws  to  submit  to  all  the  vicissi- 
tudes of  human  life,  but  we  justly  give  thanks  to  thee,  who 
hast  had  mercy  and  compassion  upon  us,  and  who  hast  thus 
relieved  our  continual  and  incessant  oppressions." 

And  when  they  had  spent  the  whole  night  in  hymns  and 
songs,  they  poured  out  through  the  gates  at  the  earliest  dawn, 
and  hastened  to  the  nearest  point  of  the  shore,  for  they  had 
been  deprived  of  their  usual  places  for  prayer,  and  standing  in 
a  clear  and  open  space,  they  cried  out,  "  0  most  mighty  King 
of  all  mortal  and  immortal  beings,  we  have  come  to  offer  thanks 
unto  thee,  to  invoke  earth  and  sea,  and  the  air  and  the  heaven, 
and  all  the  parts  of  the  universe,  and  the  whole  world  in  which 
alone  we  dwell,  being  driven  out  by  men  and  robbed  of  every- 
thing else  in  the  world,  and  being  deprived  of  our  city,  and  of 
all  the  buildings  both  private  and  public  within  the  city,  and 
being  made  houseless  and  homeless  by  the  treachery  of  our 
governor,  the  only  men  in  the  world  who  are  so  treated.  You 
suggest  to  us  favourable  hopes  of  the  setting  straight  of  what 
is  left  to  us,  beginning  to  consent  to  our  prayers,  inasmuch  as 
you  have  on  a  sudden  thrown  down  the  common  enemy  of  our 
nation,  the  author  and  cause  of  all  our  calamities,  exulting  in 
pride,  and  trusting  that  he  would  gain  credit  by  such  means, 
before  he  was  removed  to  a  distance  from  us,  in  order  that 
those  who  were  evilly  afflicted  might  not  feel  their  joy  impaired 
by  learning  it  only  by  report,  but  you  have  chastised  him  while 
he  was  so  near,  almost  as  we  may  say  before  the  eyes  of  those 
whom  he  oppressed,  in  order  to  give  us  a  more  distinct  per- 
ception of  the  end  which  has  fallen  upon  him  in  a  short  time 
beyond  our  hopes." 

XV.  And  besides  what  I  have  spoken  of  there  is  also  a 
third  thing,  which  appears  to  me  to  have  taken  place  by  the 
interposition  of  divine  providence ;  for  after  he  had  set  sail  at 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  87 

the  beginning  of  winter,  for  it  was  rightly  ordained  that  he 
should  have  his  fill  of  the  dangers  of  the  sea,  inasmuch  as  ho 
had  filled  all  the  elements  of  the  universe  with  his  impieties, 
after  suffering  innumerable  hardships  he  with  difficulty  got 
safely  to  Italy,  and  the  moment  that  he  had  arrived  there  he 
was  pursued  by  accusations  which  were  brought  against  him, 
and  which  were  brought  before  two  of  his  greatest  enemies, 
isidorus  and  Lampo,  who  a  little  while  before  were  in  the 
position  of  subjects  to  him,  calling  him  their  master,  and  bene- 
factor, and  saviour,  and  names  of  that  sort,  but  who  now  were 
his  adversaries,  and  that  too  displaying  a  power  not  only  equal 
to  but  far  superior  to  his  own,  not  merely  from  the  confidence 
which  men  feel  in  the  justice  of  their  cause,  but,  what  was  a 
matter  of  great  moment,  because  they  saw  that  the  Judge  of 
all  human  affairs  was  his  irreconcileable  enemy,  being  about 
now  to  take  upon  himself  the  form  of  a  judge  from  a  prudent 
determination  not  to  appear  to  condemn  any  one  beforehand 
unheard,  and  not  to  act  the  part  of  an  enemy,  who  before 
hearing  either  accusation  or  defence,  has  already  condemned 
the  defendant  in  his  mind,  and  has  sentenced  him  to  the  most 
severe  punishments.  But  nothing  is  so  terrible  as  for  men 
who  have  been  the  more  powerful  to  be  accused  by  their 
inferiors,  and  for  those  who  have  been  rulers  to  be  impeached 
by  their  former  subjects,  which  is  as  if  masters  were  being 
prosecuted  by  their  natural  or  purchased  slaves. 

XVI.  And  yet  even  this  in  my  opinion  was  a  lighter  evil 
when  compared  with  another  which  was  greater  still ;  for  it 
was  not  people  who  were  merely  in  the  simple  rank  of  subjects 
who  now,  discarding  that  position  and  conspiring  together,  on  a 
sudden  attacked  him  with  their  accusations  ;  but  those  who  did 
so  were  men  w^ho  during  the  chief  part  of  the  time  that  he  had 
had  the  government  of  the  courtry  had  been  in  a  position  of 
the  greatest  enmity  and  hatred  to  him,  Lampo  having  been 
under  a  prosecution  for  impiety  against  Tiberius  Caesar,  and 
having  been  almost  worn  out  by  the  matter  which  had  been 
thus  impending  over  his  head  for  two  years ;  for  the  judge 
who  had  a  grudge  against  him  caused  all  sorts  of  delays  and 
every  possible  protraction  of  the  cause  on  various  pretexts, 
wishing  even  if  he  escaped  from  the  accusation,  at  all  events  to 
keep  the  terror  of  the  future  as  uncertain  hanging  over  his  head 
for  the  longest  possible  period,  so  as  to  make  his  life  more 


88  PHILO   JUD/EUS. 

miserable  even  than  death.  And  then  again  when  he  seemed 
to  have  come  off  victorious,  saying  that  he  was  insulted  and 
injured  in  his  property  (for  he  was  compelled  to  become  a 
gymnasiarch),  either  by  being  economical  and  illiberal  in  his 
expenses,  pretending  that  he  had  not  sufficient  wealth  for  such 
unlimited  expenditure,  or  perhaps  really  not  having  enough ; 
but  before  he  came  to  the  trial,  making  a  parade  of  being  very 
rich,  but  when  he  did  come  to  the  proof  then  appearing  not  to 
be  a  man  of  exceeding  wealth,  having  acquired  nearly  all  the 
riches  which  he  had  by  unjust  actions. 

For  standing  by  the  rulers  when  they  gave  judgment,  he 
took  notes  of  all  that  took  place  on  the  trial  as  if  he  were  a 
clerk ;  and  then  he  designedly  passed  over  or  omitted  such  and 
such  points,  and  interpolated  other  things  which  were  not  said. 
And  at  times,  too,  he  made  alterations,  changing  and  altering, 
and  perverting  matters,  and  turning  things  up-side  down,  aim- 
ing to  get  money  by  every  syllable,  or,  I  might  rather  say,  by 
every  letter,  like  a  hunter  after  musty  records,  whom  the  whole 
people  with  one  accord  did  often  with  great  felicity  and  pro- 
priety of  expression  call  a  pen-murderer,  as  slaying  numbers  of 
persons  by  the  things  which  he  wrote,  and  rendering  the  living 
more  miserable  than  even  the  dead,  as,  though  they  might  have 
got  the  victory  and  been  in  comfort,  they  were  subjected  to 
miserable  s  defeat  and  poverty,  their  enemies  having  bought 
victory,  and  triumph,  and  wealth,  of  a  man  who  sold  and  made 
his  market  of  the  properties  of  others. 

For  it  was  impossible  for  rulers  who  had  the  charge  of  so 
vast  a  country  entrusted  to  them,  when  afifairs  of  every  sort,  both 
private  and  public,  were  coming  in  upon  them  fresh  every  day, 
to  remember  everything  which  they  had  heard,  especially  as 
they  had  not  only  to  fill  the  part  of  judges,  but  also  to  take 
accounts  of  all  the  revenues  and  taxes,  the  investigation  into 
which  occupied  the  greater  portion  of  the  year.  And  the  man 
to  whom  it  was  entrusted  to  take  charge  of  that  most  im- 
portant of  all  deposits,  namely,  justice,  and  of  those  most  holy 
sentiments  which  had  been  delivered  and  urged  before  them, 
caused  forge tfulness  to  the  judges,  registering  those  who  ought 
to  have  had  sentence  in  their  favour  as  defeated,  and  those 
who  ought  to  have  been  defeated  as  victorious,  after  the  receipt 
of  his  accursed  pay,  or,  to  speak  more  properly,  wages  of 
iniquity. 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  89 

XVII.  Such,  then,  was  the  character  of  Lampo,  who  was 
now  one  of  the  accusers  of  Flaccus. 

And  Isidorus  was  in  no  respect  inferior  to  him  in  wicked- 
ness, being  a  man  of  the  populace,  a  low  demagogue,  one  who 
liad  continually  studied  to  throw  everything  into  disorder  and 
confusion,  an  enemy  to  all  peace  and  stability,  very  clever  at 
exciting  seditions  and  tumults  which  had  no  existence  before, 
;uid  at  inflaming  and  exaggerating  such  as  were  already  ex- 
cited, taking  care  always  to  keep  about  him  a  disorderly  and 
promiscuous  mob  of  all  the  refuse  of  the  people,  ready  for  every 
kind  of  atrocity,  which  he  had  divided  into  regular  sections  as 
so  many  companies  of  soldiers. 

There  are  a  vast  number  of  parties  in  the  city  whose  associ- 
ation is  founded  in  no  one  good  principle,  but  who  are  united 
by  wine,  and  drunkenness,  and  revelry,  and  the  offspring  of 
those  indulgencies,  insolence  ;  and  their  meetings  are  called 
synods  and  couches  by  the  natives.  In  all  these  parties  or 
the  greater  number  of  them  Isidorus  is  said  to  have  borne  the 
lell,  the  leader  of  the  feast,  the  chief  of  the  supper,  the  dis- 
turber of  the  city.  Then,  whenever  it  was  determined  to  do 
some  mischief,  at  one  signal  they  all  went  forth  in  a  body,  and 
did  and  said  whatever  they  were  told.  And  on  one  occasion, 
being  indignant  with  Flaccus  because,  after  he  had  appeared 
originally  to  be  a  person  of  some  weight  with  him,  he  after- 
wards was  no  longer  courted  in  an  equal  degree,  having  hired  a 
gang  of  fellows  from  the  training  schools  and  men  accustomed 
to  vociferate  loudly,  who  sell  their  outcries  as  if  in  regular 
market  to  those  who  are  inclined  to  buy  them,  he  ordered 
them  all  to  assemble  at  the  gymnasium  ;  and  they,  having 
filled  it,  began  to  heap  accusations  on  Flaccus  without  any 
particular  grounds,  inventing  all  kinds  of  monstrous  accu- 
sations and  all  sorts  of  falsehoods  in  ridicvdous  language, 
stringing  long  sentences  together,  so  that  not  only  was  Flaccus 
himself  alarmed  but  all  the  others  who  were  there  at  this  un- 
expected attack,  and  especially,  as  it  may  be  conjectured,  from 
the  idea  that  there  must  certainly  have  been  some  one 
behind  the  scenes  whom  they  were  studying  to  gratify,  since 
they  themselves  had  suffered  no  evil,  and  since  they  were  well 
aware  that  the  rest  of  the  city  had  not  been  ill-treated  by 
him. 

Then,  after  they  had  deliberated  awhile,  they  determined  to 


90  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

apprehend  certain  persons  of  them  and  to  inquire  into  the 
cause  of  this  indiscriminate  and  sudden  rage  and  madness. 
And  the  men  who  were  arrested,  without  being  put  to  the  tor- 
ture, confessed  the  truth  and  added  proofs  to  their  words  by 
what  had  been  done,  detailing  the  pay  which  had  been  agreed 
to  be  given  to  them,  both  that  which  had  been  already  given 
and  that  which,  in  accordance  with  his  promises,  was  subse- 
quently to  be  paid,  and  the  men  who  were  appointed  to 
distribute  it  as  the  leaders  of  the  sedition,  and  the  place  where 
it  was  to  break  out,  and  the  time  when  the  giving  of  the 
bribes  was  to  take  place. 

,  And  when  every  one,  as  was  very  natural,  was  indignant  at 
this,  and  when  the  city  was  mightily  offended,  that  the  folly  of 
some  individuals  should  attach  to  it  so  as  to  dim  its  reputa- 
tion, Flaccus  determined  to  send  for  some  of  the  most  honour- 
able men  of  the  people,  and,  on  the  next  day  to  bring  forward 
before  them  those  who  had  distributed  the  bribes,  that  he  might 
investigate  the  truth  about  Isidorus,  and  also  that  he  might 
make  a  defence  of  his  own  system  of  government,  and  prove 
that  he  had  been  unjustly  calumniated  ;  and  when  they  heard 
the  proclamation  there  came  not  only  the  magistrates  but 
also  the  whole  city,  except  that  portion  which  was  about  to  be 
convicted  of  having  been  the  agents  of  corruption  or  the 
corrupted. 

And  they  who  had  been  employed  in  this  honourable  service, 
being  raised  up  on  the  platform,  that  they  might  be  elevated 
and  conspicuous  and  be  recognised  by  all  men,  accused 
Isidorus  as  having  been  the  cause  of  all  the  tumults  and  of 
the  accusations  which  had  been  brought  against  Flaccus,  and 
as  having  given  money  and  bribes  to  no  small  number  of  them 
by  himself.  "  Since  else,"  said  they,  "  where  could  we  have 
got  such  great  abundance  ?  We  are  poor  men,  and  are  scarcely 
able  to  provide  our  daily  expenses  for  absolute  necessaries ; 
and  what  evil  did  we  ever  suffer  from  the  governor,  so  as  to  be 
forced  to  bear  him  ill  will?  Nay,  but  it  is  he  v/ho  was  the 
cause  of  all  these  things,  the  author  of  them  all,  he  who  is 
always  envious  of  those  who  are  in  prosperity,  and  an  adver- 
sary of  all  stability  and  wholesome  law." 

And  when  those  who  were  present  came  to  the  knowledge 
of  these  things,  for  what  was  thus  said  was  a  very  evident 
proof  and  evidence  of  the  intentions  of  the  person  accused, 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  •  91 

ihey  all  raised  an  outcry,  some  calling  out  that  he  should  be 
degraded,  others  that  he  should  be  banished,  others  that  he 
should  be  put  to  death,  and  these  last  were  the  most  nu- 
merous ;  and  the  others  changed  their  tone  and  joined  them, 
so  that  at  last  they  all  cried  out,  with  one  accord  and  with  one 
voice,  to  slay  the  common  pest  of  the  land,  the  man  to  whom 
It  was  owing  that,  ever  since  he  had  arrived  in  the  country 
and  taken  any  part  in  public  affairs,  no  part  of  the  city  or  of 
the  common  interests  had  ever  been  left  in  a  sound  or  healthy 
condition ;  and  he,  indeed,  being  convicted  by  his  conscience, 
fled  away  in-doors,  fearing  lest  he  should  be  seized;  but 
Flaccus  did  nothing  against  him,  thinking  that  now  that  he 
had  voluntarily  removed  himself,  everything  in  the  city  would 
soon  be  free  from  sedition  and  contention. 

XVIII.  I  have  related  these  events  at  some  length,  not  for 
the  sake  of  keeping  old  injuries  in  remembrance,  but  because 
I  admire  that  power  who  presides  over  all  freemen's  affairs, 
namely,  justice,  seeing  that  those  men  who  were  so  generally 
hostile  to  Flaccus,  those  by  whom  of  all  men  he  was  most 
hated,  were  the  men  who  now  brought  their  accusations 
against  him,  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  his  grief,  for  it  is  not  so 
bitter  merely  to  be  accused  as  to  be  accused  by  one's  confessed 
enemies ;  but  this  man  was  not  merely  accused,  though  a  go- 
vernor, by  his  subjects,  and  that  by  men  who  had  always  been 
his  enemies,  when  he  had  only  a  short  time  before  been  the 
lord  of  the  life  of  every  individual  among  them,  but  he  was 
also  apprehended  by  force,  being  thus  subjected  to  a  twofold 
evil,  namely,  to  be  defeated  and  ridiculed  by  exulting  enemies, 
which  is  worse  than  death  to  all  right-minded  and  sensible 
people. 

And  then  see  what  an  abundance  of  disasters  came  upon 
him,  for  he  was  immediately  stripped  of  all  his  possessions, 
both  of  those  which  he  inherited  from  his  parents  and  of  all 
that  he  had  acquired  himself,  having  been  a  man  who  took 
especial  delight  in  luxury  and  ornament ;  for  he  was  not  like 
some  rich  men,  to  whom  wealth  is  an  inactive  material,  but  he 
was  continually  acquiring  things  of  every  useful  kind  in 
all  imaginable  abundance ;  cups,  garments,  couches,  minia- 
tures, and  everything  else  which  was  any  ornament  to  a  house ; 
and  besides  that,  he  collected  a  vast  number  of  servants,  care- 
fully selected  for  their  excellencies  and  accomplishments,  and 


92  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

with  reference  to  their  beauty,  and  health,  and  vigour  of  body, 
and  to  their  unerring  skill  in  all  kinds  of  necessary  and  use- 
ful service  ;  for  every  one  of  them  was  excellent  in  that  employ- 
ment to  which  he  was  appointed,  so  that  he  was  looked  upon 
as  either  the  most  excellent  of  all  servants  in  that  place,  or,  at 
all  events,  as  inferior  to  no  one. 

And  there  is  a  very  clear  proof  of  this  in  the  fact  that, 
though  there  were  a  vast  number  of  properties  confiscated  and 
sold  for  the  public  benefit,  which  belonged  to  persons  who  had 
been  condemned,  that  of  Flaccus  alone  was  assigned  to  the 
emperor,  with  perhaps  one  or  two  more,  in  order  that  the  law 
which  had  been  established  with  respect  to  persons  convicted 
of  such  crimes  as  his  might  not  be  \dolated. 

And  after  he  had  been  deprived  of  all  his  property,  he  was 
condemned  to  banishment,  and  was  exiled  from  the  whole 
continent,  and  that  is  the  greatest  and  most  excellent  portion 
of  the  inhabited  world,  and  from  every  island  that  has  any 
character  for  fertility  or  richness ;  for  he  was  commanded  to 
be  sent  into  that  most  miserable  of  all  the  islands  in  the 
JEgsean  Sea,*  called  Gyara,  and  he  would  have  been  left  there 
if  he  had  not  availed  himself  of  the  intercession  of  liCpidus,  by 
whose  means  he  obtained  leave  to  exchange  Gyara  for  Andros, 
which  was  very  near  it.  Then  he  was  sent  back  again  on  the 
road  from  Rome  to  Brundusium,  a  journey  which  he  had  taken 
a  few  years  before,  at  the  time  when  he  was  appointed  governor 
of  Egypt  and  the  adjacent  country  of  Lybia,  in  order  that  the 
cities  which  had  then  seen  him  exulting  and  behaving  with 
great  insolence  in  the  hour  of  his  prosperity,  might  now  again 
behold  him  full  of  dishonour.  And  thus  he  being  now  become 
a  conspicuous  mark  by  reason  of  this  total  change  of  fortune, 
was  overwhelmed  with  more  bitter  grief,  his  calamities  being 
constantly  re-kindled  and  inflamed  by  the  addition  of  fresh 
miseries,  which,  like  relapses  in  sickness,  compel  the  recol- 
lection of  all  former  disasters  to  return,  which  up  to  that  time 
appeared  to  be  buried  in  obscurity.' 

XIX.  And  after  he  had  crossed  the  Ionian  Gulf  he  sailed 
up  the  sea  which  leads  to  Corinth,  being  a  spectacle  to  all  the 

*  This  was  a  common  place  of  banishment  for  criminals.  Juvenal 
says  — 

Aude  aliquid  brevibus  Gyaris,  et  carcere  dignum, 
Si  vis  esse  aliquis.— i.  72. 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  93 

cities  in  Peloponnesus  which  lie  on  the  coast,  when  they  heard 
of  his  sudden  reverse  of  fortune ;  for  when  he  disembarked 
from  the  vessel  all  the  evil  disposed  men  who  bore  him  ill  will 
ran  up  to  see  him,  and  others  also  came  to  sympathize  with 
him — men  who  are  accustomed  to  learn  moderation  from  the 
misfortunes  of  others.  And  at  Lechaeum,  crossing  over  the 
isthmus  into  the  opposite  gulf,  and  having  arrived  at  Cenchreae, 
the  dockyard  of  the  Corinthians,  he  was  compelled  by  the 
guards,  who  would  not  permit  him  the  slightest  respite,  to 
embark  immediately  on  board  a  small  transport  and  to  set  sail, 
and  as  a  foul  wind  was  blowing  with  great  violence,  after  great 
sufferings  he  with  difficulty  arrived  safe  at  the  Piraeus. 

And  when  the  storm  had  ceased,  having  coasted  along 
Attica  as  far  as  the  promontory  of  Sunium,*  he  passed  by  all 
the  islands  in  order,  namely,  Helena,  and  Ceanus,  and  Cythnos, 
and  all  the  rest  which  lie  in  a  regular  row  one  after  another, 
until  at  last  he  came  to  the  point  of  his  ultimate  destination, 
the  island  of  Andros,  which  the  miserable  man  beholding  afar 
off  poured  forth  abundance  of  tears  down  his  cheeks,  as  if  from 
a  regular  fountain,  and  beating  his  breast,  and  lamenting  most 
bitterly,  he  said,  "  Men,  ye  who  are  my  guards  and  attendants 
in  this  my  journey,  I  now  ^eceive  in  exchange  for  the  glorious 
Italy  this  beautiful  country  of  Andros,  which  is  an  unfortunate 
island  for  me.  I,  Flaccus,  who  was  born,  and  brought  up,  and 
educated  in  Rome,  the  heaven  of  the  world,  and  who  have  been 
the  schoolfellow  and  companion  of  the  granddaughters  of 
Augustus,  and  who  was  afterwards  selected  by  Tiberius  Caesar 
as  one  of  his  most  intimate  friends,  and  who  have  had  entrusted 
to  me  for  six  years  the  greatest  of  all  his  possessions,  namely, 
Egypt.  What  a  change  is  this  !  In  the  middle  of  the  day, 
as  if  an  eclipse  had  come  upon  me,  night  has  overshadowed 
my  life.  What  shall  I  say  of  this  little  islet  ?  Shall  I  call 
it  my  place  of  banishment,  or  my  new  country,  or  harbour  and 
refuge  of  misery  ?  A  tomb  would  be  the  most  proper  name  for 
it ;  for  I,  miserable  that  I  am,  am  now  in  a  manner  conducted 
to  my  grave,  attending  my  own  funeral,  for  either  I  shall 
destroy  my  miserable  life  through  my  sorrow,  or  if  I  am  able 
to  cling  to  life  among  my  miseries,  I  shall  in  that  case  find  a 
distant  death,  which  \Yill  be  felt  all  the  time  of  my  life." 
These,  then,  were  the  lamentations  which  he  pom'ed  forth, 
*  Now  Cape  Colonna. 


94  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

and  when  the  vessel  came  near  the  harbour  he  landed,  stoop- 
ing down  to  the  very  ground  like  men  heavily  oppressed,  being 
weighed  down  by  his  calamities  as  if  the  heaviest  of  burdens 
was  placed  upon  his  neck,  without  being  able  to  look  up,  or 
else  not  daring  to  do  so  because  of  the  people  whom  he 
might  meet,  and  of  those  who  came  out  to  see  him  and  who 
stood  on  each  side  of  the  road.  And  those  men  who  had 
conducted  him  hither,  bringing  the  populace  of  the  Andrians, 
exhibited  him  to  them  all,  making  them  all  witnesses  of  the 
arrival  of  the  exile  in  their  island. 

And  they,  when  they  had  discharged  their  office,  departed ; 
and  then  the  misery  of  Flaccus  was  renewed,  as  he  no  longer 
beheld  any  sight  to  which  he  was  accustomed,  but  only  saw 
sad  misery  presented  to  him  by  the  most  conspicuous  evidence, 
while  he  looked  around  upon  what  to  him  was  perfect  desola- 
tion, in  the  middle  of  which  he  was  placed  ;  so  that  it  seemed 
to  him  that  a  violent  execution  in  his  native  land  would  have 
been  a  lighter  evil,  or  rather,  by  comparison  with  his  present 
circumstances,  a  most  desirable  good  ;  and  he  gave  himself  up 
to  such  violence  of  grief,  that  he  was  in  no  respect  different 
from  a  maniac,  and  leaped  about,  and  ran  to  and  fro,  and 
clapped  his  hands,  and  smote   his   thighs,   and   threw   him- 
self upon  the  ground,  and  kept  continually  crying  out,  "  I  am 
Flaccus  !  who  but  a  little  while  ago  was  the  governor  of  the 
mighty  city,  of  the  populous  city  of  Alexandria !  the  governor 
of  that  most  fertile  of  all  countries,  Egypt !     I   am  he  on 
whom  all  those  myriads  of  inhabitants  turned  their  eyes  !  who 
had  countless  forces  of  infantry,  and  cavalry,  and  ships,  for- 
midable, not  merely  by  their  number,  but  consisting  of  all  the 
most  eminent  and  illustrious  of  all  my  subject-s  !     I  am  he  who 
was  every  day  accompanied  when  I  went  out  by  countless  com- 
panies of  clients !     But  now,  was  not  all  this  a  vision  rather 
than  reality  ?  and  was  I  asleep,  and  was  this  prosperity  which 
I  then  beheld  a  dream — phantoms  marching  through  empty 
space,    fictions   of  the  soul,    which  perhaps    registered   non- 
existent things  as  though  they  had  a  being?     Doubtless,  I 
have  been  deceived.     These  things  were  but  a  shadow  and  no 
real  things,  imitations  of  reality  and  not  a  real  truth,  which 
makes  falsehood  evident;  for  as  after  we  have  awakened  we 
find  none  of  those  things  which  appeared  to  us  in  our  dreams, 
but  all  such  things  have  fled  in  a  body  and  disappeared,  so  too, 


AGAINST   FLACCUS.  95 

all  that  brilliant  prosperity  which  I  formerly  enjoyed  has  now 
been  extinguished  in  the  briefest  moment  of  time." 

XX.  With  such  discourses  as  these,  he  was  continually 
being  cast  down,  and  in  a  manner,  as  I  may  say,  prostrated  ; 
and  avoiding  all  places  where  he  might  be  likely  to  meet  with 
many  persons  on  account  of  the  shame  which  clung  to  him,  he 
never  went  down  to  the  harbour,  nor  could  he  endure  to  visit 
the  mai'ket-place,  but  shut  himself  up  in  his  house,  where  he 
kept  himself  close,  never  venturing  to  go  beyond  the  outer 
court.  But  sometimes  indeed,  in  the  deepest  twilight  of  the 
dawn,  when  every  one  else  was  still  in  bed,  so  that  he  could  be 
seen  by  no  one  whatever,  he  would  go  forth  out  of  the  city  and 
spend  the  entire  day  in  the  desolate  part  of  the  island,  turning 
away  if  any  one  seemed  likely  to  meet  him  ;  and  being  torn  as 
to  his  soul  with  the  memorials  of  his  misfortunes  which  he  saw 
about  him  in  his  house,  and  being  devoured  with  anguish,  he 
went  back  home  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  praying,  by 
reason  of  his  immoderate  and  never-ending  misery,  that  the 
evening  would  become  morning,  dreading  the  darkness  and  the 
strange  appearances  which  represented  themselves  to  him 
when  he  went  to  sleep,  and  again  in  the  morning  he  prayed 
that  it  might  be  evening  ;*  for  the  darkness  which  surrounded 
him  was  opposed  to  everything  light  or  cheerful. 

And  a  few  months  afterwards,  having  purchased  a  small 
piece  of  land,  he  spent  a  great  deal  of  his  time  there  living  by 
himself,  and  bewailing  and  weeping  over  his  fate.  It  is  said 
too,  that  often  at  midnight  he  became  possessed  like  those  who 
celebrate  the  rites  of  the  Corybantes,  and  at  such  times  he 
would  go  forth  out  of  his  farm-house  and  raise  his  eyes  to 
heaven  and  to  the  stars,  and  beholding  all  the  beauty  really 
existing  in  the  world,  he  would  cry  out,  "  0  King  of  gods  and 
men  !  you  are  not,  then,  indifferent  to  the  Jewish  nation,  nor 
are  the  assertions  which  they  relate  with  respect  to  your  provi- 
dence false  ;  but  those  men  who  say  that  that  people  has  not 
you  for  their  champion  and  defender,  are  far  from  a  correct 

*  This  is  evidently  taken  from  Deuteronomy  xxviii.  6(j,  "And  thy 
life  shall  hang  in  doubt  before  thee ;  and  thou  Hhalt  fear  day  and  night, 
and  shalt  have  none  assurance  of  thy  life  :  in  the  morning  thou  sbalt 
say,  Would  God  it  were  even  !  and  at  even  thou  shalt  say,  Would  God 
it  were  morning  !  for  the  fear  of  thine  heart  wherewith  thou  shalt  fear, 
and  for  the  sight  of  thine  eyes  which  thou  shalt  see." 


96  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

opinion.     And   I   am  an  evident  proof  of  this  ;    for  all  the 
frantic   designs  which  I  conceived  against  the  Jews,  I  now 
suffer  myself.     I  consented  when  they  were  stripped  of  their 
possessions,  giving  immunity  to  those  who  were   plundering* 
them  ;  and  on  this  account  I  have  myself  been  deprived  of  all 
my  paternal   and    maternal   inheritance,   and   of   all  that  I 
have  ever  acquired  by  gift  or  favour,  and  of  everything  else 
that  ever  became  mine  in  any  other  manner.     In  times  past  I 
reproached  them  with  ignominy  as  being  foreigners,  though 
they  were  in  truth  sojourners  in  the  land  entitled  to  full  privi- 
leges, in  order  to  give  pleasure  to  their  enemies  who  were  a 
promiscuous  and  disorderly  multitude,  by  whom  I,  miserable 
man  that  I  was,  was  flattered  and  deceived ;    and  for  this  I 
have    been   myself    branded    with    infamy,    and    have    been 
driven  as  an  exile  from  the  whole  of  the  habitable  world,  and 
am  shut  up  in  this  place.     Again,  I  led  some  of  them  into  the 
theatre,  and  commanded  them  to  be  shamelessly  and  unjustly 
insulted  in  the  sight  of  their  greatest  enemies ;  and  therefore 
I  justly  have  been  myself  led  not  into  a  theatre  or  into  one 
city,  but  into  many  cities,  to  endure  the  utmost  extremity  of 
insult,  being  ill-treated  in  my  miserable  soul  instead  of  my 
body ;  for  I  was  led  in  procession  through  the  whole  of  Italy 
as  far  as  Brundusium,  and  through  all  Peloponnesus  as  far  as 
Corinth,   and  through  Attica,   and  all  the  islands  as  far  as 
Andros,  which  is  this  prison  of  mine  ;  and  I  am  thoroughly  as- 
sured that  even  this  is  not  the  limit  of  my  misfortunes,  but 
that  others  are  still  in  store  for  me,  to  fill  up  the  measure 
as  a  requital  for  all  the  evils  which  I  have  done.     I  put  many 
persons  to  death,  and  when  some  of  them  were  put  to  death  by 
others,  I  did  not  chastise  their  murderers.    Some  were  stoned ; 
some   were  burnt   alive ;    others  were  dragged    through  the 
middle  of  the  market-place  till  the  whole  of  their  bodies  were 
torn  to  pieces.     And  for  all  this  I  know  now  that  retribution 
awaits  me,  and  that  the  avengers  are  already  standing  as  it 
were  at  the  goal,  and  are  pressing  close  to  me,  eager  to  slay 
me,  and  every  day,  or  I  may  rather  say,  every  hour,  I  die 
before  my  time,  enduring  many  deaths  instead  of  one,  the  last 
of  all  "^^ 

*  This  is  like  the  passage  in  Shakespeare — 

Cowards  die  many  times  before  their  deaths ; 
..'-,,     -^  The  brave  man  only  taste  of  death  but  once." 


AGAINST  FLACCUS.  97 

And  he  was  continually  giving  way  to  dread  and  to  appre- 
hension, and  shaking  with  fear  in  every  limb  and  every 
portion  of  his  body,  and  his  whole  soul  was  trembling  with 
terror  and  quivering  with  palpitation  and  agitation,  as  if 
nothing  in  the  world  could  possibly  be  a  comfort  to  the  man 
now  that  he  was  deprived  of  all  favourable  hopes ;  no  good 
omen  ever  appeared  to  him,  everything  bore  a  hostile  appear- 
ance, every  report  was  ill-omened,  his  waking  was  painlul,  his 
sleep  fearful,  his  solitude  resembling  that  of  wild  beasts, 
nevertheless  the  solitude  of  iiis  herds  was  what  was  most 
pleasant  to  him,  any  dwelling  in  the  city  was  his  greatest 
affliction ;  his  safe  reproach  was  a  solitary  abiding  in  the 
fields,  a  dangerous,  and  painful,  and  unseemly  way  of  life ; 
every  one  who  approached  him,  however  justly,  was  an  object 
of  suspicion  to  him.  "  This  man,*'  he  would  say,  "  who  is 
coming  quickly  hither,  is  planning  something  against  me,  he 
does  not  look  as  if  he  were  hastening  for  any  other  object,  but 
he  is  pursuing  me ;  this  pleasant  looking  man  is  laying  a  snare 
for  me ;  this  free-spoken  man  is  despising  me ;  this  man  is 
giving  me  meat  and  drink  as  they  feed  cattle  before  killing 
them.  How  long  shall  I,  hard-hearted  that  I  am,  bear  up 
against  such  terrible  calamities?  I  well  know  that  1  am 
afraid  of  death,  since  out  of  cruelty  the  Deity  will  not  punish 
me  violently,  to  cut  short  my  miserable  life,  in  order  to  load 
me  to  excess  with  irremediable  niiseries,  which  he  treasures 
up  against  me,  to  do  a  pleasure  to  those  whom  I  treacherously 
put  to  death." 

XXI.  While  repeating  these  things  over  and  over  again 
and  writhing  with  his  agony,  he  awaited  the  end  of  his  destiny, 
and  his  uninterrupted  sorrow  agitated,  and  disturbed,  and  over- 
turned his  soul.  But  Caius,  being  a  man  of  an  inhuman 
nature  and  insatiable  in  his  revenge,  did  not,  as  some  persons 
do,  let  go  those  who  had  been  once  punished,  but  raged  against 
tbera  without  end,  and  was  continually  contriving  some  new 
and  terrible  suffering  for  them  ;  and,  above  all  men,  he  hated 
Flaccus  to  such  a  degree,  that  he  suspected  all  who  bore  the 
same  name,  from  his  detestation  of  the  very  appellation  ;  and 
he  often  repented  that  he  had  condemned  him  to  banishment 
and  not  to  death,  and  though  he  had  a  great  respect  for 
Lepidus  who  had  interceded  for  him,  he  blamed  him,  so  that 
he  was  kept  in  a  state  of  great  alarm  from  fear  of  punishment 
VOL.  IV.  H 


98  PHILO  JUD^US. 

impending  over  him,  for  he  feared  lest,  as  was  very  likely,  he, 
because  he  had  been  the  cause  of  another  person  having  been 
visited  by  a  lighter  punishment,  might  himself  have  a  more 
severe  one  inflicted  upon  him. 

Therefore,  as  no  one  any  longer  ventured  to  say  a  word  by 
way  of  deprecating  the  anger  of  the  emperor,  he  gave  loose  to 
his  fury,  which  was  now  implacable  and  unrestrained,  and 
which,  though  it  ought  to  have  been  mitigated  by  time,  was 
rather  increased  by  it,  just  as  recurring  diseases  are  in  the 
body  when  a  relapse  takes  place,  for  all  such  relapses  are  more 
grievous  than  the  original  attacks. 

They  say  that  on  one  occasion  Caius,  being  awake  at  night, 
began  to  turn  his  mind  to  the  magistrates  and  officers  who 
were  in  banishment,  and  who  in  name  indeed  were  looked 
upon  as  unfortunate,  but  who  in  reality  had  now  thus 
acquired  a  life  free  from  trouble,  and  truly  tranquil  and  free. 
And  he  gave  a  new  name  to  this  banishment,  calling  it  an 
emigration,  "  For,"  said  he,  "  it  is  only  a  kind  of  emigration 
the  banishment  of  these  men,  inasmuch  as  they  have  all  the 
necessaries  of  life  in  abundance,  and  are  able  to  live  in  tran- 
quillity, and  stability,  and  peace.  But  it  is  an  absurdity  for 
them  to  be  living  in  luxury,  enjoying  peace,  and  indulging  in 
all  the  pleasures  of  a  philosophical  life." 

Then  he  commanded  the  most  eminent  of  these  men,  and 
those  who  were  of  the  highest  rank  and  reputation,  to  be  put 
to  death,  giving  a  regular  list  of  their  names,  at  the  head  of 
which   list   was    Flaccus.      And   when   the    men   arrived   at 
Andros,  who   had    been   commanded    to   put   him   to    death, 
Flaccus  happened,  just  at  that  moment,  to  be  coming  from  his 
farm  into  the  city,  and  they,  on  their  way  up  from  the  port, 
met  him,   and  while    yet  at  a  distance  they  perceived  and 
recognised  one  another ;  at  which  he,  perceiving  in  a  moment 
the  object  for  which  they  were  come  (for  every  man's  soul  is 
very  prophetic,  especially  of  such  as  are  in  misfortune),  turn- 
ing out  of  the  road,  fled  and  ran  away  over  the  rough  ground, 
forgetting,  perhaps,  that  Andros  was  an  island  and  not  the  con- 
tinent.   And  what  is  the  use  of  speed  in  an  island  which  the 
sea  washes  all  round  ?  for  one  of  two  things  must  of  necessity 
happen,  either  that  if  the  fugitive  advances  further  he  must  be 
carried  into  the  sea,  or  else  arrested  when  he  has  reached  the 
farthest  boundary.  Therefore,  in  a  comparison  of  evils,  destruc- 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.  99 

tion  by  land  must  be  preferable  to  destruction  by  sea,  since 
nature  has  made  the  land  more  closely  akin  to  man,  and  to  all 
terrestrial  animals,  not  only  while  they  are  alive,  but  even 
after  they  are  dead,  in  order  that  the  same  element  may 
receive  both  their  primary  generation  and  their  last  dis- 
solution. 

The  ofi&cers  therefore  pursued  him  without  stopping  to  take 
breath  and  arrested  him  ;  and  then  immediately  some  of  them 
dug  a  ditch,  and  the  others  dragged  him  on  by  force  in  spite  of 
all  his  resistance  and  crying  out  and  struggling,  by  which 
means  his  whole  body  was  wounded  like  that  of  beasts  that 
are  despatched  with  a  number  of  wounds ;  for  he,  turning 
round  them  and  clinging  to  his  executioners,  who  were  hin- 
dered in  their  aims  which  they  took  at  him  with  their  swords, 
and  who  thus  struck  hira  with  oblique  blows,  was  the  cause  of 
his  own  sufferings  being  more  severe ;  for  he  was  in  conse- 
quence mutilated  and  cut  about  the  hands,  and  feet,  and  head, 
and  breast,  and  sides,  so  that  he  was  mangled  like  a  victim, 
and  thus  he  fell,  justice  righteously  inflicting  on  his  own  body 
wounds  equal  in  number  to  the  murders  of  the  Jews  whom  he 
had  unlawfully  put  to  death. 

And  the  whole  place  flowed  with  blood  which  was  shed  from 
his  numerous  veins,  which  were  cut  in  every  part  of  his  body, 
and  which  poured  forth  blood  as  from  a  fountain.  And  when 
the  corpse  was  dragged  into  the  trench  which  had  been  dug, 
the  greater  part  of  the  limbs  separated  from  the  body,  the 
sinews  by  which  the  whole  of  the  body  is  kept  together  being 
all  cut  through. 

Such  was  the  end  of  Flaccus,  who  suffered  thus,  being  made 
the  most  manifest  evidence  that  the  nation  of  the  Jews  is  not 
left  destitute  of  the  providential  assistance  of  God. 


A  TEEATISE 


ON 

THE  VIRTUES  AND  ON  THE  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS. 
ADDRESSED  TO  CAIUS. 

I.  How  long  shall  we,  who  are  aged  men,  still  be  like 
children,  being  indeed  as  to  our  bodies  gray -headed  through  the 
length  of  time  that  we  have  lived,  but  as  to  our  souls  utterly 

H  2 


100  PHILO  JUD^US. 

infantine  through  our  want  of  sense  and  sensibility,  looking 
upon  that  which  is  the  most  unstable  of  all  things,  namely, 
fortune,  as  most  invariable,  and  that  which  is  of  all  things  in 
the  world  the  most  steadfast,  namely,  nature,  as  utterly  un- 
trustworthy ?  For,  like  people  playing  at  draughts,  we  make 
changes,  altering  the  position  of  actions,  and  considering  the 
things  which  are  the  result  of  fortune  as  more  durable  than 
those  which  result  from  nature,  and  the  things  which  proceed  in 
accordance  with  nature  as  less  stable  than  those  which  are  the 
result  of  chance.  And  the  reason  of  all  this  is,  that  we  form 
our  judgment  of  present  events  without  paying  any  prudential 
attention  to  the  future,  being  influenced  by  the  erroneous 
guidance  of  our  outward  senses  instead  of  the  secret  operations 
of  the  intellect ;  for  the  things  which  are  openly  conspicuous 
and  before  our  hands  so  as  to  be  taken  up  by  them,  are  com- 
prehended by  our  eyes,  but  our  reasoning  power  outstrips  them, 
hastening  onwards  to  what  is  invisible  and  future  ;  but  never- 
theless, we  obscure  the  vision  of  our  reason,  though  it  is 
far  more  acute  than  those  bodily  powers  of  sight  which  are 
exercised  by  the  eyes,  some  of  us  confusing  it  by  indulgence 
in  wine  and  satiety,  and  others  by  that  greatest  of  all  evils, 
namely,  ignorance. 

Nevertheless,  the  existing  opportunity  and  the  many  and 
important  propositions  which  arise  to  be  decided  on  at  the 
present  time,  even  if  some  people  should  be  incredulous  that 
the  Deity  exercises  a  providential  foresight  with  regard  to 
human  affairs,  and  especially  on  behalf  of  a  nation  which  ad- 
dresses its  supplications  to  him,  which  belongs  especially  to  the 
father  and  sovereign  of  the  universe,  and  the  great  cause  of  all 
things ;  and  these  propositions  are  sufficient  to  persuade  them 
of  this  truth.* 

And  this  nation  of  suppliants  is  in  the  Chaldaic  language 
called  Israel,  but  when  the  name  is  translated  into  the  Greek 
language  it  is  called,  "the  seeing  nation  ;'*  which  appellation 
appears  to  mc  to  be  the  most  honourable  of  all  things  in  the 
world,  whether  private  or  public  ;  for  if  the  sight  of  elders,  or 
instructors,  or  rulers,  or  parents,  excites  those  who  behold 
them  to  reverence  and  orderly  conduct,  and  to  an  admiration 
of  and  desire  for  a  life  of  moderation  and  temperance,  how 
great  a  bulwark  of  virtue  and  excellence  must  we  not  expect 
*  Thero  Bceins  some  corruptiou  iiijilix  Iniil  ]||  ii     i 


St.   K.»OH»»l-« 


■f^ 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         101 

to  find  in  those  souls  which,  after  having  investigated  the 
nature  of  every  created  thing,  have  learnt  to  contemplate  the 
uncreated  and  Divine  Being,  the  first  good  of  all,  the  one 
beautiful,  and  happy,  and  glorious,  and  blessed  being ;  better, 
if  one  is  to  tell  the  plain  truth,  than  the  good  itself;  more 
beautiful  than  the  beautiful  itself;  more  happy  than  happiness 
itself;  more  blessed  than  blessedness  itself;  and,  in  short,  if 
anything  else  in  the  world  is  so,  more  perfect  than  any  one  of 
the  above-mentioned  things. 

For  reason  cannot  make  such  advances  as  to  attain  to  a 
thorough  comprehension  of  God,  who  can  neither  be  touched 
nor  handled ;  but  it  withdraws  from  and  falls  short  of  such  a 
height,  being  unable  to  employ  appropriate  language  as  a  step 
towards  the  manifestation  (I  will  not  say  of  the  living  God, 
for  even  if  the  whole  heaven  were  to  become  endowed  with 
articulate  voice,  it  would  not  be  furnished  with  felicitous  and 
appropriate  expressions  to  do  justice  to  such  a  subject);  but 
even  of  his  subordinate  powers,  those,  for  instance,  by  which  he 
created  the  world  and  by  which  he  reigns  over  it  as  its  king,  and 
by  which  he  foresees  the  future,  and  all  his  other  beneficent, 
and  chastising,  and  corrective  powers.  Unless,  indeed,  we 
ought  to  class  his  correction  among  his  beneficent  powers,  not 
only  because  such  a  display  is  a  portion  of  his  laws  and  ordi- 
nances (for  law  is  made  up  of  two  things,  the  honour  of  the 
good,  and  the  chastisement  of  the  wicked),  but  also  because 
punishment  reproves,  and  very  often  even  corrects,  and  ame- 
liorates those  who  have  done  wrong  ;  and  if  it  fails  to  do  so 
with  respect  to  them,  at  all  events  it  does  so  to  those  who  are 
neai'  tlie  offenders  thus  punished  ;  for  the  punishment  of 
others  makes  most  men  better,  for  fear  lest  they  themselves 
should  suffer  the  same  things. 

II.  For  who — when  he  saw  Gains,  after  the  death  of  Tiberius 
Caesar,  assuming  the  sovereignty  of  the  whole  world  in  a 
condition  free  from  all  sedition,  and  regulated  by  and  obedient 
to  admirable  laws,  and  adapted  to  unanimity  and  harmony  in 
all  its  parts,  east  and  west,  south  and  north  ;  the  barbarian  na- 
tions being  in  harmony  with  the  Greeks,  and  the  Greeks  with  the 
barbarians,  and  the  soldiers  with  the  body  of  private  citizens, 
and  the  citizens  with  the  military  ;  so  that  they  all  partook  of 
and  enjoyed  one  common  universal  peace — could  fail  to  marvel 
at  and  be  amazefd  at  his  exti'aordinary  and  unspeakable  good 

»•         • 
•   -    .■*  .  • ♦ 


102  PHILO   JDD.EUS. 

fortune,  since  he  had  thus  succeeded  to  a  readj-made  inherit- 
ance of  all  good  things,  collected  together  as  it  were  in  one 
heap,  namely,  to  numerous  and  vast  treasures  of  money,  and 
silver  and  gold,  some  in  bullion,  and  some  in  coined  money, 
and   some   again    being   devoted    to    articles    of    luxury,    in 
drinking  cups  and  other  vessels,  which  are  made  for  display 
and  magnificence  ;  and  also  countless  hosts  uf  troops,  infantry, 
and  cavalry,  and  naval  forces,  and  revenues  which  were  sup- 
plied in  a  never-ending  stream  as  from  a  fountain ;   and  the 
sovereignty  of  the  most  numerous,  and  most  valuable,  and  im- 
portant portions  of  the  habitable  world,  which  in  fact  one  may 
fairly  call  the  whole  world,  being  not  only  all  that  is  bounded, 
by  the  two  rivers,  the  Euphrates  and  the.  Rhine  ;  the  one  of 
which  confines  Germany  and  all  the  more  uncivilised  nations  ;| 
and  the  Euphrates,  on  the  other  hand,  bridles  Parthia  and  the! 
nations  of  the  Sarraatians  and  Scythians,  which  are  not  less 
barbarous  and  uncivilised  than  the  Germanic  tribes  ;  but,  even] 
as  I  said  before,  all  the  world,  from  the  rising  to  the  setting  I 
sun,  all  the  land  in  short  on  this  side  of  the  Ocean  and  beyond 
the   Ocean,   at  which  all   the   Roman   people    and   all  Italy 
rejoiced,  and  even  all  the  Asiatic  and  European  nations. 

For  as  tney  had  never  yet  all  together  admired  any  emperor 
who  had  ever  existed  at  that  time,  not  expecting  to  have  in 
future  the  possession,  and  use,  and  enjoyment  of  all  private 
and  public  good  things,  but  thinking  that  they  actually  had 
them  already  as  a  sort  of  superfluity  of  prosperity  which  hap- 
piness was  waiting  to  fill  to  the  brim  :  accordingly  now  there 
was  nothing  else  to  be  seen  in  any  city,  but  altars,  and  victims, 
and  sacrifices,  and  men  clothed  in  white  garments,  aud  crowned 
with  garlands,  and  wearing  cheerful  countenances,  aud  display- 
ing their  joy  by  the  brightness  of  their  looks,  and  festivals,  and 
assemblies,  and  musical  contests,  and  horse-races,  and  revels, 
and  feasts  lasting  the  whole  night  long,  with  the  music  of  the 
flute  and  of  the  lyre,  and  rejoicings,  and  holidays,  and  truces, 
and  eveiy  kind  of  pleasure  addressed  to  every  one  of  the 
senses. 

On  this  occasion  the  rich  were  not  better  off  than  the  poor, 
nor  the  men  of  high  rank  than  the  lowly,  nor  the  creditors 
than  the  debtors,  nor  the  masters  than  the  slaves,  since  the 
occasion  gave  equal  privileges  and  communities  to  all  men,  so 
that  the  age  of  Saturn,  which  is   so  celebrated  by  the  poets 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.  103  ^ 

was  no  longer  looked  upon  as  a  fiction  and  a  fable,*  on 
account  of  the  universal  prosperity  and  happiness  which 
reigned  every  where,  and  the  absence  of  all  grief  and  fear,  and 
the  daily  and  nightly  exhibitions  of  joy  and  festivity  through- 
out every  house  and  throughout  the  whole  people,  which  lasted 
continually  without  any  interruption  during  the  first  seven 
months  of  his  reign. 

But  in  the  eighth  month  a  severe  disease  attacked  Caius 
who  had  changed  the  manner  of  his  living  which  was  a  little 
while  before,  while  Tiberius  was  alive,  very  simple  and  on 
that  account  more  wholesome  than  one  of  great  sumptuousness 
and  luxury ;  for  he  began  to  indulge  in  abundance  of  strong 
wine  and  eating  of  rich  dishes,  and  in  the  abundant  license  of 
insatiable  desires  and  great  insolence,  and  in  the  unseasonable 
use  of  hot  baths,  and  emetics,  and  then  again  in  wine-bibbing 
and  drunkenness,  and  returning  gluttony,  and  in  lust  after  boys 
and  women,  and  in  everything  else  which  tends  to  destroy 
both  soul  and  body,  and  all  the  bonds  which  unite  and 
strengthen  the  two ;  for  the  rewards  of  temperance  are  health 
and  strength,  and  the  wages  of  intemperance  are  weakness 
and  disease  which  bring  a  man  near  to  death. 

III.  Accordingly,  when  the  news  was  spread  abroad  that  he 
was  sick  while  the  weather  was  still  suitable  for  navigation 
(for  it  was  the  beginning  of  the  autumn,  which  is  the  last  season 
during  which  nautical  men  can  safely  take  voyages,  and  during 
which  in  consequence  they  all  return  from  the  foreign  marts 
in  every  quarter  to  their  own  native  ports  and  harbours  of 
refuge,  especially  all  who  exercise  a  prudent  care  not  to  be 
compelled  to  pass  the  winter  in  a  foreign  country) ;  they,  for- 
saking their  former  life  of  delicateness  and  luxury,  now  wore 
mournful  faces,  and  every  house  and  every  city  became  full  of 
depression  and  melancholy,  their  grief  being  now  equal  to  and 
counterbalancing  the  joy  which  they  experienced  a  short  time 
before.  For  every  portion  of  the  habitable  world  was  diseased 
in  his  sickness,  feeling  affected  with   a  more  terrible  disease 

*  The  golden  age  was  said  to  have  existed  during  the  reign  of  Saturn 
upon  earth.     So  Tibullus  says — 

Quam  bene  vivebant  Saturno  rege,  priusquam 
Tellus  in  longas  est  patefacta  vias. 

And  Virgil — 

Aureus  hanc  vitam  in  terris  Satumua  agebat 


104  PHILO  JUDGED S. 

than  that  which  was  oppressing  Caius;  for  his  sickness 
was  that  of  the  body  alone,  but  the  universal  malady  which 
was  oppressing  all  men  every  where  was  one  which  attacked 
the  vigour  of  their  souls,  their  peace,  their  hopes,  their  parti- 
cipation in  and  enjoyment  of  all  good  things  ;  for  men  began 
to  remember  how  numerous  and  how  great  are  the  evils  which 
spring  from  anarchy,  famine,  and  war,  and  the  destruction  of 
trees,  and  devastations,  and  deprivation  of  lands,  and  plunder- 
ing of  money,  and  the  intolerable  fear  of  slavery  and  death, 
which  no  one  can  relieve,  all  which  evils  appeared  to  admit  of 
but  one  remedy,  namely  the  recovery  of  Caius. 

Accordingly  when  his  disease  began  to  abate,  in  a  very 
short  time  even  the  men  who  were  living  on  the  very  confines 
of  the  empire  heard  of  it  and  rejoiced,  for  nothing  is  swifter 
than  report,*  and  immediately  every  city  was  full  of  suspense 
and  expectation,  being  continually  eager  for  better  news,  until 
at  length  his  perfect  recovery  was  announced  by  fresh  arrivals, 
at  which  news  they  again  returned  to  their  original  cheerful- 
ness, each  thinking  the  health  of  Caius  to  be  his  own  salvation  ; 
and  this  feeling  pervaded  every  continent  and  every  island, 
for  no  one  can  recollect  so  great  and  general  a  joy  affecting 
any  one  country  or  any  one  nation,  at  the  good  health  or  pros- 
perity of  their  governor,  as  now  pervaded  the  whole  of  the 
habitable  world  at  the  recovery  of  Caius,  and  at  his  being  able 
to  resume  the  exercise  of  liis  power  and  having  completely  got 
rid  of  his  sickness. 

For  they  all  rejoiced,  from  ignorance  of  the  truth,  like  men 
who  are  now  for. the  first  time  beginning  to  exchange  a  wand- 
ering and  uncivilised  mode  of  life  for  a  social  and  civilised 
system,  and  instead  of  dwelling  in  desert  places,  and  the  open 
air,  and  the  mountain  districts,  to  live  in  walled  cities,  and 
instead  of  living  without  any  governor,  or  protector,  or  lawgiver, 
to  be  now  established  under  the  care  of  a  governor  to  be  a  sort 
of  shepherd  and  leader  of  a  more  domesticated  flock  ;  for  the 
human  mind  is  apt  to  be  blind  towards  the  perception  of  what 
is  really  expedient  and  beneficial  for  it,  being  influenced 
rather  by  conjecture  and  notions  of  probability  than  by  real 
knowledge. 

IV.  At  all  events  it  was  not  long  before  Caius — who  was 

*  So  Virgil  says — 

Fama  malum  quo  non  aliud  velociua  ullum.  — jSItl  iv,  174. 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         105 

now  looked  upon  as  a  saviour  and  benefactor,  and  who  was 
expected  to  shower  down  some  fresh  and  everlasting  springs  of 
benefits  upon  all  Asia  and  Europe,  so  as  to  endow  the  inhabit- 
ants with  inalienable  happiness  and  prosperity,  both  separately 
to  each  individual  and  generally  to  the  whole  state — began,  as 
the  proverb  has  it,  at  home,  and  changed  into  a  ferocity  of 
disposition,  or,  I  should  rather  say,  displayed  the  savageness 
which  he  had  previously  overshadowed  by  pretence  and 
hypocrisy  ;  for  he  put  to  death  his  cousin  who  had  been  left  as 
the  partner  of  his  kingdom,  and  who  was  in  fact  a  more  natural 
successor  to  it  than  he  himself;  for  he  himself  was  only  Tibe- 
rius's  grandson  by  adoption,  but  the  other  was  so  by  blood; 
arguing  as  a  pretext  that  he  had  detected  him  in  plotting 
against  him,  though  his  very  age  was  a  suflQcient  refutation  uf 
any  such  accusation ;  for  the  unhappy  victim  was  only  just 
emerging  from  boyhood,  and  begmning  to  rank  among  the 
youths.  And,  as  some  persons  say,  if  Tiberius  had  lived  a 
short  time  longer,  Caius  would  have  been  made  away  with,  as 
he  l)ef^an  to  be  looked  upon  by  him  with  unalterable  suspicion, 
and  the  genuine  grandson  of  Tiberius  would  have  been  named 
the  future  emperor,  and  the  inheritor  of  his  paternal  kingdom. 

But  Tiberius  was  carried  off  by  fate,  before  he  could  bring 
his  designs  to  their  completion ;  and  Caius  thought  that  he 
should  be  able  to  escape  all  evil  report  which  might  arise  from 
bis  transgressing  the  principles  of  justice  with  respect  to  his 
partner  by  outwitting  him.  And  the  contrivance  which  he 
adopted  was  of  the  following  character.  Having  assembled 
all  the  chief  magistrates,  he  said  t  "I  am  desirous  that  he  who 
is  my  cousin  by  birth  and  my  brother  in  affection,  in  accord- 
ance with  the  instruction  of  Tiberius  who  is  now  dead,  shall  be 
a  partner  with  me  in  my  absolute  authority.  But  you  your- 
selves perceive  that  he  is  as  yet  a  mere  child,  and  that  he  is  in 
need  of  masters,  and  teachers,  and  guardians  ;  since  what  can 
be  a  more  desirable  blessing  for  me  than  that  my  one  mind 
and  one  body  shall  not  be  loaded  with  so  great  a  weight  of  the 
cares  of  government,  but  for  me  to  have  some  one  who  may 
be  able  to  lighten  and  alleviate  them  by  sharing  them  ?  I , 
therefore,"  said  he :  "  passing  over  and  being  superior  to  all 
tutors,  and  masters,  and  guardians,  register  myself  as  his 
father,  and  him  as  my  son." 

V.  With  these  words  he  deceived  both  those  who  were 


103  PHILO  JUD^US. 

present  and  the  youth  himself;  for  his  proposal  was  a  mere 
bait,  his  intention  being  not  to  invest  him  with  the  power 
\fhich  he  expected,  but  to  deprive  him  of  even  that  which  he 
already  had,  according  to  the  law  affecting  co-heirs  and 
partners ;  and  accordingly  now  he  plotted  against  hira  with 
absolute  fearlessness,  having  no  regard  for  nor  fear  of  any  one  ; 
for  by  the  laws  of  the  Romans  the  most  complete  and  absolute 
authority  over  the  son  belongs  to  the  father,  besides  the  fact  of 
Caius  having  the  imperial  authority  which  was  wholly  irrespon- 
sible, since  no  one  could  either  venture  or  had  any  power  to 
demand  an  account  from  him  of  any  thing  whatever  that  he 
might  do. 

Accordingly,  looking  uponlhis  youth  to  be  like  a  thirds-man 
in  the  games,  he  proceeded  to  overthrow  him,  feeling  no  com- 
passion, either  for  the  fact  of  his  having  been  brought  up  with 
him,  or  his  being  so  nearly  related  to  him,  or  for  his  age,  but 
having  no  idea  of  sparing  this  miserable  youth,  doomed  to  an 
early  death ;  his  own  partner  in  the  government,  his  co-heir, 
who  had  formerly  been  expected  to  be  all  but  the  absolute 
emperor,  by  reason  of  his  being  the  nearest  relation  to 
Tiberius ;  for  when  their  fathers  are  dead,  the  grandsons  are 
usually  looked  upon  by  their  grandfathers  as  standing  in  the 
position  of  sons. 

It  is  said  moreover,  that  this  youth,  being  ordered  to  slay 
himself  with  his  own  hands,  while  a  centurion  and  a  captain  of 
a  thousand  were  standing  by  (who  had  been  expressly  com- 
manded to  take  no  part  in  the  horrid  deed,  since  it  was  not 
lawful  for  the  descendants  of  the  emperors  to  be  put  to  death 
by  any  one  else  ;  for  Caius  remembered  the  laws  amid  his 
lawless  acts,  and  had  some  regard  for  piety  in  all  his  impious 
deeds,  imitating  as  well  as  he  could  the  nature  of  truth)  ;  he, 
not  knowing  how  to  kill  himself,  for  he  had  never  seen  any 
one  else  put  to  death,  and  had  never  had  any  practice  in 
fighting  with  weapons,  which  is  the  usual  exercise  and  course 
of  instruction  for  children  who  are  being  educated  with  a  view 
to  become  leaders  and  rulers,  on  account  of  the  wars  which 
they  may  have  to  conduct,  at  first  exhorted  those  officers  who 
had  come  to  him  to  put  him  to  death  themselves,  stretching 
out  his  neck ;  but  when  they  did  not  dare  to  do  so,  he  himself 
taking  the  sword  inquired  in  his  ignorance  and  want  of 
experience  what  was  the  most  mortal  place,  in  order  that  by 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         107 

a  well-directed  blow  he  might  cut  short  his  miserable  life  ;  and 
thej,  like  instructors  in  misery,  led  him  on  his  way,  and 
pointed  out  to  him  the  part  into  which  he  was  to  thrust  his 
sword  ;  and  he,  having  thus  learnt  his  first  and  last  lesson, 
became  himself,  miserable  that  he  was,  his  own  murderer 
under  compulsion. 

VI.  But  when  this  first  and  greatest  undertaking  had  been 
accomplished  by  Caius,  there  being  no  longer  left  any  one  who 
had  any  connexion  with  the  supreme  authority,  to  whom  any 
one  who  bore  him  ill-will,  and  who  was  suspected  by  him, 
could  possibly  turn  his  eyes  ;  he  now,  in  the  second  place, 
proceeded  to  compass  the  death  of  Macro,  a  man  who  had  co- 
operated with  him  in  every  thing  relating  to  the  empire,  not 
only  after  he  had  been  appointed  emperor,  for  it  is  a  character- 
istic of  flattery  to  court  those  who  are  in  a  state  of  prosperity, 
but  who  had  previously  assisted  him  in  his  measures  for 
securing  that  authority. 

For  Tiberius,  who  was  a  man  of  very  profound  prudence, 
and  the  most  able  of  all  the  men  of  his  court  at  perceiving  the 
hidden  intentions  of  any  man,  and  who  was  as  pre-eminent  in 
intelligence  and  acuteness  as  he  was  in  good  fortune,  did  very 
often  look  with  suspicion  upon  Caius  as  being  evil  disposed 
towards  all  the  house  of  Claudius,  and  as  being  related  to  him 
only  on  the  mother's  side,*  and  he  feared  for  his  grandson,  lest 
he,  being  left  a  mere  child,  should  be  put  to  death  by  him. 
And  he  judged  him,  moreover,  very  little  fitted  for  an 
authority  of  such  magnitude,  both  on  account  of  the  unsociable- 
ness  and  ferocity  of  his  nature,  and  the  inequality  of  his 
temper ;  for  he  was  continually  giving  way  to  the  most  frantic 
and  most  inconsistent  moods,  not  preserving  any  consistency 
either  in  his  words  or  in  his  actions ;  all  which  Macro  studied 
with  all  his  strength  at  every  opportunity,  pacifying  the  suspi- 
cions of  Tiberius  and  all  the  prejudices  with  which  he 
perceived  that  his  mind  was  inflamed  against  Caius  by  reason 
of  liis  ceaseless  fear  and  anxiety  for  his  grandson. 

For  he  represented  to  him,  that  Caius  was  a  person  of  a 
good  and  obedient  disposition,  and  one  who  entertained  the 
greatest  affection  for  his  cousin,  so  that  out  of  his  exceeding 
regard  for  him  he  would  be  willing  even  to  abandon  tho 
government  and  to  yield  it  up  to  him  by  himself,  but  that 
•  Caligula  was  the  son  of  Germanicus  and  Agrippina. 


108  PHILO  JI3D^US. 

excessive  modesty  was  anything  but  advantageous  to  manj 
persons,  in  consequence  of  which  Caius,  who  was  of  a  most 
guileless  and  single-minded  disposition,  was  looked  upon  b} 
many  as  crafty  and  designing. 

And  when  he  could  not  persuade  him,  by  all  the  argumentt 
drawn  from  probabilities  which  he  advanced,  he  brought  for- 
ward that  which  rested  upon  specific  agreements,  adding,  "  1 
myself  will  be  his  security,  I  who  deserve  to  have  confidence 
placed  in  me,  inasmuch  as  I  have  given  suJScient  proof  thai 
I  myself  am  individually  a  friend  to  Caesar,  and  a  friend  tc 
Tiberius,  since  it  was  I  who  carried  into  execution,  your  in- 
tentions respecting  the  downfall  of  Sejanus. 

And,  in  short,  he  was  very  assiduous,  and  energetic,  and 
comprehensive  in  his  praises  of  ('aius,  if,  indeed,  one  maj 
speak  of  speeches  in  defence  of  a  man  as  equivalent  to  pane- 
gyrics on  him,  which  were  rather  addressed  to  the  doing  awa\ 
with  the  unfavourable  impressions  and  suspicions,  excited  b> 
obscure  and  indistinct  hints  and  accusations.  In  short,  aJ] 
the  things  which  any  one  could  say  on  behalf  of  any  brotbei 
or  legitimate  child,  such  and  more  too  did  Macro  say  tc 
Tiberius  in  behalf  of  Caius.  And  the  cause  of  this  was  accord- 
ing to  the  report  which  obtain  d  among  the  generality  ol 
people,  not  only  that  Macro  had,  on  the  other  hand,  been 
greatly  courted  by  him,  as  one  who  had  the  greatest,  or. 
indeed,  all  the  power  under  the  empire ;  but  also  that  Macro's 
wife  was  favourable  to  him,  for  a  reason  which  ought  not  to  he 
mentioned,  and  she  every  day  urged  on,  and  encouraged,  and 
entreated  her  husband  to  omit  no  exertion  of  his  zeal  and 
energy  on  behalf  of  the  young  man.  And  a  wife  is  a  very 
powerful  engine  to  divert  or  to  persuade  the  mind  of  her  hus- 
band, especially  if  she  be  one  of  an  amorous  temperament,  foi 
because  of  her  own  consciousness  she  becomes  more  given  tc 
flattery. 

And  Macro,  being  ignorant  of  the  dishonour  done  to  his 
marriage-bed  and  to  his  family,  and  looking  upon  her  flattery 
as  a  proof  of  her  sincere  good  will  and  affection  for  him,  was 
deceived,  and  without  being  aware  of  it  was  led,  by  hei 
intrigues,  to  embrace  his  bitterest  enemies  as  his  best  friends. 

Yii.  Therefore,  as  he  knew  that  he  bad  preserved  him  ten 
thousand  times,  when  he  was  in  the  most  imminent  danger  of 
being  put  to  death,  he  used  to  ofifer  him  undisguised,  sincere, 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         109 

and  honest  admonitions  and  advice,  with  perfect  freedom  of 
speech ;  for,  like  a  good  workman,  he  was  desirous  that  what 
he  looked  upon  as  his  own  work  should  remain  uninjured  and 
indestructible,  without  being  put  an  end  to,  either  by  himself 
3r  by  any  one  else ;  therefore,  whenever  he  saw  him  sleeping 
it  any  entertainment  he  would  go  round  and  awaken  him, 
aaving,  at  the  same  time,  a  regard  for  what  was  becoming  and 
ilso  for  his  safety,  for  a  man  who  is  asleep  is  a  good  object  for 
:reacliery  ;  and  whenever  he  beheld  him  looking  with  an 
jxcited  eye  at  any  dancers,  or  even  sometimes  dancing  with 
:hem,  or  not  smiling  with  dignity  upon  actors  of  farcical  and 
aughable  spectacles,  but  rather  grinning  like  a  boy,  or  wholly 
carried  away  by  the  tunes  of  some  harp-player  or  chorus,  so  as 
)n  some  occasions  even  to  join  in  their  song,  he  would,  if  he 
ivas  sitting  or  going  near  him,  give  him  a  nudge,  and  en- 
leavour  to  check  him. 

And  very  often,  when  he  was  reclining  near  him,  he  would 
rtfhisper  in  his  ear,  and  admonish  him  gently  and  quietly,  so 
:hat  no  one  else  might  hear  what  was  said,  saying,  "  You 
)ught  not  only  not  to  be  like  any  one  else  here,  but  like  no 
me  else  whatever,  neither  at  any  spectacle,  or  at  anything  that 
.8  to  be  heard,  or  in  anything  else  that  ever  affects  the  out- 
Aard  senses,  but  you  ought  rather  to  surpass  all  other  men  in 
3very  action  of  your  life,  as  much  as  you  surpass  them  in  your 
TQod  fortune,  for  it  is  unreasonable  for  the  ruler  of  all  the 
^arth  and  of  all  the  sea  to  be  subdued  by  a  song  or  by  an  ex- 
libition  of  dancing,  or  by  any  ridiculous  jest  or  piece  of  acting, 
)r  by  anything  else  of  that  kind  ;  and  not  on  every  occasion, 
md  in  every  place,  to  remember  his  position  as  emperor, 
ike  a  shepherd  and  protector  of  the  flock,  availing  himself 
)f  everything  that  can  tend  to  any  kind  of  amelioration,  from 
)very  word,  and  from  every  action,  of  every  description  what- 
)ver." 

Then  again  he  would  add,  *'  When  you  are  present  at  any 
heatrical  contest,  or  at  any  gymnastic  games,  or  at  any  of  the 
j;ontests  in  the  hippodrome,  do  not  consider  the  pursuits  them- 
elves  so  much  as  the  behaving  correctly  in  all  such  pursuits, 
nd  entertain  thoughts  of  this  nature  :  if  some  men  labour 
n  this  manner  to  bring  to  perfection  things  that  can  in  no 
espect  benefit  human  life,  but  which  only  afford  pleasure  and 
musement  to  the  spectators,  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  praised 


110  PHILO  JUD^US. 

and  admired,  aad  to  receive  rewards,  and  honours,  and  crowns 
and   to  have   their   names   proclaimed   as   conquerors;  what 
ought  that  man  to  do  who  is  skilful  in  the  most  sublime  and 
most  important  of  all  arts  ?     Now  the  greatest  and  most  excel- 
lent of  all  sciences  is  the  science  of  government,  by  means  of 
which  every  country  which  is  good  and  fertile,  whether  it  be 
champaign  or  mountainous,  is  cultivated,  and  every  sea  is  na- 
vigated without  danger  by  heavily-laden  merchant-vessels,  to 
communicate  to  the  different  countries  the  useful  productions 
of  each,  out  of  a  natural  desire  for  participation  and  associa- 
tion, so  that  each  land  receives  what  it  stands  in  need  of,  and 
sends  abroad  in  requital  those  good  things  of  which  it  has  a 
superfluity ;  for  envy  has  never  obtained  a  dominion  over  the 
whole   of  the   habitable  world,    nor   even   over   those   great 
divisions  of  it,  the  whole  of  Europe  or  the  whole  of  Asia,  but 
it  lurks  in  holes  like  a  venomous  reptile,  creeping  out  in  smdl 
districts  to  attack  an  individual  man,  or  a  single  family,  or,  if 
it  is  very  violent  and  powerful,  perhaps  one  city ;  but  it  never 
attacks  a  larger  circle  of  a  whole  nation  or  a  whole  country, 
especially  ever  since  your  august  family  has  really  begun  to 
rule  over  all  men  in  every  part  of  the  world. 

"  For  your  house  has  discovered  and  brought  to  light  every- 
thing that  is  good,  even  in  the  midst  of  evils,  and  has  banished 
all  evils  to  the  extremities  of  the  earth,  and  beyond  its  borders 
to  the  very  depths  of  Tartarus,  and  has  brought  back,  from  the 
most  distant  borders  of  the  earth  and  sea,  those  profitable  and 
beneficial  things  which  were  in  a  manner  banished  into  the 
habitable  world  around  us  ;  and  now  all  these  things  are  en- 
trusted to  your  power,  to  be  governed  by  your  authority. 

"  Accordingly  you,  having  been  conducted  by  nature  to  the 
supreme  helm  of  the  world,  and  having  the  government  of 
everything  placed  in  your  hand,  must  guide  the  universal  ship 
of  all  mankind  in  a  safe  and  salutary  manner,  rejoicing  and 
delighting  in  nothing  more  than  in  doing  good  to  your  sub- 
jects ;  for  different  people  have  different  contributions  to 
bestow,  which  individuals  necessarily  offer  in  their  several 
cities.  But  the  most  suitable  gift  for  a  ruler  to  give  is  to  adopt 
•wise  counsels  with  respect  to  those  who  are  subject  to  his 
authority,  and  to  execute  intentions  which  have  been  rightly 
formed,  and  to  bestow  on  them  good  things  without  any  limita- 
tion, with  a  liberal  hand  and  mind,  except  such  as  it  may  be 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        Ill 

better  to  keep  in  reserve  from  a  prudent  foreknowledge  of  the 
uncertainty  of  the  future." 

VIII.  The  unhappy  man  kept  dinning  suggestions  of  this 
kind  into  his  ears  in  the  hope  of  improving  Caius ;  but  he, 
being  a  contentious  and  quarrelsome  person,  tumed  his  mind  in 
the  directly  opposite  direction,  as  if  he  were  exhorted  to  do 
exactly  the  contrary,  and  he  conceived  a  most  determined  dis- 
gust for  his  monitor,  so  as  never  to  behold  him  with  a  cheerful 
countenance ;  and  sometimes  when  he  saw  him  at  a  distance 
he  would  speak  as  follows  to  those  near  him :   "  Here  comes 
the  teacher  of  one  who  has  no  longer  any  right  to  be  looked 
upon  as  a  pupil ; — here  comes  the  pedagogue  of  one  who  is  no 
longer  a  child,  the  monitor  of  one  who  is  wiser  than  himself, 
the  man  who  thinks  it  proper  that  the  emperor  should  obey 
his  subject,  who  sets  himself  up  as  a  man  deeply  versed  by 
experience  in  the  science  of  government,  and  as  a  teacher  of 
it,  though  from  whom  he  has  learnt  the  principles  of  sovereign 
government  I  know  not ;  for  from  the  moment  that  I  left  my 
cradle,  I  have  had  ten  thousand  instructors,  fathers,  brothers, 
mcles,  cousins,  and  grandfathers,  up  to  the  very  founders  of 
ny  family,   in  fact  every  one  related  to   me  either  on  my 
''ather's  or  my  mother's  side,  who  had  acquired  absolute  powder 
jbr  themselves,  even  without  taking  into  consideration  the  fact 
jhat,  by  their  being  the  authors  of   my  being,  they  had  im- 
planted in  me  some  degree  of  royal  power  and  some  natural 
liptitude  for  government.    For  as  similitudes  of  both  body  and 
|oul  exist  both  in   the  form,   and  position,  and   motions   of 
jnen,  and  also  as  the  inclinations,  and  dispositions,  and  actions 
if  men  are  preserved  in  some  degree  of  similitude  through  the 
•rinciples  of  descent,  so  also  is  it  probable  that  the  very  same 
rinciples  should  convey  an  outline  of  similitude  in  respect  of 
ne's  aptitude  for  government.     Shall  any  one,  then,  who  is 
^norant  dare  to  instruct  me  who  am  the  reverse  of  ignorant  ? 
le  who,  even  before  my  birth,  while  I  was  yet  in  my  mother's 
omb,  was  fashioned  as  an  emperor  in  the  workshop  of  nature  ? 
'or  how  can  it  be  possible  for  persons,  who  but  a  short  time 
[sfore  were  private  individuals,  to  contemplate  as  they  should 
le  intentions  of  an  imperial  soul  ?    But  some  persons  in  their 
lameless  audacity  dare  to  put  themselves  forward  as  inter- 
reters  and  perfecters  of  the  principles  of  government,  when 


J]2  pniLO  jUD^us. 

in  reality  ihey  scarcely  ought  to  be  enrolled  among  those  who 
have  any  understanding  whatever  of  the  matter." 

And  as  he  thus  diligently  laboured  to  alienate  himself  from 
Macro,  he  began  also  to  invent  false  but  plausible  and 
specious  grounds  for  blaming  and  accusing  him;  for  passionate 
and  irritable  natures,  especially  when  belonging  to  powerful 
men,  are  very  ingenious  at  weaving  plausibilities.  Now,  the 
pretexts  which  he  made  use  of  against  him  were  of  the  follow- 
ing catures.  He  said  Macro  thought  thus :  "  Caius  is  my 
work ;  the  work  of  Macro.  I  am  more  truly,  or  at  all  events 
not  less  truly,  his  father  than  his  own  parents.  He  would 
have  been  destroyed,  over  and  over  again,  by  Tiberius,  who 
thirsted  for  his  blood,  if  it  had  not  beeu  for  me  and  for  my 
powers  of  persuasion.  And  moreover,  when  Tiberius  was 
dead,  I,  who  had  under  my  command  the  whole  force  of  the 
army,  immediately  placed  him  in  the  position  which  Tiberius 
had  occupied,  teaching  him  that  the  state  had  indeed  sustained 
a  loss  of  one  man,  but  that  the  imperial  authority  continued 
unaltered,  as  entire  as  ever." 

And  many  people  have  given  credit  to  these  assertions  of 
of  his  as  if  they  were  true,  not  being  acquainted  with  the  false 
and  crafty  disposition  of  the  speaker  ;  for  hitherto  the  dis- 
honest and  designing  character  of  his  disposition  was  not  made 
manifest.  But  a  few  days  afterwards  the  miserable  man  was 
put  to  death,  with  his  wife,  receiving  the  extremity  of  punish- 
ment as  a  reward  for  his  exceeding  good  will  towards  his 
slayer.  This  is  the  consequence  of  doing  kindnesses  to  un- 
grateful people ;  for  in  return  for  the  benefits  which  they  have 
received,  they  inflict  the  greatest  of  injuries  on  those  from 
whom  they  have  received  them.  Accordingly,  Macro,  who 
had  done  everything  in  sincerity  with  the  most  earnest  eager- 
ness and  zeal  for  the  good  of  Caius,  in  the  first  place  iu  order 
to  save  him  from  death,  and  afterwards  in  order  that  he  by 
himself  might  succeed  to  the  imperial  authority,  received  for 
his  reward  the  fate  which  1  have  mentioned. 

For  it  is  said  that  the  wretched  man  was  compelled  to  kill 
himself  with  his  own  hand ;  and  his  wife,  too,  experienced  the 
same  misery,  even  though  she  indeed  had  at  one  time  been 
believed  to  be  on  the  most  intimate  terms  of  familiarity  with 
Caius ;  but  they  say  that  none  of  the  allurements  of  love  are 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         113 

stable  and  trustworthy  because  it  is  a  passion  -which  quickly 
breeds  satiety. 

IX.  But  after  Macro  and  all  his  house  had  been  sacrificed, 
Cains  then  began  to  design  a  third  more  grievous  piece  of 
treachery  still.  His  father-in-law  had  been  Marcus  Silanus,  a 
man  full  of  wisdom,  and  very  illustrious  by  birth.  He,  after 
his  daughter  had  died  by  an  early  death,  still  was  very  atten- 
tive and  affectionate  to  Caius,  showing  all  imaginable  regard 
for  him,  not  so  much  like  a  father-in-law  as  like  an  actual 
father,  and  he  hoped  that  he  should  find  that  Caius  also  enter- 
tained equal  good  will  towards  him,  transforming  himself 
according  to  the  principles  of  equality  from  a  son-in-law  into  a 
son ;  but  he  was,  without  knowing  it,  cherishing  mistaken 
opinions,  and  deluding  himself,  for  he  w^as  continually  uttering 
affectionate  speeches,  keeping  back  nothing  which  could  tend 
to  the  amelioration  and  improvement  of  Caius's  disposition 
and  way  of  life  and  mode  of  government,  speaking  with  all 
freedom,  and  looking  upon  his  own  surpassing  nobility  of  birth 
and  nearness  of  connexion  by  marriage  as  circumstances  which 
gave  him  grounds  for  great  familiarity  and  openness,  for  his 

'  daughter  had  been  dead  only  a  very  short  time,  so  that  the 
,  laws  and  bonds  which  bind  such  kinsmen  were  scarcely 
destroyed,  and  one  may  almost  say  were  still  quivering  with 
life,  some  relics  of  the  breath  of  vitality  being  still  left,  as  it 
jwere,  and  remaining  warm  in  the  body.  But  Caius,  looking 
^  upon  every  admonition  as  an  insult,  because  he  fancied  that  he 
j  himself  was  the  wisest  and  most  virtuous  of  all  men,  and  more- 
jOver  the  most  valorous  and  the  most  just,  hated  all  who 
; ventured  to  offer  him  instruction  more  than  even  his  avowed 
jenemies. 

Therefore,  looking  on  Silanus  as  a  bore,  who  only  wished  to 
2heck  the  impetuosity  and  indulgence  of  his  appetites,  and  dis- 
carding all  recollection  of  and  regard  for  his  deceased  wife,  he 
Teacherously  put  her  father  to  death,  who  was  also  his  own 
ather-in-law. 

X.  And  by  this  time  the  matter  began  to  be  widely  talked 
ibout  in  consequence  of  the  continual  deaths  of  so  many 
eminent  men,  so  that  now  these  things  began  to  be  spoken  of 
u  every  mouth  as  intolerable  infamy  and  wickedness ;  not 
ndeed  openly,  from  fear,  but  gently  and  under  the  breath,  in 
vhispers  ;  and  then  again,  by  a  sudden  change  (for  the  multi- 

VOL.  IV  I 


114  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

tude  is  very  unstable  in  everything,  in  intentions,  and  words, 
and  actions),  men,  disbelieving  that  one  who  but  a  little  while 
before  was  merciful  and  humane  could  have  become  altered  so 
entirely,  for  Caius  had  been  looked  upon  as  affable,  and 
sociable,  and  friendly,  began  to  seek  for  excuses  for  him, 
and  after  some  search  they  found  such,  saying  with  regard  to 
his  cousin  and  co-heir  in  the  kingdom  things  such  as  these : 
"  The  unchangeable  law  of  nature  has  ordained  that  there 
should  be  no  partnership  in  sovereign  power,  and  it  has 
established  by  its  own  unalterable  principles  what  this  man 
must  inevitably  have  suffered  at  the  hands  of  his  more  powerful 
co-heir.  The  one  who  was  the  more  powerful  has  chastised  the 
other.  This  is  not  murder.  Perhaps,  indeed,  the  putting  that 
youth  to  death  was  done  providentially  for  the  advantage  of 
the  whole  human  race,  since  if  one  portion  had  been  assigned 
as  subjects  to  the  one,  and  another  portion  to  the  other,  there 
would  have  arisen  troubles  and  confusion,  and  civil  and  foreign 
war.  And  what  is  better  than  peace?  and  peace  is  caused  by 
good  government  on  sound  principles.  And  no  government 
can  be  good  but  that  which  is  free  from  all  contentions  and 
from  all  disputes,  and  then  everything  else  is  made  right  by 
it." 

And  in  reference  to  the  case  of  Macro,  they  said,  "  The  man 
was  puffed  up  with  pride  in  an  immoderate  degree ;  he  had  no 
idea  of  that  great  lesson  which  came  from  Delplii,  '  know  thy- 
self. And  they  say  that  knowledge  is  the  cause  of  happiness, 
and  that  ignorance  is  the  parent  of  unhappiness.  What  could 
have  possessed  him  to  make  such  an  alteration  and  change  in 
their  relative  positions  as  to  thrust  himself,  who  was  a  subject, 
into  the  rank  of  a  governor,  and  to  depress  Caius,  who  was  the 
emperor,  into  the  place  of  a  subject?  For  it  is  the  part  of  a 
ruler  to  command,  and  that  was  what  Macro  did ;  but  it  is  the 
duty  of  a  subject  to  obey,  and  that  was  what  he  considered  that 
Caius  was  to  submit  to." 

For  these  inconsiderate  men,  without  giving  themselves  the  , 
trouble  of  inquiring  into  the  truth,  called  the  recommenda- 1 
tions  of  Macro  commands,  and  called  him  who  gave  advice  a 
governor,  out  of  ignorance   and  insensibility,  or  else  out  of 
flattery,  suppressing  the  truth  and  giving  a  false  colouring  to 
the  nature  of  both  names  and  things. 

And  in  reference  to  Silanus  thev  said,  "  Silanus  was  a  most 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         115 

ridiculous  person  when  he  took  it  into  his  head  that  a  father- 
in-law  would  have  as  much  influence  with  his  son-in-law  as  a 
real  father  has  with  a  son.  And  yet  even  real  fathers  who  are 
in  a  private  station  submit  to  their  sons  when  they  are  in 
great  offices  and  in  places  of  high  authority,  being  quite  con- 
tent with  the  second  place ;  but  this  foolish  man,  even  v^^hen 
he  was  no  longer  his  father-in-law,  kept  on  claiming  privileges 
■which  did  not  belong  to  him,  without  perceiving  that  with  the 
death  of  his  daughter  the  connexion  which  bad  originated  in 
the  marriage  of  Caius  with  her  had  also  died,  for  intermar- 
riages are  the  bonds  which  unite  families  between  which  there 
is  no  kindred,  changing  alienation  into  near  connexion  ;  but 
when  that  lx)nd  is  dissolved,  then  the  union  is  dissolved  like- 
wise, especially  when  it  is  dissolved  by  a  circumstance  which 
cannot  be  altered  or  remedied,  namely,  by  the  death  of  the 
woman  who  was  given  in  marriage  into  another  family." 

Such  conversations  as  these  were  held  in  every  company, 
the  speakers  being  wholly  influenced  by  their  wish  that  the 
emperor  should  not  appear  to  be  cruel;  for  as  they  had  hoped 
that  such  humanity  and  gentleness  was  seated  in  the  soul  of 
Caius  as  had  not  existed  in  either  of  the  previous  emperors, 
they  thought  it  would  be  a  most  strange  thing  if  he  now  made 
so  great  and  so  sudden  a  change  to  an  entirely  contrary  dis- 
position. 

XI.  Having   now,  then,   entirely  accomplished   the   three 

undertakings  above-mentioned,  with  reference  to  three  most 

I  important  divisions,  two  of  them  belonging  to  the  country,  one 

to  the  class  of  counsellors  and  the  other  to  the  knights,  and 

I  the  third  affecting  his  own  relations,  and  considering  that  now 

I  that  he  had  thus  put  down  the  mightiest  and  most  powerful  of 

I  his  foes,  he  must  have  struck  all  the  rest  with  the  utmost 
terror,  alarming  the  counsellors  by  the  death  of  Silanus  (for  he 
was  inferior  to  no  one  in  the  senate),  and  the  knights  by  the 
execution  of  Macro  (for  he,  like  the  leader  of  a  chorus,  had 
long  been  considered  the  very  first  man  of  the  knights  for 
oputation  and  glory),  and  all  his  blood  relations  by  the 
laughter  of  his  cousin  and  joint  inheritor  of  the  kingdom,  he  no 
cnger  chose  to  remain  fettered  by  the  ordinary  limits  of  human 
iture,  but  aspired  to  raise  himself  above  them,  and  desired  to 
0  looked  upon  as  a  god. 
And  at  tlie  beginning  of  this  insane  desire  they  say  that  he 

T  2 


116  PIIILO   JUDiEaS. 

was  influenced  by  such  a  train  of  reasoning  as  the  following  : 
for  as  the  curators  of  the  herds  of  other  animals,  namely  cow- 
herds, and  goatherds,  and  shepherds,  are  neither  oxen  nor 
goats,  nor  sheep,  but  men  who  have  received  a  more  excellent 
portion,  and  a  more  admirable  formation  of  mind  and  body  ;  so 
in  the  same  manner,  said  he,  is  it  fitting  that  I  who  am  the 
leader  of  the  most  excellent  of  all  herds,  namely,  the  race  of 
mankind,  should  be  considered  as  a  being  of  a  superior  nature, 
and  not  merely  human,  but  as  one  who  has  received  a  greater 
and  more  holy  portion.  Accordingly,  having  impressed  this 
idea  on  his  mind,  like  a  vain  and  foolish  man  as  he  was,  he 
bore  about  in  himself  a  fallacious  fable  and  invention  as  if  it 
had  been  a  most  undeniable  truth ;  and  after  he  had  once 
carried  his  boldness  and  audacity  to  such  a  pitch  as  to  compel 
the  multitude  to  admit  of  his  most  impious  deification,  he 
attempted  to  do  other  things  consistent  with  and  conformable 
to  it,  and  in  this  way  he  advanced  up  to  the  highest  point  by 
slow  degrees  as  if  he  were  ascending  up  steps. 

For  he  began  at  first  to  liken  himself  to  those  beings  who  are 
called  demigods,  such  as  Bacchus,  and  Hercules,  and  the  twins 
of  Lacedoemon ;  turning  into  utter  ridicule  Trophonius,  and 
Amphiaraus,  and  Amphilochus,  and  others  of  the  same  kind, 
with  all  their  oracles  and  secret  ceremonies,  in  comparison  of 
his  own  power.  In  the  next  place,  like  an  actor  in  a  theatre, 
he  was  continually  wearing  different  dresses  at  different  times, 
taking  at  one  time  a  lion's  skin  and  a  club,  both  gilded  over ; 
being  then  dressed  in  the  character  of  Hercules ;  at  another 
time  he  would  wear  a  felt  hat  upon  his  head,  when  he  was 
disguised  in  imitation  of  the  Spartan  twins,  Castor  and  Pollux  ; 
sometimes  he  also  adorned  himself  with  ivy,  and  a  thyrsus,  and 
skins  of  fawns,  so  as  to  appear  in  the  guise  of  Bacchus. 

And  he  looked  upon  himself  as  being  in  this  respect  supe- 
rior to  all  of  these  beings,  because  each  of  them  while  he  had 
his  own  peculiar  honours  had  no  claim  to  those  which  belonged 
to  the  others,  but  he  in  his  envious  ambition  appropriated  all 
the  honours  of  the  whole  body  of  demigods  at  once,  or  I 
should  rather  say,  appropriated  the  demigods  themselves; 
transforming  himself  not  into  the  triple-bodied  Geryon,  so  as  to 
attract  all  beholders  by  the  multitude  of  his  bodies ;  but,  what 
was  the  most  extraordinary  thing  of  all,  changing  and  trans- 
forming the  essence  of  one  body  into  every  variety  of  form  and 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         117 

figure,  like  the  Egyptian  Proteus,  whom  Homer  has  repre- 
sented as  being  susceptible  of  every  variety  of  transformation, 
into  all  the  elements,  and  into  the  animals,  and  plants,  which 
belong  to  the  different  elements.* 

And  yet  why,  O  Caius  !  did  you  think  yourself  in  need  of 
spurious  honours,  such  as  the  temples  and  statues  of  the  beings 
above-mentioned  are  often  filled  with  ?  You  ought  rather  to 
have  imitated  their  virtues.  Hercules  purified  both  the  earth 
and  the  sea,  performing  labours  of  the  greatest  possible  im- 
portance and  of  the  highest  benefit  to  all  mankind,  in  order  to 
eradicate  all  that  was  mischievous  and  calculated  to  injure  the 
nature  of  each  of  the  elements.  Bacchus  rendered  the  vine 
susceptible  of  cultivation,  and  extracted  a  most  delicious  drink 
from  it,  which  is  at  the  same  time  most  beneficial  to  the  souls 
and  bodies  of  men,  leading  the  first  to  cheerfulness,  working  in 
them  a  forgetfulness  of  evils  and  a  hope  of  blessings,  and 
making  the  latter  more  healthy,  and  vigorous,  and  active,  and 
supple.  And  individually  it  renders  each  man  better,  and  alters 
populous  families  and  households,  leading  them  from  a  squalid 
and  laborious  life  of  vexation  to  a  course  of  relaxation  and 
cheerful  happiness,  and  causing  to  every  city  on  earth,  both 
Grecian   and  barbarian,   incessant  festivity,  and  mirth,    and 

*  Tlie  passage  in  Homer  is  to  be  found  at  Odyssey  iv.  363.  It  is 
imitated  more  concisely  by  Virgil,  who  makes  Gyrene  tell  Aristosus — 

Verum  ubi  correptum  manibus  viuclisque  tenebis 
Turn  varia)  eludent  species  atque  ora  ferarum ; 

j  Fiet  enim  subito  sus  horridus  atraque  tigris 

j  Squaraosusque  draco  et  fulva  cervice  leccna 

Aut  acrem  flaramas  sonitum  dabit,  atque  ita  vinclis 

Excidet,  aut  in  aquas  tenues  dilapsus  abibit. — Georg.  iv.  410. 

Which  is  thus  translated  by  Pope — 

"  Instant  he  wears,  elusive  of  the  rape, 
The  mimic  force  of  every  savage  shape  : 
Or  glides  with  liquid  lapse  a  murm'riug  stream. 
Or  wrapt  in  flame,  he  glows  at  every  limb. 
Yet  still  retentive,  with  redoubled  might 
Thro'  each  vain  passive  form  constrains  his  flight. 
But  when,  his  native  shape  resumed,  he  stands 
Patient  of  conquest,  and  j'^our  cause  demands  ; 
The  cause  that  urg'd  the  bold  attempt  declare, 
And  soothe  the  vanquish'd  with  a  victor's  prayer. 
The  bands  relaxed,  implore  the  seer  to  say 
What  godhead  interdicts  the  wab'ry  way." 


118  PHILO   JUD.EUS. 

entertainment,  and  revelry ;    for  of  all  these  things  is  good 
wine  the  cause. 

Again,  it  is  said  that  the  twin  sons  of  Jupiter,  Castor  and 
Pollux,  are  partakers  of  immortality.  For  since  the  one  waa 
mortal  and  the  other  immortal,  the  one  who  had  had  the  more 
excellent  portion  assigned  to  him  did  not  choose  to  behave  in  a 
selfish  manner,  but  rather  to  display  his  good  will  and  affection 
towards  his  brother  ;  for  having  acquired  the  idea  that  eternity 
was  never-ending,  and  considering  that  he  was  to  live  for  ever, 
and  that  his  brother  was  to  be  dead  for  ever,  and  that  in  con- 
junction with  his  own  immortality  he  should  likewise  be  en- 
during an  undying  sorrow  on  account  of  his  brother,  he 
conceived  and  carried  out  a  most  marvellous  system  of  counter- 
balancing, mingling  mortality  with  himself  and  immortality 
with  his  brother,  and  thus  he  modified  inequality,  which  is  the 
beginning  of  all  injustice,  by  equality,  which  is  the  fountain  of 
justice. 

XII.  All  these  beings,  0  Caius  !  were  admired  on  account 
of  the  benefits  which  they  had  conferred  on  mankind,  and  they 
are  admired  for  them  even  up  to  the  present  time,  and  they 
were  deservedly  thought  worthy  of  veneration  and  of  the  very 
highest  honours.  But  come  now,  and  tell  us  yourself  in  what 
achievement  of  yours  do  you  pride  youi'self  and  boast  yourself 
as  being  in  the  least  similar  to  their  actions  ?  Have  you  imi- 
tated the  twin  sons  of  Jupiter  in  their  brotherly  affection,  that 
1  may  begin  with  that  point  ?  Did  you  not  rather,  0  hard- 
hearted and  most  pitiless  of  men  !  inhumanly  slaughter  your 
brother,  the  joint  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  with  you,  even 
before  he  had  arrived  at  the  full  vigour  of  manhood,  when  he 
was  still  in  early  youth.  Did  you  not  afterwards  banish  your 
sisters,  lest  they  also  should  cause  you  any  reasonable  appre- 
hension of  the  deprivation  and  loss  of  your  imperial  power  ? 

Have  you  imitated  Bacchus  in  any  respect?  Have  you 
been  an  inventor  of  any  new  blessings  to  mankind?  Have 
you  filled  the  whole  of  the  habitable  world  with  joy  as  he  did  ? 
Are  all  Asia  and  Europe  inadequate  to  contain  the  gifts  which 
liave  been  showered  upon  mankind  by  you?  No  doubt  you 
have  invented  new  arts  and  sciences,  like  a  common  pest  and 
murderer  of  your  kind,  by  which  you  have  changed  all  pleasant 
and  acceptable  things  into  vexation  and  sorrow,  and  have  made 
life  miserable  and  intolerable  to  all  men  everywhere,  appro- 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         1 1 9 

priating  to  yourself  in  your  intolerable  and  insatiable  greedi- 
ness all  the  good  and  beautiful  things  which  belonged  to  every- 
one else,  whether  from  the  east  or  from  any  other  country  of 
the  universe,  carrying  off  everything  from  the  south,  every- 
thing from  the  north,  and  in  requital  giving  to  and  pouring 
down  upon  those  whom  you  had  plundered  every  sort  of  mis- 
chievous and  injurious  things  from  your  own  bitter  spirit, 
everything  which  is  ever  engendered  in  cruel,  and  destructive, 
and  envenomed  dispositions ;  these  are  the  reasons  why  you 
appeared  to  us  as  a  new  Bacchus. 

But  I  suppose  you  imitated  Hercules  in  your  unwearied 
labours  and  your  incessant  displays  of  valour  and  virtue ;  you, 
0  most  wretched  of  men !  having  filled  every  continent  and 
every  island  with  good  laws,  and  principles  of  justice,  and 
wealth,  and  comfort,  and  prosperity,  and  abundance  of  other 
blessings,  you,  wretched  man,  full  of  all  cowardice  and  iniquity, 
who  have  emptied  every  city  of  all  the  things  which  can  con- 
duce to  stability  and  prosperity,  and  have  made  them  full  of 
everything  which  leads  to  trouble  and  confusion,  and  the  most 
utter  misery  and  desolation. 

Tell  me  then,  0  Caius !  do  you,  after  having  made  all  these 

contributions  to  universal  destruction,  do  you,  I  say,  seek  to 

acquire  immortality  in  order  to  make  the  calamities  which  you 

have  heaped  upon  mankind,  not  of  brief  duration  and  short- 

I  lived,  but  imperishable  and  everlasting  ?     But  I  think,  on  the 

i  contrary,  that  even  if  you  had  previously  appeared  to  be  a  god, 

I  you  would  beyond  all  question  have  been  changed  on  account 

j  of  your  evil  practices  into  an  ordinary  nature,  resembling  that 

I  of  comnaon  perishable  mortals  ;  for  if  virtues  can  make  their 

I  possessors  immortal,  then  beyond  all  doubt  vices  can  make 

i  them  mortal.     Do  not,  therefore,  inscribe  your  name  by  the 

;  side  of  that  of  the  twin  sons  of  Jupiter,  those  most  affectionate 

S  of  deities,  you  who  have  been  the  murderer  and  destruction  of 

j  your  brethren,  nor  claim  a  share  in  the  honours  of  Hercules 

I  or  Bacchus,  who  have  benefited  human  life.     You  have  been 

I  the  undoer  and  destroyer  of  those  good  effects  which  they 

produced. 

Xni.  But  the  madness  and  frenzy  to  which  he  gave  way 
were  so  preposterous,  and  so  utterly  insane,  that  he  went  even 
beyond  the  demigods,  and  mounted  up  to  and  invaded  the 


120  rillLO  JUDiEUS. 

veneration  and  worship  paid  to  those  who  are  looked  upon  as 
greater  than  they,  as  the  supreme  deities  of  the  world,  Mercury, 
and  Apollo,  and  Mars. 

And  first  of  all  he  dressed  himself  up  with  the  caduceus, 
and  sandals,  and  mantle  of  Mercury,  exhibiting  a  regularity  in 
his  disorder,  a  consistency  in  his  confusion,  and  a  ratiocina- 
tion in  his  insanity. 

Afterwards,  when  he  thought  lit  to  do  so,  he  laid  aside  these 
ornaments,  and  metamorphosed  and  transformed  himself  into 
Apollo,  crowning  his  head  with  garlands,  in  the  form  of  rays, 
and  holding  a  bow  and  arrows  in  his  left  hand,  and  holding 
forth  graces  in  his  right,  as  if  it  became  him  to  proffer  blessings 
to  all  men  from  his  ready  store,  and  to  display  the  best  ar- 
rangement possible  on  his  right  hand,  but  to  contract  the 
punishments  which  he  had  it  in  his  power  to  inflict,  and  to 
allot  to  them  a  more  confined  space  on  his  left.  And  imme- 
diately there  were  established  choruses,  who  had  been  carefully 
trained,  singing  paeans  to  him,  the  same  who  had,  a  httle  while 
before,  called  him  Bacchus,  and  Evius,  and  Lyaeus,  and  sang 
Bacchic  hymns  in  his  honour  when  he  assumed  the  disguise  of 
Bacchus. 

Very  often,  also,  he  would  clothe  himself  with  a  breastplate, 
and  march  forth  sword  in  hand,  with  a  helmet  on  his  bead  and 
a  shield  on  his  left  arm,  calling  himself  Mars,  and  on  each 
side  of  him  there  marched  with  him  the  attendants  of  this 
new  and  unknown  Mars,  a  troop  of  murderers  and  executioners 
who  had  already  performed  him  all  kinds  of  wicked  services 
"when  he  was  raging  and  thirsting  for  human  blood ;  and  then 
when  men  saw  this  they  were  amazed  and  terrified  at  the 
marvellous  sight,  and  they  wondered  how  a  man  who  did 
exactly  the  contrary  to  what  was  done  by  those  beings  to  whom 
he  claimed  to  be  equal  in  honour,  did  not  choose  to  imitate 
their  virtues,  but  assumed  the  outward  character  of  each  with 
the  most  abominable  conduct.  And  yet  all  those  ornaments 
and  decorations  which  belonged  to  them  were  attached  to  his 
statues  and  images,  which  indicated  by  symbols  the  benefits 
which  the  beings  who  are  thus  honoured  confer  upon  the  race 
of  mankind.  Mercury,  for  instance,  requires  wings  attached 
to  his  ankles.  Why  so  ?  Is  it  not  because  it  behoves  him  to 
be  the  interpreter  and  declarer  of  the  will  of  the  gods  (from 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         121 

which  employment,  in  fact,  he  derives  his  Greek  name  of 
Hermes*),  announcing  good  news  to  mankind  (for  not  only  no 
god  bat  no  sensible  man  ever  will  become  the  messenger  of 
evil),  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  be  exceedingly 
swift-footed,  and  all  but  winged,  from  the  unhesitating  rapidity 
with  which  he  requires  to  proceed.  Since  it  is  right  that 
beneficial  news  should  be  announced  with  great  promptness, 
just  as  bad  news  ought  to  be  brought  slowly,  unless  indeed  any 
one  should  prefer  saying  that  such  ought  to  be  entirely  sup- 
pressed in  silence. 

Again,  he  takes  with  him  his  caduceus  or  herald's  wand,  as 
a  token  of  reconciliation  and  peace,  for  wars  receive  their  respites 
and  terminations  by  means  of  heralds,  who  restore  peace ;  and 
wars  which  have  no  heralds  to  terminate  them  cause  endless 
calamities  to  both  parties,  both  to  those  who  invade  their 
neighbours  and  to  those  who  are  endeavouring  to  repel  the 
invasion.  But  for  what  purpose  did  Caius  assume  the  winged 
sandals  of  Mercury?  Was  it  because  he  wished  to  spread 
with  power,  and  rapidity,  and  loudness  that  miserable  and 
ill-omened  intelligence  which  ought  rather  to  be  buried  in 
silence  altogether,  conveying  his  voice  everywhere  with  un- 
ceasing celerity  ? 

And  yet  what  need  had  he  of  such  rapid  motion  ?  for  even 
while  standing  still  he  poured  forth  unspeakable  evils  upon 
evils  as  if  from  an  unceasing  fountain,  showering  them  down 
upon  every  portion  of  the  habitable  world.  And  of  what  use 
was  the  herald's  wand  to  him,  who  never  either  said  or  did 
anything  bearing  upon  peace,  but  who  rather  filled  every 
house  and  every  city  within  Greece  and  in  the  countries  of  the 
barbarians  with  civil  wars?  Let  him,  therefore,  impostor  that 
he  is,  lay  aside  the  name  of  Mercury,  since  by  assuming  it  he 
is  only  profaning  an  appellation  which  does  not  belong  to  him. 

XIV.  Again,  of  all  the  attributes  of  Apollo,  what  is  there 
which  in  the  least  degree  resembles  his  characteristics  ?  He 
wears  a  crown  emitting  rays  all  around,  the  artist  who  made  it 
having  given  a  most  admirable  representation  of  the  beams  of 
the  sun ;  but  how  can  the  sun,  or  in  fact  any  light  at  all,  be  a 
welcome  object  to  him,  and  not  rather  night,  or  anything  else, 
if  there  be  such  more  completely  enveloped  darkness,  or  even 
anything  darker  than  darkness  itself,  for  the  performance  of 
*  i.e.  from  iQ^irji'tvu),  "to  interpret." 


12ii  PHILO   JUD^US. 

his  lawless  actions  ?  Since  good  actions  do  require  the  bril- 
liancy of  noonday  for  their  proper  display,  but  shameful  actions, 
as  they  say,  are  suited  to  the  extreme  depths  of  Tartarus,  into 
which  they  ought  to  be  thrust  in  order  to  be  concealed  from 
sight,  as  is  becoming.  Let  him  also  transpose  the  things 
which  he  bears  in  each  of  his  hands,  and  not  pollute  the  proper 
arrangement,  for  let  him  bear  his  arrows  and  his  bow  in  his 
right  hand,  for  he  knows  how  with  good  aim  to  shoot  at  and  to 
pierce  men  and  women,  and  whole  families,  and  populous 
cities,  to  their  complete  destruction.  And  let  him  either  at 
once  throw  away  his  graces  altogether,  or  else  let  him  keep 
them  in  the  shade  in  his  left  hand,  for  he  has  defaced  their 
beauty,  directing  all  his  eyes  and  exciting  all  his  desires 
against  vast  properties,  so  as  to  plunder  them  in  an  iniquitous 
manner,  in  consequence  of  which  their  owners  were  murdered, 
finding  themselves  unfortunate  through  their  good  fortune. 

But  no  doubt  he  with  great  felicity  gave  a  new  representa- 
tion of  the  medical  skill  of  Apollo,  for  this  god  was  the  inventor 
of  healing  medicines,*  so  as  to  cause  health  to  men,  thinking  fit 
himself  to  heal  the  diseases  which  were  inflicted  by  others,  by 
reason  of  the  excessive  mildness  and  gentleness  of  his  own 
nature  and  habits,  but  this  man,  on  the  contrary,  loads  those 
who  are  in  good  health  with  disease,  and  inflicts  mutilations 
on  those  who  are  sound,  and  in  short  visits  the  Hving  with 
most  cruel  death,  caused  by  the  hand  of  man  before  the  time 
of  their  natural  death,  preparing  every  imaginable  engine  of 
destruction  in  abundant  plenteousness,  by  means  of  which,  if  he 
had  not  himself  been  previously  put  to  death  in  accordance 

*  This  is  one  of  the  attributes  of  Apollo  of  which  he  boasts  to 
Daphne. 

Inventum  medicina  meum  est,  opiferque  per  orbem 

Dicor  et  herbarum  subjecta  potentia  nobis  : 

Hie  mihi  quod  nullis  amor  eat  medicabilis  herbis 

Nee  prosunt  domino  quae  prosunt  omnibus  artes. — Met.  1.461. 
Or  as  it  is  translated  by  Dryden  — 

"  Medicine  is  mine ;  what  herbs  and  simples  grow 

In  fields  and  forests,  all  their  powers  I  know, 

And  am  the  great  physician  called  below. 

Alas,  that  fields  and  forests  can  afford 

No  remedies  to  heal  their  love -sick  lord. 

To  cure  the  pains  of  love  no  plant  avails, 

And  his  own  physic  the  physician  fails." 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         123 

with  justice,  everything  glorious  or  respectable  in  every  city 
would  long  ago  have  been  destroyed. 

For  his  designs  were  prepared  against  all  those  in  authority 
and  all  those  possessed  of  riches,  and  especially  against  those 
in  Rome  and  those  in  the  rest  of  Italy,  by  whom  such  quanti- 
ties of  gold  and  silver  had  been  treasured  up  that  even  if  all 
the  riches  of  all  the  rest  of  the  habitable  world  had  been 
collected  together  from  its  most  distant  borders,  it  would  have 
been  found  to  be  very  inferior  in  amount. 

On  this  account  he  began,  he,  this  hater  of  the  citizens,  this 
devourer  of  the  people,  this  pestilence,  this  destructive  evil, 
began  to  banish  all  the  seeds  of  peace  from  his  country,  as  if 
he  were  expelling  evil  from  holy  ground ;  for  Apollo  is  said  to 
have  been  not  only  a  physician  but  also  an  excellent  prophet, 
by  his  oracular  predictions  announcing  what  was  likely  to  con- 
duce to  the  advantage  of  mankind,  in  order  that  no  one,  being 
overshadowed  by  uncertainty,  going  on  without  seeing  his  way 
before  him  like  a  blind  man,  might  hastily  fall  into  unexpected 
evils  as  if  they  were  the  greatest  benefits  ;  but  that  men  having 
previously  acquired  a  knowledge  of  the  future  as  if  it  were 
really  present,  and  looking  at  it  with  the  eye  of  their  mind, 
might  guard  against  future  evils  just  as  they  can  see  evils 
actually  before  them  with  the  bodily  eye,  and  in  this  way 
secure  themselves  against  any  irremediable  disaster. 

Is  it  fitting  now  to  compare  with  these  oracles  of  Apollo  the 
ill-omened  warnings  of  Caius,  by  means  of  which  poverty,  and 
dishonour,  and  banishment,  and  death  were  given  premature 
notice  of  to  all  those  who  were  in  power  and  authority  in  any 
part  of  the  world  ?  What  connexion  or  resemblance  was  there 
between  him  and  Apollo,  when  he  never  paid  any  attention  to 
any  ties  of  kindred  or  friendship  ?  Let  him  cease,  then,  this 
pretended  Apollo,  from  imitating  that  real  healer  of  mankind, 
for  the  form  of  God  is  not  a  thing  which  is  capable  of  being 
imitated  by  an  inferior  one,  as  good  money  is  imitated  by  bad. 

XV.  A  man,  indeed,  may  expect  anything  rather  than  that 
a  man  endowed  with  such  a  body  and  such  a  soul,  when  both 
of  them  are  effeminate  and  broken  down,  could  ever  possibly 
be  made  like  to  the  vigour  of  Mars  in  either  particular;  but 
this  man,  like  a  mummer  transforming  himself  on  the  stage, 
putting  on  all  sorts  of  masl«  one  after  anotlier,  sought  to 
deceive  the  spectators    by  a  series  of  fictitious  appearances. 


124  PHILO   JUD^US. 

Come,  then,  let  him  be  subjected  to  an  examination  in  respect 
of  all  the  particulars  of  his  soul  and  body,  by  reason  of  his 
utter  unlikeness  to  the  aforesaid  deity  in  every  position  and  in 
every  motion.  Was  he  not  utterly  unlike  Mars,  not  in  respect 
only  of  his  appearance  as  celebrated  in  fable,  but  as  to  his 
natural  qualities  ?  Mars,  who  is  endued  with  pre-eminent 
valour,  which  we  know  to  be  a  power  calculated  to  avert  evil, 
to  be  the  assistant  and  ally  of  all  who  are  unjustly  oppressed, 
as  indeed  his  very  name  shows,  for  he  appears  to  me  to  be 
called  Mars  from  his  helping,*  which  is  the  same  as  assisting, 
being  as  such  the  god  who  is  able  to  put  down  wars  and  to 
cause  peace,  of  which  this  representation  of  his  was  the  enemy, 
being  the  comrade  of  wars,  and  the  man  who  changed  peace  and 
stability  into  disorder  and  confusion. 

XVI.  Have  we  not,  then,  learned  from  all  these  instances, 
that  Caius  ought  not  to  be  likened  to  any  god,  and  not  even  to 
any  demi-god,  inasmuch  as  he  has  neither  the  same  nature,  nor 
the  same  essence,  nor  even  the  same  wishes  and  intentions  as 
any  one  of  them  ;  but  appetite  as  it  seems  is  a  blind  thing,  and 
especially  so  when  it  takes  to  itself  vain-gloriousness  and  am- 
bition in  conjunction  with  the  greatest  power,  by  which  we 
who  were  previously  unfortunate  are  utterly  destroyed,  for  he 
regarded  the  Jews  with  most  especial  suspicion,  as  if  they  were 
the  only  persons  who  cherished  wishes  opposed  to  his,  and  who 
had  been  taught  in  a  manner  from  their  very  swaddling-clothes 
by  their  parents,  and  teachers,  and  instructors,  and  even  before 
that  by  their  holy  laws,  and  also  by  thei^  unwi'itten  maxims 
and  customs,  to  believe  that  there  was  but  one  God,  their 
Father  and  the  Creator  of  the  world ;  for  all  others,  all  men, 
all  women,  all  cities,  all  nations,  every  country  and  region  of 
the  earth,  I  had  almost  said  the  whole  of  the  inhabited  world, 
although  groaning  over  what  was  taking  place,  did  nevertheless 
flatter  him,  dignifying  him  above  measure,  and  helping  to 
increase  his  pride  and  arrogance;  and  some  of  them  even 
introduced  the  barbaric  custom  into  Italy  of  falling  down  in 
adoration  before  him,  adulterating  their  native  feelings  of 
Roman  liberty. 

But  the  single  nation  of  the  Jews,  being  excepted  from  these 
actions,  was  suspected  by  him  of  wishing  to  counteract  his 

*  The  Greek  word  is  apjyyfiv,  from  which  Philo  supposes  'Aprjc,  the 
Greek  name  of  Mars,  to  be  derived. 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        125 

desires,  since  it  was  accustomed  to  embrace  voluntary  death  as 
an  entraTice  to  immortality,  for  the  sake  of  not  permitting  any 
of  their  national  or  hereditary  customs  to  be  destroyed,  even  if 
it  were  of  the  most  trivial  character,  because,  as  is  the  case  in 
a  house,  it  often  happens  that  by  the  removal  of  one  small  part, 
even  those  parts  which  appeared  to  be  solidly  established  fall 
down,  being  relaxed  and  brought  to  decay  by  the  removal  of 
that  one  thing,  but  in  this  case  what  was  put  in  motion  was 
not  a  trifle,  but  a  thing  of  the  very  greatest  importance, 
namely,  the  erecting  the  created  and  perishable  nature  of  a 
man,  as  far  at  least  as  appearance  went,  into  the  uncreated  and 
imperishable  nature  of  God,  which  the  nation  correctly  judged 
to  be  the  most  terrible  of  all  impieties  (for  it  would  have  been 
easier  to  change  a  god  into  man,  than  a  man  into  God),  besides 
the  fact  of  such  an  action  letting  in  other  most  enormous  wick- 
edness, infidelity  and  ingratitude  towards  the  Benefactor  of 
the  whole  world,  who  by  his  own  power  gives  abundant  supplies 
of  all  kinds  of  blessings  to  every  part  of  the  universe. 

XVII.  Therefore  a  most  terrible  and  irreconcileable  war 
was  prepared  against  our  nation,  for  what  could  be  a  more 
terrible  evil  to  a  slave  than  a  master  who  was  an  enemy? 
And  his  subjects  are  the  slaves  of  the  emperor,  even  if  they 
were  not  so  to  any  one  of  the  former  emperors,  because  they 
governed  with  gentleness  and  in  accordance  with  the  laws,  but 
now  that  Caius  had  eradicated  all  feelings  of  humanity  from  his 
soul,  and  had  admired  lawlessness  (for  looking  upon  himself  as 
the  law,  he  abrogated  all  the  enactments  of  other  lawgivers  in 
every  state  and  country  as  so  many  vain  sentences),  we  were 
properly  to  be  looked  upon  not  only  as  slaves,  but  as  the  very 
lowest  and  mose  dishonoured  of  slaves,  now  that  our  ruler  was 
changed  into  our  niaster. 

XVIII.  And  the  mixed  and  promiscuous  multitude  of  the 
Alexandrians  perceiving  this,  attacked  us,  looking  upon  it  as 
a  most  favourable  opportunity  for  doing  so,  and  displayed  all 
the  arrogance  which  had  been  smouldering  for  a  long  period, 
disturbing  everything,  and  causing  universal  confusion,  for  they 
began  to  crush  our  people  as  if  they  had  been  surrendered  by 
the  emperor  for  the  most  extreme  and  undeniable  miseries,  or 
as  if  they  had  been  subdued  in  war,  with  their  frantic  and 
most  brutal  passion,  forcing  their  way  into  their  houses,  and 
driving  out  the  owners,  with  their  wives  and  children,  which 


126  PHILO  JUD-fiDS. 

they  rendered  desolate  and  void  of  inhabitants.  And  no 
longer  watching  for  night  and  darkness,  like  ordinary 
robbers  out  of  fear  of  being  detected,  they  openly  plun- 
dered them  of  all  their  furniture  and  treasures,  carrying 
them  off  in  broad  daylight,  and  displaying  their  booty  to 
every  one  whom  they  met,  as  if  they  had  inherited  it  or 
fairly  purchased  it  from  the  owners. 

And  if  a  multitude  joined  together  to  share  any  particular 
piece  of  plunder,  they  divided  it  in  the  middle  of  the  market- 
place, reviling  it  and  turning  it  all  into  ridicule  before  the 
eyes  of  its  real  owners.  These  things  were  of  themselves 
terrible  and  grievous;  how  could  they  be  otherwise  ?  Surely 
it  was  most  miserable  for  men  to  become  beggars  from 
having  been  wealthy,  and  to  be  reduced  on  a  sudden  from  a 
state  of  abundance  to  one  of  utter  indigence,  without  having 
done  any  wrong,  and  to  be  rendered  houseless  and  homeless, 
being  driven  out  and  expelled  from  their  own  houses,  that 
thus,  being  compelled  to  dwell  in  the  open  air  day  and  night, 
they  might  be  destroyed  by  the  burning  heat  of  the  sun  or 
by  the  cold  of  the  night. 

Yet  even  these  evils  were  lighter  than  those  which  I  am 
about  to  mention;  for  when  the  populace  had  driven 
together  these  countless  myriads  of  men,  and  women,  and 
children,  like  so  many  herds  of  sheep  and  oxen,  from  every 
quarter  of  the  city,  into  a  very  narrow  space  as  if  into  a 
pen,  they  expected  that  in  a  few  days  they  should  find  a 
heap  of  corpses  all  huddled  together,  as  they  would  either 
have  perished  by  hunger  through  the  want  of  necessary 
food,  as  they  had  not  prepared  themselves  with  any  thing 
requisite,  through  a  foreknowledge  of  the  evils  which 
thus  suddenly  came  upon  them ;  or  else  through  being 
crushed  and  suffocated  from  want  of  any  adequate  space 
to  breathe  in,  all  the  air  around  them  becoming  tainted,  and 
all  that  there  was  of  vivifying  power  in  their  respiration 
being  cut  off,  or,  if  one  is  to  say  the  truth,  utterly  expelled, 
by  the  breath  of  those  who  were  expiring  among  them.  By 
which,  each  individual  being  inflamed,  and  in  a  manner 
oppressed  by  a  descent  of  fever  upon  him,  inhaled  a  hot  and 
unwholesome  breath  through  his  nostrils  and  mouth,  heap- 
ing, as  the  proverb  has  it,  fire  on  fire ;  for  the  power  which 
resides  in  the  inmost  parts  changed  its  nature,  and  became 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         ]27 

most  excessively  fiery;  upon  wMch,  when  the  external 
breezes,  being  moderately  cool,  blow,  all  the  organs  of  the 
respiratory  powers  flourish,  and  are  in  a  good  and  healthy 
condition ;  but  when  these  breezes  change  and  become  hot, 
then  those  organs  must  of  necessity  be  in  a  bad  state,  fire 
being  added  to  fire. 

XIX.  As  they  then  were  no  longer  able  to  endure  the 
misery  of  the  place  within  which  they  were  enclosed,  they 
poured  forth  into  desolate  parts  of  the  wilderness,  and  to 
the  shore,  and  among  the  tombs,  in  their  eagerness  to  find 
any  pure  and  untainted  air.  And  if  any  of  them  had 
previously  been  left  in  the  other  parts  of  the  city,  or  if  any 
had  come  in  thither  from  the  fields  out  of  ignorance  of  the 
evils  which  had  visited  their  companions,  they  fell  into  every 
variety  of  misfortune,  being  stoned,  or  else  wounded  with 
sharp  tiles,  or  beaten  on  the  most  mortal  parts  of  the  body, 
and  especially  on  the  head,  with  branches  of  maple  and  of 
oak,  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  death. 

And  some  of  those  persons  who  are  accustomed  to  pass 
their  time  in  idleness  and  inaction,  sitting  around,  occupied 
themselves  in  watching  those  who,  as  I  have  said  before, 
were  thus  driven  together  and  crammed  into  a  very  small 
space,  as  if  they  were  a  force  which  they  were  blockading ; 
lest  any  one  should  secretly  escape  without  their  perceiving 
it.  And  a  great  many  were  designing  td  effect  their  escape 
from  want  of  necessaries,  disregarding  their  own  safety  from 
a  fear  that,  if  they  remained,  the  whole  body  might  perish 
with  famine.  So  those  men,  expecting  that  they  would 
endeavour  to  escape,  kept  a  continual  watch,  and  the 
moment  tliat  they  caught  any  one,  they  immediately  put 
him  to  death  with  every  circumstance  of  insult  and  cruelty. 

And  there  was  another  company  lying  in  wait  for  them 
on  the  quays  of  the  river,  to  catch  any  Jews  who  arrived  at 
those  spots,  and  to  plunder  them  of  every  thing  which  they 
brought  for  the  purposes  of  traffic ;  for,  forcing  their  way 
into  their  ships  they  took  out  the  cargo  before  the  eyes  of 
its  lawful  owners,  and  then,  binding  the  hands  of  the 
merchants  behind  them,  they  burnt  them  alive,  taking  the 
rudders,  and  helms,  and  punt-poles,  and  the  benches  for  the 
rowers  to  sit  upon,  for  fuel.  And  thus  these  men  perished 
by  a  most  miserable  death  being  burnt  alive  in  the  middle 


128  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

of  the  city  ;  for  sometimes,  for  want  of  other  timber  they 
brought  piles  of  faggots  together,  and  tying  them  up,  they 
threw  them  on  the  miserable  victims ;  and  they,  being 
already  half  burnt,  were  killed,  more  by  the  smoke  of  the 
green  wood  than  by  the  flames,  as  the  new  faggots  gave  forth 
only  an  unsubstantial  and  smoky  sort  of  flame,  and  were 
soon  extinguished,  not  being  able  to  be  reduced  to  ashes  by 
reason  of  their  lightness. 

And  many  who  were  still  alive  they  took  and  bound,  and 
fastened  their  ankles  together  with  thongs  and  ropes,  and 
then  dragged  them  through  the  middle  of  the  market-place, 
leaping  on  them,  and  not  sparing  their  corpses  even  after 
they  were  dead ;  for,  tearing  them  to  pieces  limb  from  limb, 
and  trampling  on  them,  behaving  with  greater  brutality 
and  ferocity  than  even  the  most  savage  beasts,  they 
destroyed  every  semblance  of  humanity  about  them,  so  that 
not  even  a  fragment  of  them  was  left  to  which  the  rites  of 
burial  could  be  afforded. 

XX.  But  as  the  governor  of  the  country,  who  by  himself 
could,  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so,  have  put  down  the  violence 
of  the  multitude  in  a  single  hour,  pretended  not  to  see  what 
he  did  see,  and  not  to  hear  what  he  did  hear,  but  allowed 
the  mob  to  carry  on  the  war  against  our  people  without  any 
restraint,  and  threw  our  former  state  of  tranquillity  into 
confusion,  the  poprlace  being  excited  still  more,  proceeded 
onwards  to  still  more  shameless  and  more  audacious  designs 
and  treachery,  and,  arraying  very  numerous  companies,  cut 
down  some  of  the  synagogues  (and  there  are  a  great  many 
in  every  section  of  the  city),  and  some  they  razed  to  the 
very  foundations,  and  into  some  they  threw  fire  and  burnt 
them,  in  their  insane  madness  and  frenzy,  without  caring 
for  the  neighbouring  houses ;  for  there  is  nothing  more 
rapid  than  fire,  when  it  lays  hold  of  fuel. 

I  omit  to  mention  the  ornaments  in  honour  of  the 
emperor,  which  were  destroyed  and  burnt  with  these 
synagogues,  such  as  gilded  shields,  and  gilded  crowns,  and 
pillars,  and  inscriptions,  for  the  sake  of  which  they  ought 
even  to  have  abstained  from  and  spared  the  other  things ; 
but  they  were  full  of  confidence,  inasmuch  as  they  did  not 
fear  any  chastisement  at  the  hand  of  Caius,  as  they  well 
knew  that  he  cherished  an  indescribable  hatred  against  the 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         129 

Jews,  SO  that  their  opinion  was  that  no  one  could  do  him  a 
more  acceptable  service  than  by  inflicting  every  description 
of  injury  on  the  nation  which  he  hated  ;  and,  as  they  wished 
to  curry  favour  with  him  by  a  novel  kind  of  flattery,  so  as  to 
allow,  and  for  the  future  to  give  the  rein  to,  every  sort  of  ill 
treatment  of  us  without  ever  being  called  to  account,  what 
did  they  proceed  to  do  ?  All  the  synagogues  that  they 
were  unable  to  destroy  by  burning  and  razing  them  to  the 
ground,  because  a  great  number  of  Jews  lived  in  a  dense 
mass  in  the  neighbourhood,  they  injured  and  defaced  in 
another  manner,  simultaneously  with  a  total  overthrow  of 
their  laws  and  customs ;  for  they  set  up  in  every  one  of 
them  images  of  Caius,  and  in  the  greatest,  and  most 
conspicuous,  and  most  celebrated  of  them  they  erected  a 
brazen  statue  of  him  borne  on  a  four-horse  chariot.  And  so 
excessive  and  impetuous  was  the  rapidity  of  their  zeal,  that, 
as  they  had  not  a  new  chariot  for  four  horses  ready,  they 
got  a  very  old  one  out  of  the  gymnasium,  full  of  poison, 
mutilated  in  its  ears,  and  in  the  hinder  part,  and  in  its 
pedestal,  and  in  many  other  points,  and  as  some  say,  one 
which  had  already  been  dedicated  in  honour  of  a  woman,  the 
eminent  Cleopatra,  who  w^as  the  great  grandmother  of  the 
last. 

Now  what  amount  of  accusation  he  brought  against  those 
who  had  dedicated  this  chariot  on  this  very  account  is 
notorious  to  every  one ;  for  what  did  it  signify  if  it  was  a 
new  one  and  belonging  to  a  woman  ?  Or  what  if  it  was  an 
old  one  and  belonging  to  a  man  ?  And  what,  in  short,  if  it 
was  wholly  dedicated  to  the  name  of  some  one  else  ?  Was  it 
not  natural  that  those  who  were  oftering  up  a  chariot  of  this 
sort  on  behalf  of  the  emperor  should  be  full  of  cautious  fear, 
lest  some  one  might  lay  an  information  against  them  before 
our  emperor,  who  took  such  especial  care  that  every  thing 
which  at  all  aftected  or  related  to  himself  should  be  done  in 
the  most  dignified  manner  possible  ? 

But  these  men  expected  to  be  most  extravagantly  praised, 
md  to  receive  greater  and  more  conspicuous  advantages  as 
rewards  for  their  conduct,  in  thus  dedicating  the  synagogues 
0  Caius  as  new  pieces  of  consecrated  ground,  not  because 
)t  the  honour  which  was  done  to  him  by  this  proceeding, 
Dut  because  in  this  way  they  exhausted  every  possible  means 

VOL.  IV.  K 


130  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

of  insulting  and  injuring  our  nation.  And  one  may  find 
undeniable  and  notorious  proofs  of  this  having  been  the 
case. 

For,  in  the  first  place,  one  may  derive  them  from  about 
ten  kings  or  more  who  reigned  in  order,  one  after  another, 
for  three  hundred  years,  and  who  never  once  had  any  images 
or  statues  of  themselves  erected  in  our  synagogues,  though 
there  were  many  of  their  relations  and  kinsmen  whom  they 
considered,  and  registered  as,  and  spoke  of  as  gods.  And 
what  would  they  not  have  done  in  the  case  of  those  whom 
they  looked  upon  as  men  ?  a  people  who  look  upon  dogs, 
and  wolves,  and  lions,  and  crocodiles,  and  numerous  other 
beasts,  both  terrestrial  and  aquatic,  and  numerous  birds,  as 
gods,  and  erect  in  their  honour  altars,  and  temples,  and 
shrines,  and  consecrated  precincts,  throughout  the  whole  of 
Egypt  ? 

XXI.  Perhaps  some  people  who  would  not  have  opened 
their  mouths  then  will  say  now :  "  They  were  accustomed 
to  pay  respect  to  the  good  deeds  done  by  their  govern- 
ors  rather   than   to   their   governors   themselves,   because 
the   emperors   are    greater   than   the    Ptolemies,   both    in 
their  dignities  and  in  their  fortunes,  and  are  justly  entitled 
to  receive  higher  honours.     Then,   0  ye  most  foolish  of 
all  mankind!  that  I  may  not  be  compelled  to  utter  any 
thing   disrespectful   or   blasphemous,  why  did   you   never 
think  Tiberius,  who  was  emperor  before  Caius,  who  indeed 
was  the  cause  that  Caius  ever  became  emperor,  who  himself 
enjoyed  the  supreme  power  by  land  and  sea  for  three  and 
twenty  years,  and  who  never  allowed  any  seed  of  war  to 
smoulder  or  to  raise  its  head,  either  in  Greece  or  in  the 
territory  of  the  barbarians,  and  who  bestowed  peace  and  the 
blessings  of  peace  up  to  the  end  of  his  life  with  a  rich  and 
most  bounteous  hand  and  mind  upon  the  whole  empire  and  the 
whole  world ;  why,  I  say,  did  you  not  consider  hiln  worthy 
of  similar  honour  ?     AVas  he  inferior  in  birth  ?     No ;  he  was 
of  the  most  noble  blood  by  both  parents.     AVas  he  inferior 
in  his  education  ?     Who,  of  all  the  men  who  flourished  in 
his  time,  was  either  more  prudent  or  more  eloquent  ?     Or 
in  his  age  ?     "What  king  or  emperor  ever  lived  to  more 
prosperous  old  age  than  he  ?     Moreover,  he,  even  while  he 
was  still  a  young  man,  was  called  the  old  man  as  a  mark  of 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         131 

respect  because  of  his  exceeding  wisdom.  This  man,  though 
he  was  so  wise,  and  so  good,  and  so  great,  was  passed  over 
and  disregarded  by  you. 

Again,  why  did  you  not  ])ay  similar  honour  to  him  who 
exceeded  the  common  race  of  human  nature  in  every  virtue, 
who,  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of  his  absolute  power  and 
his  own  excellence,  was  the  first  man  to  be  called  Augustus, 
not  receiving  the  title  after  another  by  a  succession  of  blood 
as  a  part  of  his  inheritance,  but  who  was  himself  the  origin 
of  his  successors,  having  that  title  and  honour  ?  He  who 
first  became  emperor,  when  all  the  affairs  of  the  state  were 
in  disorder  and  confusion ;  for  the  islands  were  in  a  state  of 
war  against  the  continents,  and  the  continents  were  con- 
tending with  the  islands  for  the  pre-eminence  in  honour, 
each  having  for  their  leaders  and  champions  the  most 
powerfid  and  eminent  of  the  E/omans  who  were  in  office. 
And  then  again,  great  sections  of  Asia  were  contending 
against  Europe,  and  Europe  against  Asia,  for  the  chief  power 
and  dominion  ;*  the  European  and  Asiatic  nations  rising  up 
from  the  extremities  of  the  earth,  and  Avaging  terrible  wars 
against  one  another  over  all  the  earth,  and  over  every  sea, 
with  enormous  armaments,  so  that  very  nearly  the  Avhole 
race  of  mankind  would  have  been  destroyed  by  mutual 
slaughter  and  made  utterly  to  disappear,  if  it  had  not  been 

•  He  alludes  here  to  the  war  between  Caesar  and  Pompey.  Pompey 
had  been  governor  of  Syria,  and  Virgil  speaks  of  him  as  relying  on  his 
eastern  forces. 

Ill?e  autem,  paribus  quas  fulgere  cemia  in  arm  is, 
Concordes  animas  nunc,  et  dum  nocte  premuntur 
Heu  !  quantum  inter  se  bellum,  si  lumiua  vitse 
Attigerint,  quantas  acies  stragemque  ciebunt  I 
Aggeribus  socer  Alpinis  atque  arce  Monoeci 
Descendens  ;  gener  adversis  instructus  Eois. — ^n.  \i.  832. 
Or  as  it  is  translated  by  Dryden — 

"  The  pair  you  see  in  equal  armour  shine, 
Now,  friends  below,  in  close  embraces  join  ; 
But  when  they  leave  the  shady  realms  of  night, 
And  clothed  in  bodies  breathe  your  upper  light, 
With  mortal  hate  each  other  shall  pursue, 
AVh.at  wars,  what  wounds,  what  slaughter  shall  ensue. 
Pi'om  Alpine  heights  the  father  first  descends, 
His  daughter's  husband  in  the  plain  attends, 
His  daughter's  husband  arms  his  eastern  friends." 
K  2 


132  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

for  one  man  and  leader,  Augustus,  by  whose  means  they 
were  brought  to  a  better  state,  and  therefore  we  may  justly 
call  him  the  averter  of  evil. 

This  is  Caesar,  who  calmed  the  storms  which  were  raging 
in  every  direction,  who  healed  the  common  diseases  which 
were  afflicting  both  Greeks  and  barbarians,  who  descended 
from  the  south  and  from  the  east,  and  ran  on  and  penetrated 
as  far  as  the  north  and  the  west,  in  such  a  way  as  to  fill  all 
the  neighbouring  districts  and  waters  with  unexpected 
miseries.  This  is  he  who  did  not  only  loosen  but  utterly 
abolish  the  bonds  in  which  the  whole  of  the  habitable  world 
was  previously  bound  and  weighed  down.  This  is  he  who 
destroyed  both  the  evident  and  the  unseen  wars  which  arose 
from  the  attacks  of  robbers.  This  is  he  who  rendered  the 
sea  free  from  the  vessels  of  pirates,  and  filled  it  with 
merchantmen.*  This  is  he  who  gave  freedom  to  every 
city,  who  brought  disorder  into  order,  who  civilized  and 
made  obedient  and  harmonious,  nations  which  before  his 
time  were  unsociable,  hostile,  and  brutal.  This  is  he  who 
increased  G-reece  by  many  Greeces,  and  who  Greecised  the 
regions  of  the  barbarians  in  their  most  important  divisions  : 
the  guardian  of  peace,  the  distributor  to  every  man  of  what 
was  suited  to  him,  the  man  who  proffered  to  all  the  citizens 
favours  with  the  most  ungrudging  liberality,  who  never  once 
in  his  whole  life  concealed  or  reserved  for  himself  any  thing 
that  was  good  or  excellent. 

XXII.  Now  this  man  who  was  so  great  a  benefactor  to 
them  for  the  space  of  three  and  forty  years,  during  which 
he  reigned  over  Egypt,  they  passed  over  in  silence  and 
neglect,  never  erecting  any  thing  in  their  synagogues  to  do 
him  honour ;  no  image,  no  statue,  no  inscription. 

And  yet  if  ever  there  was  a  man  to  whom  it  was  proper 
that  new  and  unprecedented  honours  should  be  voted,  it  was 
certainly  fitting  that  such  should  be  decreed  to  him,  not 
only  because  he  was  as  it  were  the  origin  and  fountain  of 
the  family  of  Augustus,  not  because  he  was  the  first,  and 
greatest,  and  universal  benefactor,  having,  instead  of  the 
multitude  of  governors  who  existed  before,  entrusted  the 
common  vessel  of  the  state   to   himself  as   one   pilot   of 

*  He  is  attributing  an  honour  to  Augustus  which  does  not  belong  to 
him.     It  was  Pompey  who  cleared  the  sea  of  pirates. 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS  133 

admirable  skill  in  the  science  of  governments  to  steer  and 
govern ;  for  the  verse, 

"  The  government  of  many  is  not  good,"  * 

is  very  properly  expressed,  since  a  multitude  of  votes  is  the 
cause  of  every  variety  of  evil ;  but  also  because  the  whole  of 
the  rest  of  the  habitable  world  had  decreed  him  honours  equal 
to  those  of  the  Olympian  gods.  And  we  have  evidence  of 
this  in  the  temples,  and  porticoes,  and  sacred  precincts,  and 
groves,  and  colonnades  which  have  been  erected,  so  that  all 
the  cities  put  together,  ancient  and  modern,  which  exhibit 
magnificent  works,  are  surpassed,  by  the  beauty  and  magni- 
tude of  the  buildings  erected  in  honour  of  Caesar,  and 
especially  by  those  raised  in  our  city  of  Alexandria. 

For  there  is  no  sacred  precinct  of  such  magnitude  as  that 
which  is  called  the  Grove  of  Augustus,  and  the  temple 
erected  in  honour  of  the  disembarkation  of  Csesar,  which  is 
raised  to  a  great  lioight,  of  great  size,  and  of  the  most 
conspicuous  beauty,  opposite  the  best  harbour ;  being  such 
an  one  as  is  not  to  be  seen  in  any  other  city,  and  full  of 
offerings,  in  pictures,  and  statues ;  and  decorated  all  around 
with  silver  and  gold ;  being  a  very  extensive  space,  orna- 
mented in  the  most  magnificent  and  sumptuous  manner  with 
porticoes,  and  libraries,  and  men's  chambers,  and  groves,  and 
propylaja,  and  wide,  open  terraces,  and  court-yards  in  the 
open  air,  and  with  everything  that  could  contribute  to  use 
or  beauty ;  being  a  hope  and  beacon  of  safety  to  all  who  set 
sail,  or  who  came  into  harbour. 

XXIII.  Therefore,  though  they  had  such  admirable  prc- 
exts  for  such  conduct,  and  all  the  nations  in  every  part  of 
the  world  inclined  to  agree  with  them,  they  nevertheless 
neither  made  any  innovations  in  their  sjTiagogues,  but  kept 
'lie  law  in  every  particular;  and  refused  any  marks  of 
•espect  and  veneration  which  might  have  been  looked  upon 
IS  due  to  Csesar.  Perhaps  some  cautious  and  sensible 
)erson  may  ask :  "  Why  were  all  these  honours  denied  to 
nm?"  1  will  tell  the  reason,  without  suppressing  any 
hing, 

They  were  aware  of  the  attention  which  he  paid  to  every 
liing,  and  of  the  very  exceeding  care  which  he  took  that  the 
•  Horn.  II.  ii.  204. 


134  PHTLO   JUDiEUS. 

national  laws  and  customs  prevailing  in  each  nation  should 
be  confirmed  and  preserved,  being  equally  anxious  for  the 
preservation  of  the  rights  of  foreign  nations  in  this  respect, 
as  for  those  of  the  Romans;  and  that  he  received  his 
honours,  not  for  the  destruction  of  the  laws  existing  in  any 
people,  filling  himself  with  pride  and  arrogance,  but  in  a 
spirit  of  proper  conformity  with  the  magnitude  of  so  vast  an 
empire,  which  is  dignified  and  honoured  by  such  marks  of 
respect  being  paid  to  the  emperor. 

And  tliere  is  most  undeniable  proof  that  he  was  never 
influenced  or  puffed  up  by  the  excessive  honours  paid  to 
him,  in  the  fact  that  he  did  not  approve  of  any  one's 
addressing  him  as  master  or  god,  but  if  any  one  used  such 
expressions  he  was  angry ;  and  we  may  see  it  too  in  his 
approbation  of  the  Jews,  who  he  well  knew  most  reli- 
giously avoided  all  such  language. 

How  then  did  he  look  upon  the  great  division  of  Eome 
which  is  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  Tiber,  which  he  was 
well  aware  was  occupied  and  inhabited  by  the  Jews  ?  And 
they  were  mostly  E-oman  citizens,  having  been  emancipated ; 
for,  having  been  brought  as  captives  into  Italy,  they  were 
manumitted  by  those  who  had  bought  them  for  slaves,  with- 
out ever  having  been  compelled  to  alter  any  of  their 
hereditary  or  national  observances.  Therefore,  he  knew 
that  they  had  synagogues,  and  that  they  were  in  the  habit 
of  visiting  them,  and  most  especially  on  the  sacred  sabbath 
days,  when  they  publicly  cultivate  their  national  philosophy. 
He  knew  also  that  they  were  in  the  habit  of  contributing 
sacred  sums  of  money  from  their  first  fruits  and  sending 
them  to  Jerusalem  by  the  hands  of  those  who  were  to 
conduct  the  sacrifices.  But  he  never  removed  them  from 
E-ome,  nor  did  he  ever  deprive  them  of  their  rights  as 
Eoman  citizens,  because  he  had  a  regard  for  Judaea,  nor  did 
he  ever  meditate  any  new  steps  of  innovation  or  rigour 
with  respect  to  their  synagogues,  nor  did  he  forbid  their 
assembling  for  the  interpretation  of  the  law,  nor  did  he 
make  any  opposition  to  their  offerings  of  first  fruits  ;  but  he 
behaved  with  such  piety  towards  our  countrymen,  and  with 
respect  to  all  our  customs,  that  he,  I  may  ahnost  say,  with 
all  his  house,  adorned  our  temple  with  many  costly  aud 
magnificent  ofierings,  commanding  that  continued  sacrifices 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         135 

of  whole  burnt  offerings  should  be  offered  up  for  ever  and 
ever  every  day  from  his  own  revenues,  as  a  first  fruit  of  his 
own  to  the  most  high  Grod,  which  sacrifices  are  performed  to 
this  very  day,  and  will  be  performed  for  ever,  as  a  proof  and 
specimen  of  a  truly  imperial  disposition. 

Moreover,  in  the  monthly  divisions  of  the  country,  when 
the  whole  people  receives  money  or  corn  in  turn,  he  never 
allowed  the  Jews  to  fall  short  in  their  reception  of  this 
favour,  but  even  if  it  happened  that  this  distribution  fell  on 
the  day  of  their  sacred  sabbath,  on  which  day  it  is  not  lawful 
for  them  to  receive  any  thing,  or  to  give  any  thing,  or  in 
short  to  perform  any  of  the  ordinary  duties  of  life,  he 
charged  the  dispenser  of  these  gifts,  and  gave  him  the  most 
careful  and  special  injunctions  to  make  the  distribution  to 
the  Jews  on  the  day  following,  that  they  might  not  lose  the 
effects  of  his  common  kindness. 

XXiy.  Therefore,  all  people  in  every  country,  even  if 
they  were  not  naturally  well  inclined  towards  the  Jewish 
nation,  took  great  care  not  to  violate  or  attack  any  of  the 
Jewish  customs  or  laws.  And  in  the  reign  of  Tiberius 
things  went  on  in  the  same  manner,  although  at  that  time 
things  in  Italy  were  thrown  into  a  great  deal  of  confusion 
when  Sejanus  was  preparing  to  make  his  attempt  against 
our  nation ;  for  he  knew  immediately  after  his  death  that 
the  accusations  which  had  been  brought  against  the  Jews 
who  were  dwelling  in  E-ome  were  false  calumnies,  inventions 
of  Sejanus,  who  was  desirous  to  destroy  our  nation,  which 
he  knew  alone,  or  above  all  others,  was  likely  to  oppose  his 
unholy  counsels  and  actions  in  defence  of  the  emperor,  who 
was  in  great  danger  of  being  attacked,  in  violation  of  all 
treaties  and  of  all  honesty. 

And  he  sent  commands  to  all  the  governors  of  provinces 
in  every  country  to  comfort  those  of  our  nation  in  their 
respective  cities,  as  the  punishment  intended  to  be  inflicted 
was  not  meant  to  be  inflicted  upon  all,  but  only  on  the 
guilty ;  and  they  were  but  few.  And  he  ordered  them  to 
change  none  of  the  existing  customs,  but  to  look  upon  them 
as  pledges,  since  the  men  were  peaceful  in  their  dispositions 
and  natural  characters,  and  their  laws  trained  them  and 
disposed  them  to  quiet  and  stability. 

XX\ .  But  Caius  pufted  himself  up  with  pride,  not  only 


136  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

saying,  but  actually  thinking  that  he  was  a  god.  And  then 
he  found  no  people,  whether  among  the  Grreeks  or  among 
the  barbarians,  more  suitable  than  the  Alexandrians  to 
confirm  him  in  his  immoderate  and  unnatural  ambition ;  for 
they  are  in  an  extraordinary  degree  inclined  to  flattery,  and 
trick,  and  hypocrisy,  being  thoroughly  furnished  with  all 
kinds  of  cajoling  Avords,  and  prone  to  confuse  every  thing 
with  their  unbridled  and  licentious  talk.  And  the  name  of 
God  is  held  in  so  little  veneration  among  them,  that  they 
have  given  it  to  ibises,  and  to  the  poisonous  asps  which  are 
found  in  their  country,  and  to  many  other  savage  beasts 
which  exist  in  it.  So  that  they,  very  naturally,  giving  in 
to  all  kinds  of  addresses  and  invocations  to  him,  addressed 
him  as  God,  deceiving  men  of  shallow  comprehension,  who 
were  wholly  inexperienced  in  the  impiety  prevailing  in 
Egypt,  though  they  are  detected  by  those  who  are  ac- 
quainted with  their  excessive  folly,  or,  I  should  rather  say, 
with  their  preposterous  impiety. 

Of  which,  Caius,  having  no  experience,  imagined  that  he 
was  really  believed  by  the  Alexandrians  to  be  God,  since 
they,  without  any  disguise,  openly  and  plainly  used  all  the 
appellations  without  any  limitation,  with  which  they  were 
accustomed  to  invoke  the  other  gods.  In  the  next  place,  he 
believed  that  the  innovations  which  they  made  with  respect 
to  their  synagogues,  were  all  made  with  a  pure  conscience, 
and  from  a  sincere  honour  and  respect  for  him,  partly  being 
influenced  by  the  ephemerides  in  the  way  of  memorial,  which 
some  persons  sent  him  from  Alexandria ;  for  these  things 
were  what  he  very  much  delighted  to  read,  to  such  a  degree 
that  the  writings  of  all  other  authors,  whether  in  prose  or  in 
poetry,  were  looked  upon  by  him  as  absolutely  odious  in 
comparison  with  the  delight  which  these  documents  afforded 
him,  and  partly  by  the  language  of  some  of  his  domestics, 
who  were  continually  jesting  with  him  and  ridiculing  all 
serious  things. 

XXYI.  The  greater  portion  of  these  men  were  Egyptians, 
wicked,  worthless  men,  who  had  imprinted  the  venom  and 
evil  disposition  of  their  native  asps  and  crocodiles  on  their 
own  souls,  and  gave  a  faithful  representation  of  them  there. 
And  the  leader  of  the  whole  Egyptian  troops,  like  the  cory- 
phaeus of  a  chorus,  was  a  man  of  the  name  of  Helicon,  an 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         137 

accursed  and  infamous  slave,  who  had  been  introduced  into 
the  imperial  household  to  its  ruin ;  for  he  had  acquired  a 
slight  smattering  of  the  encyclical  sciences,  by  imitation  of 
and  rivalry  with  his  former  master,  who  gave  him  to  Tiberius 
Csesar.  And  at  that  time  he  had  no  especial  privilege,  since 
Tiberius  had  a  perfect  hatred  of  all  youthful  sallies  of  wit 
for  the  mere  purposes  of  amusement,  as  he,  from  almost  his 
earliest  youth,  was  of  a  solemn  and  austere  disposition. 

But  when  Tiberius  was  dead,  and  Caius  succeeded  to  the 
empire,  he  then,  following  a  new  master,  who  invited  him  to 
every  description  of  relaxation  and  luxury,  such  as  could 
delight  every  one  of  his  outward  senses,  said  to  himself: 
"  Eise  up,  O  Helicon !  now  is  your  opportunity.     You  have 
now  an  auditor,  and  a  spectator,  who  is  of  all  men  in  the 
world  the  best  calculated  to  receive  the  exhibition  of  your 
talents   favourably.     Tou    are   a   man   of    very   attractive 
natural  talents.     You  are  able  to  joke  graceful,  and  to  say 
witty,  things  beyond  any  one  else.     You  are  skilful  in  all 
kinds  of  amusements,  and  trifling,  and  fashionable  sports. 
And   you  are  equally  accomplished  in  those  branches   of 
encyclical  education  which  are  not  so  ordinarily  met  with. 
Moreover,  you  have  a  readiness  of  speech   and   repartee 
which  is  far  from  unpleasing.     If  therefore  you  mingle  with 
your  jestings  any  little  stimulus  which  is  in  the  least  un- 
welcome or  painful,  so  as  to  excite  not  only  laughter  but 
any  feelings  of  bitterness,  on  the  part  of  one  who  is  always 
ready  to  suspect  evil,  you  will   be  deliberately  alienating 
from  yourself  a  master  who  is  very  well  inclined  by  nature 
to  listen  to  any  accusations  which  are  brought  before  him  in 
a  joking  manner ;  for  his  ears,  as  you  well  know,  are  always 
open,  and  are  constantly  on  the  watch  to  listen  to  all  those 
who  are  in  the  habit  of  interweaving  accusations  of  others 
with  their  sycophancy.     And   do  not   seek  for  any  more 
abundant  causes ;  for  you  have  a  sufiicient  foundation  with 
respect  to  the  customs  of  the  Jews  and  the  national  laws  of 
that  people,  in  which  you  yourself  were  bred  up,  and  in. 
which   you  have  been  instructed  from   your  very  earliest 
childhood,  not  by  one  man  only,  but  by  tliat  most  chattering 
and  vexatious  portion  of  the  "^city  of  Alexandria.     So  now 
make  an  exhibition  of  your  learning." 

XXVII.  By  these  preposterous  and  accursed  arguments 


138  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

he  excited  his  own  expectations,  and  trained  himself,  and 
inflamed  his  own  wishes ;  and  then  he  attended  upon  and 
courted  Caius,  day  and  night,  never  leaving  him  for  a 
moment,  but  being  with  him  at  all  times  and  on  all  occa- 
sions, and  employing  every  moment  when  he  was  by  himself, 
or  when  he  was  resting,  to  pour  fortli  accusations  against 
our  nation,  like  a  most  infamous  man  as  he  was,  exciting 
pleasure  in  the  mind  of  the  emperor  by  ridiculing  the  Jews 
and  their  laws  and  customs,  that  thus  his  calumnies  might 
wound  us  the  more  effectually ;  for  he  never  openly  con- 
fessed himself  to  be  our  accuser,  nor  could  he  in  fact  make 
such  a  confession ;  but  he  went  by  all  kinds  of  crooked 
paths,  and  practised  every  sort  of  manoeuvre,  and  thus  was  a 
more  dangerous  and  formidable  enemy  than  even  those  men 
who  openly  recorded  their  hatred  of  and  hostility  towards 
us. 

They  say  also  that  some  of  the  ambassadors  of  the  Alex- 
andrians, being  completely  aware  of  this,  had  secretly  hired 
him  by  considerable  bribes,  and  not  only  by  money  but  by 
hopes  of  future  honours,  which  they  led  him  to  expect  he 
might  attain  to  at  no  distant  period,  when  Caius  should 
come  to  Alexandria.  And  he,  being  continually  declaiming 
of  that  time  in  which,  while  his  master  was  present,  and  in 
conjunction  with  him,  he  should  be  almost  supreme  in  his 
power  over  a  large  portion  of  the  world  (for  it  was  notorious 
enough  that  by  his  assiduous  courting  of  Caius,  he  would  be 
able  to  acquire  power  over  the  most  illustrious  portion  of 
the  citizens,  and  over  all  those  who  are  held  in  especial 
honour  by  the  most  magnificent  and  glorious  city,*  promised 
every  thing). 

A^e,  therefore,  being  for  a  long  time  unsuspicious  of  this 
natural  enemy,  who  was  plotting  against  us  from  his  con- 
cealment, took  precautions  only  against  our  external  foes ; 
but  when  we  perceived  that  he  too  was  to  be  guarded 
against,  we  searched  into  the  matter  carefully,  considering 
every  expedient  to  see  if  we  could,  by  any  means,  propitiate 
and  conciliate  the  man  who  was  thus  aiming  and  shooting 
at  us,  by  every  means  and  from  every  place,  with  great  ac- 
curacy of  aim  and  power  of  injuring  us ;  for  he  was  in  the 
habit  of  playing  at  ball  with  him,  and  of  exercising  himself 
•  There  seems  some  corruptiou  in  the  text  here. 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         139 

in  gymnastic  sports  with  him,  and  of  bathing  with  him,  and 
breakfasting  with  him,  and  he  was  with  Caius  when  he  was 
wont  to  go  to  rest,  filling  the  part  of  chamberlain  and  chief 
body-guard  to  him,  an  office  which  was  not  entrusted  to  any- 
one else,  so  that  he  alone  had  all  kinds  of  favourable  oppor- 
tunities for  being  listened  to  at  leisure  by  the  emperor, 
when  he  was  removed  from  any  external  tumults  and  dis- 
tractions, and  able  quietly  to  hear  what  he  principally 
desired. 

And  he  mingled  numbers  of  satirical  and  quizzing  observ- 
ations with  his  more  formal  and  serious  accusations,  in  order 
to  excite  pleasure  in  his  hearers  by  that  means,  and  to  do  us 
the  greatest  possible  amount  of  injury ;  for  the  quizzing 
and  ridiculing  appeared,  as  he  used  it,  to  be  the  principal 
object  at  which  he  aimed,  though  it  was  in  reality  only  his 
indirect  one ;  and  the  accusations  which  he  launched  against 
us  appeared  to  be  mere  casual  observations,  dropped  acci- 
dentally, though  in  reality  they  were  his  primary  and  sole 
object,  while  he  was  trying  every  expedient  possible,  and  so, 
like  sailors  who  have  a  fair  wind  blowing  on  their  stern,  he 
was  borne  onwards  with  a  full  sail  before  a  favourable  gale, 
heaping  upon  us  and  stringing  together  one  accusation  after 
another,  while  the  mind  of  his  hearer  was  fashioned  in  a 
more  solid  and  retentive  mould,  so  that  the  recollection  ot 
the  accusations  was  not  easily  eradicated. 

XXVIII.  Accordingly,  we  being  in  a  great  strait  and  in 
most  difficult  circumstances,  we,  though  we  had  availed 
ourselves  of  every  expedient  which  we  could  possibly  think 
of  in  order  to  propitiate  and  conciliate  Helicon,  could  find 
no  means  of  doing  so  and  no  access  to  him,  since  no  one 
dared  either  to  accost  or  to  approach  him,  by  reason  of  his 
exceeding  insolence  and  cruelty  with  which  he  behaved  to 
every  one ;  and  also  because  we  were  not  aware,  whether 
there  was  any  especial  reason  for  his  alienation  from  the 
Jewish  nation ;  since  he  was  also  exciting  and  exasperating 
his  master  against  our  people,  and,  accordingly,  we  left  oft 
labouring  at  this  point,  and  turned  our  attention  to  what 
was  of  greater  importance. 

For  it  appeared  good  to  present  to  Caius  a  memorial,  con- 
taining a  summary  of  what  v,e  had  suftcred,  and  of  the  way 
in  which  we  considered  that  we  deserved  to  be  treated ;  and 


140  PHILO  JUD^US. 

this  memorial  was  nearly  an  abridgment  of  a  longer  petition 
which  we  had  sent  to  him  a  short  time  before,  by  the  hand 
of  king  Agrippa ;  for  be,  by  chance,  was  staying  for  a  short 
time  in  the  city,  while  on  his  way  into  Syria  to  take  pos- 
session of  the  kingdom  which  had  been  given  to  him ;  but 
we,  without  being  aware  of  it,  were  deceiving  ourselves,  for 
before  also  we  had  done  the  same,  when  we  originally 
began  to  set  sail,  thinking  that  as  we  were  going  before  a 
judge  we  should  meet  with  justice ;  but  he  was  in  reality  aa 
irreconcilable  enemy  to  us,  attracting  liS,  as  far  as  appear- 
ance went,  with  favourable  looks  and  cheerful  address ;  for, 
receiving  us  favourably  at  first,  in  the  plains  on  the  banks 
of  the  Tiber  (for  he  happened  to  be  walking  about  in  his 
mother's  garden),  he  conversed  with  us  formally,  and  waved 
his  right  hand  to  us  in  a  protecting  manner,  giving  us  sig- 
nificant tokens  of  his  good  will,  and  having  sent  to  us  the 
secretary,  whose  duty  it  was  to  attend  to  the  embassies  that 
arrived,  Obulus  by  name,  he  said,  "  1  myself  will  listen  to 
what  you  have  to  say  at  the  first  favourable  opportunity." 

So  that  all  those  who  stood  around  congratulated  us  as  if 
we  had  already  carried  our  point,  and  so  did  all  those  of  our 
own  people,  who  are  influenced  by  superficial  appearances. 
But  I  myself,  who  was  accounted  to  be  possessed  of  superior 
prudence,  both  on  account  of  my  age  and  my  education,  and 
general  information,  was  less  sanguine  in  respect  of  the 
matters  at  which  the  others  were  so  greatly  delighted. 
"  For  why,"  said  I,  after  pondering  the  matter  deeply  in 
my  own  heart,  "  why,  when  there  have  been  such  numbers 
of  ambassadors,  who  have  come,  one  may  almost  say,  from 
every  corner  of  the  globe,  did  he  say  on  that  occasion  that 
he  would  hear  what  we  had  to  say,  and  no  one  eise  ?  What 
could  have  been  his  meaning  ?  for  he  was  not  ignorant  that 
we  were  Jews,  who  would  have  been  quite  content  at  not 
being  treated  worse  than  the  others ;  but  to  expect  to  be 
looked  upon  as  worthy  to  receive  especial  privileges  and 
precedence,  by  a  master  who  was  of  a  different  nation  and 
a  young  man  and  an  absolute  monarch,  would  have  seemed 
like  insanity.  But  it  would  seem  that  he  was  showing 
civility  to  the  whole  district  of  the  Alexandrians,  to  which 
he  was  thus  giving  a  privilege,  when  promising  to  give  his 
decision  speedily ;  unless,  indeed,  disregarding  the  character 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         141 

of  a  fail:  and  impartial  hearer,  he  was  intending  to  be  a 
fellow  suitor  with  our  adversaries  and  an  enemy  of  ours, 
instead  of  behaving  like  a  judge." 

XXIX.  Having  these  ideas  in  my  mind,  I  resisted  the 
sanguine  hopes  of  the  others,  and  had  no  rest  in  my  mind 
day  or  night.  But  while  I  was  thus  giving  way  to  de- 
spondency and  lamenting  over  my  ignorance  of  the  future 
(for  it  was  not  safe  to  postpone  matters),  on  a  sudden 
another  most  grievous  and  unexpected  calamity  fell  upon 
us,  bringing  danger  not  on  one  section  of  the  Jews  only,  but 
on  all  the  nation  together.  For  we  had  come  from  Kome  to 
Dicaearchia  attending  upon  Caius  ;  and  he  had  gone  down  to 
the  sea-side  and  was  remaining  near  the  gulf,  having  left  for 
a  while  his  own  palaces,  which  were  numerous  and  superbly 
furnished.  And  while  we  were  anxiously  considering  his 
intentions,  for  we  were  continually  expecting  to  be  sum- 
moned, a  man  arrived,  with  blood-shot  eyes,  and  looking 
very  miicb  troubled,  out  of  breath  and  palpitating,  and 
leading  us  away  to  a  little  distance  from  the  rest  (for  there 
were  several  persons  near),  he  said,  "  Have  you  heard  the 
news?"  And  then  when  he  was  about  to  tell  us  what  it 
was  he  stopped,  because  of  the  abundance  of  tears  that  rose 
up  to  choke  his  utterance.  And  beginning  again,  he  was  a 
second  and  a  third  time  stopped  in  the  same  manner.  And 
Me,  seeing  this,  were  much  alarmed  and  agitated  by  suspense, 
and  entreated  him  to  tell  us  what  the  circumstance  was  on 
account  of  which  he  said  that  he  had  come  ;  for  he  could  not 
have  come  merely  to  weep  before  so  many  witnesses.  "  If, 
then,"  said  we,  "  you  have  any  real  cause  for  tears,  do  not 
keep  your  grief  to  yourself;  we  have  been  long  ago  well 
accustomed  to  misfortune." 

And  he  with  difficulty,  sobbing  aloud,  and  in  a  broken 
voice,  spoke  as  follows :  "  Our  temple  is  destroyed !  Caius 
has  ordered  a  colossal  statue  of  himself  to  be  erected  in 
the  holy  of  holies,  having  his  own  name  inscribed  upon  it 
with  the  title  of  Jupiter  !"  And  while  we  were  all  struck 
dumb  with  astonishment  and  terror  at  what  he  had  told  us, 
and  stood  still  deprived  of  all  motion  (for  we  stood  there 
mute  and  in  despair,  ready  to  fall  to  the  groud  with  fear  and 
sorrow,  the  very  muscles  of  our  bodies  being  deprived  of  all 
strength  by  the  news  which  we  had  heard) ;  others  arrived 


142  PHILO  JUD/EUS. 

bearing  the  same  sad  tale.  And  then  we  all  retired  and 
shut  ourselves  up  together  and  bewailed  our  individual  and 
common  miseries,  and  went  through  every  circumstance  that 
our  minds  could  conceive,  for  a  man  in  misfortune  is  a  most 
loquacious  animal,  wrestling  as  we  might  with  our  misery. 
And  we  said  to  one  another,  "  ^,Ve  have  sailed  hither  in  the 
middle  of  winter,  in  order  that  we  might  not  be  all  involved 
in  violation  of  the  law  and  in  misfortunes  proceeding  from 
it,  without  being  aware  what  a  winter  of  misery  was  await- 
ing us  on  shore,  far  more  grievous  than  any  storm  at  sea. 
For  of  the  one  nature  is  the  cause,  which  has  divided  the 
seasons  of  the  year  and  arranged  them  in  due  order,  but 
nature  is  a  thing  which  exerts  a  saving  power ;  but  the  other 
storm  is  caused  by  a  man  who  cherishes  no  ideas  such  as 
become  a  man,  but  is  a  young  man,  and  a  promoter  of  all 
kinds  of  innovation,  being  invested  with  irresponsible  power 
over  all  the  world. 

"  And  youth,  when  combined  with  absolute  power  and 
yielding  to  irresistible  and  unrestrained  passion,  is  an 
invincible  evil.  And  will  it  be  allowed  to  us  to  approach 
him  or  to  open  our  mouth  on  the  subject  of  the  synagogues 
before  this  insulter  of  our  holy  and  glorious  temple  r  For 
it  is  quite  evident  that  he  will  pay  no  regard  whatever  to 
things  of  less  importance  and  which  are  held  in  inferior 
estimation,  when  he  behaves  with  insolence  and  contempt 
towards  our  most  beautiful  and  renowned  temple,  which  is 
respected  by  all  the  east  and  by  all  the  west,  and  regarded 
like  the  sun  which  shines  everywhere.  And  even  if  we  were 
allowed  free  access  to  him,  what  else  could  we  expect  but  an 
inexorable  sentence  of  death  ?  But  be  it  so ;  we  will  perish, 
For,  indeed,  a  glorious  death  in  defence  of  and  for  the  sake 
of  the  nreservation  of  our  laws,  is  a  kind  of  life. 

"  But,  indeed,  if  no  advantage  is  derived  from  our  death, 
w^ould  it  not  be  insanity  to  perish  in  addition  to  M^hat  we  now 
have  to  endure,  and  this  too,  while  we  appear  to  be  ambas- 
sadors, so  that  the  calamity  appears  rather  to  affect  those 
who  have  sent  us  than  those  who  remain  ?  Not  but  what 
those  of  our  fellow  countrymen  who  are  by  nature  most 
inclined  to  detest  all  wickedness,  will  accuse  us  of  impiety, 
as  if  we,  in  the  extremity  of  dangers,  when  our  whole 
country  was  tossed  about  and  threatened,  were  remembering 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         143 

some  private  interests  of  our  own  out  of  selfisTiness.  For  it 
is  necessary  that  small  things  must  yield  to  great  ones,  and 
that  private  objects  must  yield  to  the  general  interests ; 
since,  when  they  are  destroyed,  there  is  an  end  of  the  con- 
stitution and  of  the  nation.  For  how  can  it  be  holy  or 
lawful  for  us  to  struggle  in  any  other  manner,  pointing  out 
that  we  are  citizens  of  Alexandria,  over  whom  a  danger  is 
now  impending,  that  namely,  of  the  utter  destruction  of  the 
general  constitution  of  the  Jewish  nation ;  for  in  the  de- 
struction of  the  temple  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  this  man, 
so  fond  of  innovation  and  willing  to  dare  the  most  audacious 
actions,  will  also  order  the  general  name  of  our  whole  nation 
to  be  abolished. 

"  If,  therefore,  both  the  objects  on  account  of  which  we 
were  sent  are  overthrown,  perhaps  some  one  will  say,  AVhat 
then,  did  they  not  know  that  they  had  to  negotiate  for  a  safe 
return  ?  But  I  w^ould  reply  to  such  a  man,  You  either  have 
not  the  genuine  feelings  of  a  nobly  born  man,  or  else  you 
were  not  educated  like  one,  and  have  never  been  trained  in 
the  knowledge  of  the  sacred  scriptures ;  for  men  who  are 
truly  noble  are  full  of  hope,  and  the  laws  too  implant  good 
hopes  in  all  those  who  do  not  study  them  superficially  but 
with  all  their  hearts.  Perhaps  these  things  are  meant  as  a 
trial  of  the  existing  generation  to  see  how  they  are  inclined 
towards  virtue,  and  whether  they  have  been  taught  to  bear 
evils  with  resolute  and  firm  minds,  without  yielding  at  the 
first  moment ;  all  human  considerations  then  are  discarded, 
and  let  them  be  discarded,  but  let  an  imperishable  hope 
jand  trust  in  God  the  Saviour  remain  in  our  souls,  as  he  has 
often  preserved  our  nation  amid  inextricable  dilnculties  and 
distresses." 

XXX.  These  w^ere  the  sort  of  things  which  we  said,  be- 
wailing at  the  same  time  our  unexpected  calamities,  and  yet 
also  encouraging  one  another  with  the  hope  of  a  change  to 
a  more  tranquil  and  peaceful  state  of  things.  And  after  a 
little  consideration  and  delay,  we  said  to  those  who  had 
brought  us  this  doleful  news,  "  Why  sit  ye  here  quietly, 
having  just  kindled  sparks  of  eagerness  in  our  ears  by  which 
we  are  set  on  fire  and  rendered  all  in  a  blaze,  when  you 
3ught  rather  to  add  to  what  you  have  told  us  an  account  of 
the  causes  which  have  operated  on  Caius." 


144  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

And  they  replied,  "  You  know  the  principal  and  primary 
cause  of  all ;  for  that  indeed  is  universally  known  to  all  men. 
He  desires  to  be  considered  a  god ;  and  he  conceives  that 
the  Jews  alone  are  likely  to  be  disobedient ;  and  that  there- 
fore he  cannot  possibly  inflict  a  greater  evil  or  injury  upou 
them  than  by  defacing  and  insulting  the  holy  dignity  of 
their  temple ;  for  report  prevails  that  it  is  the  mcst  beau- 
tiful of  all  the  temples  in  the  world,  inasmuch  as  it  is 
continually  receiving  fresh  accessions  of  ornament  and  has 
been  for  an  infinite  period  of  time,  a  never-ending  and 
boundless  expense  being  lavished  on  it.  And  as  he  is  a  very 
contentious  and  quarrelsome  man,  he  thinks  of  appropriating 
this  edifice  wholly  to  himself.  And  he  is  excited  now  on  this 
siibject  to  a  much  greater  degree  than  before  by  a  letter 
which  Capito  has  sent  to  him. 

"  Capito  is  the  collector  of  the  imperial  revenues  in 
Judaea,  and  on  some  account  or  other  he  is  very  hostile  to 
the  nations  of  the  country ;  for  having  come  thither  a  poor 

,  man,  and  having  amassed  enormous  riches  of  every  imagin- 
able description  by  plunder  and  extortion,  he  has  now 
become  afraid  lest  some  accusation  may  be  brought  against 
him,  and  on  this  account  he  has  contrived  a  design  by  which 
he  may  repel  any  such  impeachment,  namely,  by  calumni- 
ating those  whom  he  has  injured ;  and  a  circumstance  which 
we  will  now  mention,  has  given  him  some  pretext  for  car- 
rying out  his  design. 

"  There  is  a  city  called  Jamnia ;  one  of  the  most  populous 
cities  in  all  Judaea,  which  is  inhabited  by  a  promiscuous 
multitude,  the  greatest  number  of  whom  are  .Jews  ;  but 
there  are  also  some  persons  of  other  tribes  from  the  neigh- 
bouring nations  who  have  settled  there  to  their  own 
destruction,  who  are  in  a  manner  sojourners  among  the 
original  native  citizens,  and  who  cause  them  a  great  deal  of 
trouble,  and  who  do  them  a  great  deal  of  injury,  as  they  are 
continually  violating  some  of  the  ancestral  national  customs 
of  the  Jews.  These  men  hearing  from  travellers  who  visit 
the  city  how  exceedingly  eager  and  earnest  Caius  is  about 

■is  own  deification,  and  how  disposed  he  is  to  look  unfavour- 
ably upon  the  whole  race  of  Judaea,  thinking  that  they  have 
now  an  admirable  opportunity  for  attacking  them  them- 
selves, have  erected  an  extemporaneous  altar  of  the  most 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         145 

contemptible  materials,  having  made  clay  into  bricks  for  the 
sole  purpose  of  plotting  against  their  fellow  citizens ;  for 
they  knew  well  that  they  would  never  endure  to  see  their 
customs  transgressed  ;  as  was  indeed  the  case. 

"  For  when  the  Jews  saw  what  they  had  done,  and  were 
very  indignant  at  the  holiness  and  sanctity  and  beauty  of 
the  sacred  place  being  thus  obscured  and  defaced,  they  col- 
lected together  and  destroyed  the  altar ;  so  the  sojourners 
immediately  went  to  Capito  who  was  in  reality  the  contriver 
of  the  whole  affair ;  and  he,  thinking  that  he  had  made  a 
most  lucky  hit,  which  he  had  been  seeking  for  a  long  time, 
•writes  to  Cains  dilating  on  the  matter  and  exaggerating  it 
enormously ;  and  he,  when  he  had  read  the  letter,  ordered  a 
colossal  statue  gilt  all  over,  much  more  costly  and  much 
more  magnificent  than  the  rich  altar  which  had  been 
erected  in  Jamnia,  by  way  of  insult  to  be  set  up  in  the 
temple  of  the  metropolis,  having  for  his  most  excellent  and 
sagacious  counsellors  Helicon,  that  man  of  noble  birth,  a 
chattering  slave,  a  perfect  scum  of  the  earth,  and  a  fellow  of 
the  name  of  Apelles,  a  tragic  actor,  who  when  in  the  first 
bloom  of  youth,  as  they  say,  made  a  market  of  his  beauty, 
and  when  he  was  past  the  freshness  of  youth  went  on  the 
stage ;  and  in  fact  .all  those  who  go  on  the  stage  selling 
themselves  to  the  spectators,  and  to  the  theatres,  are  not 
lovers  of  temperance  and  modesty,  but  rather  of  the  most 
extreme  shamelessness  and  indecency. 

"  On  this  account  Apelles  was  taken  into  the  rank  of  a 
fellow  counsellor  of  the  emperor,  that  Cains  might  have  an 
adviser  with  whom  he  might  indulge  in  mocking  jests,  and 
with  whom  he  might  sing,  passing  over  all  considerations 
of  the  general  welfare  of  the  state,  as  if  everything  in  every 
:j[uarter  of  the  globe  was  enjoying  profound  peace  and  tran- 
quillity under  the  laws. 

"■  Therefore  Helicon,  this  scorpion-like  slave,  discharged  all 
lis  Egyptian  venom  against  the  Jews ;  and  Apelles  his 
Vscalonite  poison,  for  he  was  a  native  of  Ascalon ;  and 
)etwcen  the  people  of  Ascalon'  and  the  inhabitants  of  the 
loly  land,  the  Jews,  there  is  an  irreconcileable  and  never- 
'nding  hostility  although  they  are  bordering  nations." 

When  we  heard  this  we  were  wounded  in  our  souls  at 
very  word  he  said  and  at  every  name  he  mentioned ;  but 

I    VOL.  IV.  L 


146  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

those  admirable  advisers  of  admirable  actions  a  little  while 
afterwards  met  with  the  lit  reward  of  their  impiety,  the  one 
being  bound  by  Caius  with  iron  chains  for  other  causes,  and 
being  put  to  the  torture  and  to  the  rack  after  periods  of 
reliei",  as  is  the  case  with  people  aifected  with  intermittent 
diseases ;  and  Helicon  was  put  to  death  by  Claudius  G-er- 
manicus  Caesar,  for  other  wicked  actions,  that,  like  a  mad- 
man as  he  was,  he  had  committed ;  but  these  occurrences 
took  place  at  a  later  date. 

XXXI.  And  the  letter  respecting  the  erection  of  the 
statue  was  written  not  in  plain  terms,  but  wdth  as  much 
caution  and  prudence  as  possible,  taking  every  measure 
which  could  tend  to  security ;  for  he  commands  Petronius, 
the  lieutenant  and  governor  of  all  Syria,  to  whom  indeed  he 
wrote  the  letter,  to  lead  half  the  army  which  w  as  on  the 
Euphrates,  to  guard  against  any  passage  of  that  river  by  any 
of  the  eastern  kings  or  nations,  into  Judaea  as  an  escort  to 
the  statue  ;  not  in  order  to  honour  its  erection  with  any 
especial  pomp,  but  to  chastise  with  death  any  attempt  that 
might  be  made  to  hinder  it. 

What  sayest  thou,  O  master  ?  Are  you  making  war  upon 
us,  because  you  anticipate  that  we  will  not  endure  such 
indignity,  but  that  we  will  fight  on  behalf  of  our  laws,  and 
die  in  defence  of  our  national  customs  ?  Tor  you  cannot 
possibly  have  been  ignorant  of  what  was  likely  to  result  from 
your  attempt  to  introduce  these  innovations  respecting  our 
temple ;  but  having  previously  learnt  with  perfect  accuracy 
what  was  likely  to  happen  as  well  as  if  it  had  already  takeo 
place,  and  knowing  the  future  as  thoroughly  as  if  it  were 
actually  present,  you  commanded  your  general  to  bring 
up  an  army  in  order  that  the  statue  when  erected  might  bt 
consecrated  by  the  first  sacrifice  offered  to  it,  being  of  i 
most  polluted  kind,  stained  with  the  blood  of  miserable  mei 
and  women. 

Accordingly  Petrouius,  when  he  had  read  what  he  wa 
commanded  to  do  in  this  letter,  was  in  great  perplexity,  no 
being  able  to  resist  the  orders  sent  to  him  out  of  fear,  for  h'  | 
heard  that  the  emperor's  wrath  was  implacable  not  onl 
against  those  who  did  not  do  what  they  were  commanded  t 
do,  but  who  did  not  do  it  in  a  momenl^ ;  and  on  the  othe 
hand,  he  did  not  see  how  it  was  easy  to  perform  them,  fo 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         147 

he  knew  that  the  Jews  would  willingly,  if  it  were  possible, 
endure  ten  thousand  deaths  instead  of  one,  rather  than 
submit  to  see  any  forbidden  thing  perpetrated  with  respect 
to  their  religion  ;  for  all  men  are  eager  to  preserve  their 
own  customs  and  laws,  and  the  Jewish  nation  above  all 
others ;  for  looking  upon  their  laws  as  oracles  directly  given 
to  them  by  God  himself,  and  having  been  instructed  in  this 
doctrine  from  their  very  earliest  infancy  they  bear  in  their 
souls  the  images  of  the  commandments  contained  in  these 
laws  as  sacred ;  and  secondly,  as  they  continually  behold  the 
visible  shapes  and  forms  of  them,  they  admire  and  venerate 
them  in  their  minds  and  they  admit  such  foreigners  as  are 
disposed  to  honour  and  worship  them,  to  do  so  no  less  than 
their  own  native  fellow  citizens. 

But  all  who  attempt  to  violate  their  laws,  or  to  turn  them 
into  ridicule,  they  detest  as  their  bitterest  enemies,  and 
they  look  upon  each  separate  one  of  the  commandments 
with  such  awe  and  reverence  that,  whether  one  ought  to 
call  it  the  invariable  good  fortune  or  the  happiness  of  the 
nation,  they  have  never  been  guilty  of  the  violation  of  even 
the  most  insignificant  of  them ;  but  above  all  other  obser- 
vances their  zeal  for  their  holy  temple  is  the  most  predomi- 
nant, and  vehement,  and  universal  feeling  throughout  the 
w^hole  nation ;  and  the  greatest  proof  of  this  is  that  death  is 
inexorably  pronounced  against  all  those  who  enter  into 
the  inner  circuit  of  the  sacred  precincts  (for  they  admit  all 
men  from  every  country  into  the  exterior  circuit),  unless  he 
be  one  of  their  own  nation  by  blood, 

Petronius,  having  regard  to  these  considerations,  was  very 
reluctant  to  attempt  what  he  was  commanded  to  do,  con- 
sidering what  a  great  and  wicked  piece  of  daring  he  should 
be  committing,  and  invoking  all  the  deliberative  powers  of 
his  soul  as  to  a  council,  he  inquired  into  the  opinion  of  each 
of  them,  and  he  found  every  faculty  of  his  mind  agreeing 
that  he  should  change  nothing  of  these  observances  and 
customs  which  had  been  hallowed  from  the  begiiming  of  the 
world  ;  in  the  first  place  because  of  the  natural  principles  of 
justice  and  piety  by  which  they  were  dictated,  and  secondly 
because  of  the  danger  which  threatened  any  attempt  at 
innovation  upon  them,  not  only  from  God,  but  also  from"  the 
people  who  would  be  insulted  by  such  conduct.     He  also 

L  2 


148  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

gave  a  thouglit  to  the  circumstances  of  the  nation  itself,  to 
its  exceeding  populousness,  so  that  it  was  not  contained  as 
every  other  nation  was  by  the  circuit  of  the  one  region 
which  was  allotted  to  it  for  itself,  but  so  that,  I  may  almost 
say,  it  had  spread  over  the  whole  face  of  the  earth ;  for  it  is 
ditfused  throughout  every  continent,  and  over  every  island, 
so  that  everywhere  it  appears  but  little  inferior  in  number 
to  the  original  native  population  of  the  country. 

Was  it  not,  then,  a  most  perilous  undertaking  to  draw 
upon  himself  such  innumerable  multitudes  of  enemies  ? 
And  was  there  not  danger  of  allies  and  friends  from  all 
quarters  arriving  to  their  assistance  ?  It  would  be  a  result 
of  very  formidable  danger  and  difficulty,  besides  the  fact 
that  the  inhabitants  of  Judaea  are  infinite  in  numbers,  and  a 
nation  of  great  stature  and  personal  strength,  and  of  great 
courage  and  spirit,  and  men  who  are  willing  to  die  in  defence 
of  their  national  customs  and  laws  with  unshrinking  bravery, 
so  that  some  of  those  who  calumniate  them  say  that  their 
courage  (as  indeed  is  perfectly  true)  is  beyond  that  of  any 
barbarian  nation,  being  the  spirit  of  free  and  nobly  born  men. 

And  the  state  of  all  the  nations  which  lie  beyond  the 
Euphrates  added  to  his  alarm ;  for  he  was  aware  that  Baby- 
lon and  many  others  of  the  satrapies  of  the  east  were  occu- 
pied by  the  Jews,  knowing  this  not  merely  by  report  but 
likewise  by  personal  experience  ;  for  every  year  sacred  mes- 
sengers are  sent  to  convey  large  amounts  of  gold  and  silver 
to  the  temple,  which  has  been  collected  from  all  the  subor- 
dinate governments,  travelling  over  rugged,  and  difficult,  and 
almost  impassable  roads,  which  they  look  upon  as  level  and 
easy  inasmuch  as  they  serve  to  conduct  them  to  piety. 

Therefore,  being  exceedingly  alarmed,  as  was  very  natural, 
lest  if  they  heard  of  the  unprecedented  design  of  erecting 
this  colossal  statue  in  the  temple,  they  might  on  a  sudden 
direct  their  march  that  way  and  surround  him,  some  on  one 
side  and  some  on  the  other,  so  as  to  hem  him  in  completely, 
and  co-operating  with  and  joining  one  another  might  treat 
the  enemy  who  would  be  thus  enclosed  in  the  midst  of  them 
with  terrible  severity,  he  hesitated  long,  attaching  great 
weight  to  all  these  considerations. 

Then  again  he  was  drawn  in  the  opposite  direction  by 
considerations  of  a  contrary  character,  saying  to  himself*, 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         149 

"This is  the  command  of  one  who  is  my  master  and  a  young 
man,  and  of  one  who  judges  everything  which  he  wishes  to 
have  done  to  be  expedient  and  becoming,  and  who  is  resolved 
that  everything  M'hich  he  has  once  decided  on  shall  be  at 
once  performed  even  though  it  may  be  the  most  injurious 
measure  possible  and  full  of  all  contention  and  insolence ; 
and  now  having  passed  beyond  all  human  nature  he  has 
actually  recorded  himself  to  be  God ;  and  great  danger  of 
my  life  impends  over  me  whether  I  oppose  him  or  whether 
I  comply  with  his  commands ;  if  I  comply  with  them  the 
result  will  very  probably  be  war,  and  one  that  perhaps  may 
be  attended  with  doubtful  success  and  which  will  be  far  from 
turning  out  as  it  is  expected  to  do ;  and  if  I  oppose  him  I 
shall  then  be  exposed  to  the  open  and  implacable  hatred  of 
Caius." 

And  with  this  opinion  of  his,  many  of  those  Eomans  who 
were  joined  with  him  in  the  administration  of  the  affairs  of 
Syria  coincided,  knowing  that  the  anger  of  Caius  and  the 
punishments  which  he  would  inflict  would  come  upon  them 
lirst  as  being  accomplices  in  the  disobedience  to  the  injunc- 
tions Avhich  he  had  sent ;  but  at  last  when  it  arrived  the 
fashion  of  the  statue  afforded  them  a  po-etext  for  delay  dur- 
ing which  they  might  have  time  for  a  more  deliberate  con- 
sideration of  the  matter ;  for  they  did  not  send  any  man 
from  Eome  (as  it  appears  to  me  because  the  providence  of 
Grod  overruled  the  matter  in  this  way,  who  thus  invisibly 
stayed  the  hand  of  these  wicked  doers),  nor  did  he  command 
the  most  skilful  man  or  him  who  was  accounted  so  in  Syria 
to  manage  the  matter,  since  while  he  w^as  pressing  on  this 
lawless  action  with  all  speed  a  war  was  suddenly  kindled. 

Therefore  having  now  opportunity  to  consider  what  course 
would  be  most  advantageous  (for  w^hen  great  events  sud- 
denly come  altogether,  they  break  down  and  perplex  the 
mind),  he  commanded  the  statue  to  be  made  in  some  one  of 
the  bordering  regions.  Therefore  Petronius,  sending  for  the 
most  gkilful  and  renowned  artists  in  Phcenicia,  gave  them 
the  materials  requisite  for  the  making  of  the  statue  ;  and 
they  took  them  to  Sidon,  and  there  proceeded  to  make  it. 

He  also  sent  for  the  magistrates  of  the  Jews  and  the 
pnests  and  rulers  of  the  people,  both  to  announce  to  them 
the  commands  which  he  had  received  from  Caius  and  also  to 


150  PHILO  JUDi!^:US. 

counsel  tliem  to  submit  cheerfully  to  the  commands  which 
had  been  imposed  by  their  master,  and  to  give  due  considera- 
tion to  the  dangers  before  their  eyes ;  for  that  the  most  war- 
like of  the  military  powers  in  Syria  were  all  ready,  and  would 
soon  cover  all  the  country  with  dead  bodies  ;  for  he  thought 
that  if  he  could  previously  weaken  their  resolution  he  would 
be  able  by  their  means  to  work  upon  all  the  rest  of  the  mul- 
titude and  to  persuade  them  not  to  oppose  the  will  of  the 
emperor  ;  but,  as  was  natural,  he  was  wholly  disappointed  in 
his  expectations  ;  for  it  is  said  indeed  that  they  were  amazed 
at  his  first  Avords,  and  that  at  first  they  were  utterly  over- 
whelmed by  his  announcement  of  their  real  danger  and 
misery,  and  that  they  stood  speechless  and  poured  forth  a 
ceaseless  abundance  of  tears  as  if  from  a  fountain,  tearing 
their  beards  and  the  hair  of  their  head,  and  saying,  "  We  who 
were  formerly  very  fortunate,  have  now  advanced  through 
many  events  to  an  exceeding  old  age  that  we  might  at  last 
behold  what  no  one  of  our  ancestors  ever  saw.  With  what 
eyes  can  we  endure  to  look  upon  these  things  ?  Let  them 
rather  be  torn  out,  and  let  our  miserable  lives  and  our 
afl[licted  existence  be  put  an  end  to,  before  we  behold  such 
an  evil  as  this,  such  an  intolerable  spectacle  which  it  is 
impious  to  hear  of  or  to  conceive." 

XXXII.  In  this  way  did  they  bewail  their  fate ;  but 
when  the  inhabitants  of  the  holy  city  and  of  all  the  region 
round  about  heard  of  the  design  which  was  in  agitation, 
they  all  arrayed  themselves  together  as  if  at  a  concerted 
signal,  their  common  misery  having  given  them  the  word, 
and  went  forth  in  a  body,  and  leaving  their  cities  and  their 
villages  and  their  houses  empty,  they  hastened  with  one 
accord  into  Phoenicia,  for  Petronius  happened  to  be  in  that 
country  at  the  moment.  And  when  some  of  the  guards 
of  Petronius  saw  a  countless  multitude  hastening  towards 
them  they  ran  to  their  general  to  bring  him  the  news,  and 
to  warn  him  to  take  precautions,  as  they  expected  war ;  and 
while  they  were  relating  to  him  what  they  had  seen,  he  was 
still  without  any  guards  ;  and  the  multitude  of  the  Jews 
suddenly  coming  upon  him  like  a  cloud,  occupied  the  whole 
of  Phoenicia,  and  caused  great  consternation  among  the 
Phoenicians  who  thus  beheld  the  enormous  population  of  the 
nation ;  and  at  first  so  great  an  outcry  was  raised,  accom- 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         151 

panied  with  weeping  and  beating  of  the  breast,  that  the  verv 
ears  of  those  present  could  not  endure  the  vastness  of  the 
noise ;  for  it  did  not  cease  when  they  ceased,  but  continued 
to  vibrate  even  after  they  were  quiet :  then  there  '  were 
approaches  to  the  governor,  and  supplications  addressed  to 
him  such  as  the  occasion  suggested;  for  calamities  are 
themselves  teachers  of  what  should  be  done  in  an  existing 
emergency. 

And  the  multitude  was  divided  into  six  companies,  one  of 
old  men,  one  of  young  men,  one  of  boys ;  and  again  in  their 
turn  one  band  of  aged  matrons,  one  of  women  in  the  prime 
of  life,  and  one  of  virgins  ;  and  when  Petronius  appeared  at 
a  distance  all  the  ranks,  as  they  had  been  appointed,  fell  to 
the  ground,  uttering  a  most  doleful  howling  and  lamenta- 
tion, mingled  with  supplications.  But  when  he  commanded 
them  to  rise  up,  and  to  come  nearer  to  him,  they  would  for 
a  long  time  hardly  consent  to  rise,  and  scattering  abundance 
of  dust  upon  their  heads,  and  shedding  abundance  of  tears, 
they  put  both  their  hands  behind  them  like  captives  who  are 
fettered  in  this  way,  and  thus  they  approached  him. 

Then  the  body  of  the  old  men,  standing  before  him, 
addressed  him  in  the  following  terms  :  "  We  are,  as  you  see, 
without  any  arms,  but  yet  as  we  passed  along  some  persons 
haye  accused  us  as  being  enemies,  but  even  the  very  weapons 
of  defence  with  which  nature  has  provided  each  individual, 
namely  our  hands,  we  have  averted  from  you,  and  placed  ia 
a  position  where  they  can  do  nothing,  offering  our  bodies 
freely  an  easy  aim  to  any  one  who  desires  to  put  us  to 
death.  We  have  brought  unto  you  our  wives,  and  our 
children,  and  our  whole  families,  and  in  your  person  we  will 
prostrate  ourselves  before  Caius,  having  left  not  one  single 
I  person  at  home,  that  you  may  either  preserve  us  all,  or 
destroy  us  all  together  by  one  general  and  complete  destruc- 
tion. Petronius,  we  are  a  peaceful  nation,  both  by  our 
natural  disposition  and  by  our  determined  intentions,  and 
the  education  which  has  been  industriously  and  carefully 
instilled  into  us  has  taught  us  this  lesson  from  our  very 
earliest  infancy.  When  Caius  assumed  the  imperial  power 
we  were  the  first  people  in  all  Syria  to  congratulate  him, 
Vitellius  at  that  time  being  in  our  city,  from  whom  you 
received  the  government  as  his  successor,  to  whom  writings 


153  PHILO   JUD.EUS. 

concerning  these  matters  were  sent,  and  the  happy  news 
proceeding  onwards  from  our  city,  where  it  had  been  re- 
ceived M'ith  joy,  reached  the  other  cities  with  similar  accept- 
ance. Ours  was  the  first  temple  which  received  sacrifices 
for  the  happy  reign  of  Caius.  Did  it  do  so  that  it  might  be 
the  first  or  the  only  temple  to  be  deprived  of  its  customary- 
modes  of  worship  ? 

"  We  have  now  left  our  cities,  we  have  abandoned  our 
houses  and  our  possessions,  we  will  cheerfully  contribute  to 
you  all  our  furniture,  all  our  cattle,  and  all  our  treasures, 
everything  in  short  which  belongs  to  us,  as  a  willing  booty. 
AVe  shall  think  that  we  are  receiving  them,  not  giving  them 
up.  We  only  ask  one  thing  instead  of  and  to  counterbalance 
all  of  them,  namely,  that  no  innovations  may  take  place  in 
respect  of  our  temple,  but  that  it  may  be  kept  such  as  we 
have  received  it  from  our  fathers  and  our  forefathers.     And 
if  we  cannot  prevail  with  you  in  this,  then  we  ofier  up  our- 
selves for  destruction,  that  we  may  not  live  to  behold  a 
calamity  more  terrible  and  grievous  than  death.     "VYe  hear 
that  great  forces  of  infantry  and  cavalry  are  being  prepared 
by  you  against  us,  if  we  oppose  the  erection  and  dedication 
of  this  statue.     No  one  is  so  mad  as,  when  he  is  a  slave,  to 
oppose  his  master.     We  willingly  and  readily  submit  our- 
selves to  be  put  to  death ;  let  your  troops  slay  us,  let  them 
sacrifice  us,  let  them  cut  us  to  pieces  unresisting  and  uncon- 
tending,  let  them  treat  us  with  every  species  of  cruelty  that 
conquerers  can  possibly  practise,  but  what  need  is  there  of 
any  army  ?  We  ourselves,  admirable  priests  for  the  purpose, 
will  begin  the  sacrifice,  bringing  to  the  temple  our  wives 
and  slaying  our  wives,  bringing  our  brothers  and  sisters  and 
becoming  fratricides,  bringing  our  sons  and  our  daughters, 
that  innocent  and  guiltless  age,  and  becoming  infanticides. 
Those  who  endure  tragic  calamities  must  needs  make  use  of 
tragic  language.  Then  standing  in  the  middle  of  our  victims, 
having  bathed  ourselves  deeply  in  the  blood  of  our  kinsfolk 
(for  such  blood  will  be  the  only  bath  which  we  shall  have 
wherewith  to  cleanse  ourselves  for  the  journey  to  the  shades 
below),  we  will  mingle  our  own  blood  with  it,  slaughtering 
ourselves  upon  their  bodies.     And  when  we  are  dead,  let 
this  commandment  be  inscribed  over  us  as  an  epitaph,  '  Let 
not  even  Grod  blame  us,  who  have  had  a  due  regard  to  both 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         153 

considerations,  pious  loyalty  towards  the  emperor  and  the 
I  evercntial  preservation  of  our  established  holy  laws.' 

"  And  this  will  be  what  will  be  deservedly  said  of  us  if  we 
give  up  our  miserable  life,  holding  it  in  proper  contempt. 
VV^e  have  heard  of  a  most  ancient  tradition,  which  has  been 
handed  down  throughout  Greece  by  their  historians,  who 
have  affirmed  that  the  head  of  the  Grorgon  had  such  mighty 
power,  that  those  who  beheld  it  immediately  became  stones 
and  rocks.  But  this  appears  only  to  be  a  fiction  and  fable, 
the  truth  being  that  great,  and  unexpected,  and  Avonderful 
events  do  often  bring  after  them  great  disaster  ;  for  instance, 
the  anger  of  a  master  causes  death,  or  calamities  equivalent 
to  death. 

•'  Do  you  suppose  (may  God  forbid  that  any  such  event 
should  ever  take  place)  that  if  any  of  our  countrymen  were 
to  see  this  statue  being  brought  into  our  temple,  it  would 
not  change  them  into  stones  ?  Their  limbs  being  all  con- 
gealed, and  their  eyes  becoming  fixed  so  as  not  to  be  capable 
of  motion,  and  their  Avhole  body  losing  all  its  natural  motions 
in  every  one  of  its  united  parts  and  limbs !  We  will,  how- 
ever, now,  0  Petronius,  address  to  you  one  last  and  most 
righteous  and  just  request ;  we  say  that  you  ought  not  to  do 
what  you  are  commanded,  but  we  entreat  you  to  grant  us  a 
respite,  and  we  most  earnestly  supplicate  you  to  delay  a 
httle  while  till  we  appoint  an  embassy,  and  send  it  to 
approach  your  master,  and  to  convey  our  entreaties  to  him. 
Perhaps  in  oiu'  embassy  we  may  find  some  argument  or 
jther  to  persuade  him,  either  by  bringing  before  him  all  the 
considerations  respecting  the  honour  of  God,  or  the  preser- 
v^ation  of  our  indestructible  and  unalterable  laws,  or  by 
urging  upon  him  that  w'e  ought  not  to  be  subjected  to  a 
»vorse  fate  than  all  the  nations  even  in  the  very  most  remote 
extremities  of  the  earth,  who  have  been  allowed  to  preserve 
:heir  national  customs ;  with  reference  to  which  his  grand- 
ather  and  great-grandlather  came  to  a  righteous  decision 
^•hen  they  confirmed  and  set  the  seal  to  our  customs  witli 
vll  care.  Perhaps  when  he  hears  these  arguments  he  will 
De  more  merciful  to  us.  The  intentions  of  the  great  do  not 
ilways  continue  the  same,  and  those  which  are  adopted  in 
inger  are  the  quickest  to  change.  We  have  been  grievously 
calumniated.    Suffer  us  to  refute  the  false  accusations  which 


154  PHILO   JUD^US. 

}iave  been  brought  against  us.     It  is  hard  to  be  condemned 
without  being  heard  in  our  own  defence. 

"And  if  we  foil  to  convince  him,  what  will  after  that  pre- 
vent him  from  doing  the  things  which  be  at  present  intends 
to  do  ?  Until,  then,  we  have  sent  this  embassy,  do  not  cut 
off  all  the  hopes  of  so  many  myriads  of  men,  since  our  zeal 
and  earnestness  is  displayed  not  in  the  cause  of  gain,  but  in 
that  of  religion ;  though  indeed  we  speak  foolishly  in  using 
such  an  expression  as  that,  for  what  can  be  a  more  real  and 
beneficial  gain  to  men  than  holiness  ?" 

XXXIII.  They  uttered  these  complaints  and  entreaties 
with  great  agony  and  misery  of  soul,  with  exceeding  sobbing 
and  difficulty  of  speech,  for  all  their  limbs  sweated  with 
apprehension,  and  their  ceaseless  tears  flowed  in  torrents,  so 
that  all  who  heard  them,  and  Petronius  himself,  sympathised 
with  their  sorrow,  for  he  was  by  nature  a  man  very  kind 
and  gentle  in  his  natural  disposition,  so  that  he  was  easily 
influenced  by  what  was  now  said  or  heard ;  and  what  was 
said  appeared  to  be  entirely  just,  and  the  misery  of  those  whom 
he  now  beheld  appeared  most  pitiable ;  and  rising  up,  and 
retiring  with  his  fellow  counsellors,  he  took  counsel  as  to 
what  he  ought  to  do,  and  he  saw  that  those  who  a  short 
time  before  opposed  the  wishes  of  the  Jews  with  all  their 
might  were  now  wavering  and  perplexed,  and  that  those  who 
had  previously  been  hesitating  were  now  for  the  most  part 
inclined  to  compassion,  at  which  he  was  pleased. 

Nevertheless,  though  he  was  well  acquainted  with  the 
disposition  of  the  emperor,  and  how  implacable  and  inexor- 
able he  was  in  his  anger,  he  still  had  himself  some  sparks  of 
the  Jewish  philosophy  and  piety,  since  he  had  long  ago  learnt 
something  of  it  by  reason  of  his  eagerness  for  learning,  and 
had  studied  it  still  more  ever  since  he  had  come  as  governor 
of  the  countries  in  which  there  are  vast  numbers  of  Jews 
scattered  over  every  city  of  Asia  and  Syria ;  or  partly  because 
he  was  so  disposed  in  his  mind  from  his  spontaneous,  and 
natural,  and  innate  inclination  for  all  things  which  are 
worthy  of  care  and  study. 

Moreover,  God  himself  appears  often  to  suggest  virtuous 
ideas  to  virtuous  men,  by  which,  while  benefiting  others, 
thev  will  likewise  be  benefited  themselves,  which  now  was 
the  case  with  Petronius.     What  then  was  his  resolution? 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         155 

Not  to  hurry  on  the  artists,  but  to  persuade  them  to 
continue  to  finish  the  statue  which  they  had  in  hand, 
taking  pains  and  labouring  as  far  as  might  be  possible  not 
to  be  inferior  to  the  most  renowned  models,  but  to  take 
plenty  of  time,  so  as  to  make  their  work  perfect,  since 
things  which  are  done  in  a  hurry  are  very  often  inferior, 
but  things  which  are  done  with  great  pains  and  skill  require 
I  length  of  time.  But  the  embassy  which  they  entreated 
eave  to  send  he  determined  not  to  permit,  for  he  considered 
;hat  it  would  not  be  safe  for  him  to  allow  it ;  still  he  deter- 
nined  not  to  oppose  those  who  wished  to  refer  the  whole 
natter  to  the  supreme  sovereign  and  master,  but  neither  to 
igree  with  nor  to  contradict  the  multitude,  for  he  considered 
;hat  either  line  of  conduct  was  fraught  with  danger. 

Moreover,  he  determined  to  write  a  letter  to  Caius,  not  in 
my  respect  accusing  the  Jews,  and  on  the  other  hand  not 
giving  any  accurate  account  of  their  entreaties  and  suppli- 
cations, and  to  explain  the  delay  which  was  taking  place  in 
/he  erection  of  the  statue,  partly  because  the  preparation  of 
t  required  a  certain  space  of  time  for  its  completion,  and 
3artly,  he  reminded  him,  that  the  season  of  the  year  was  in 
lome  degree  the  cause  of  unavoidable  delay,  in  which  there 
vas  no  question  but  that  Caius  must  of  necessity  acquiesce, 
or  it  was  just  at  the  moment  the  very  height  of  the  wlieat 
larvest  and  of  all  the  other  cereal  crops ;  and  he  said  that 
le  was  afraid  lest  out  of  despair  of  the  preservation  of  their 
lational  and  hereditary  laws  and  customs,  the  men  might 
'onceive  such  a  contempt  for  life  as  either  themselves  to  lay 
vaste  their  lands,  or  to  burn  all  the  corn-bearing  district, 
vhether  mountainous  or  champaign  country,  and,  therefore, 
hat  he  might  require  a  guard  to  secure  a  careful  gathering  in 
)f  the  crops,  and  that  not  only  of  such  as  were  borne  on  the 
irable  land  but  of  those  produced  by  fruit-bearing  trees  ;  for 
le  himself  was  intending,  as  is  said,  to  sail  to  Alexandria  in 
3gypt,  but  so  great  a  general  did  not  choose  to  cross  the  open 
•ea  both  by  reason  of  the  danger  and  also  of  the  numerous 
leet  which  would  be  required  as  his  escort,  and  also  from 
lis  regard  for  his  OAvn  person,  as  everything  requisite  for  his 
'omfort  would  be  more  easily  provided  if  he  took  the  circui- 
ous  route  through  Asia  and  Syria;  for  he  would,  if  he 
'oasted  along,  be  able  to  sail  every  day  and  land  every  night, 


156  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

especially  if  he  took  with  him  a  sufficient  number  of  shipa 
of  war,  and  not  transports,  in  which  a  coasting  voyage  is 
more  successful,  just  as  one  across  the  open  sea  is  better  for 
merchantmen.  Therefore  it  was  necessary  that  abundant 
quantities  of  forage  and  food  should  be  prepared  for  his 
cattle  in  every  one  of  the  Syrian  cities,  and  especially  in  all 
such  as  were  on  the  coast,  for  a  numerous  multitude  would 
be  proceeding  both  by  land  and  sea,  collected  not  only  from 
U/ome  itself  and  from  Italy,  but  that  which  had  also  followed 
him  from  all  the  other  provinces  of  the  empire  as  far  as 
Syria,  being  partly  the  regular  guard  of  the  magistrates,  and 
partly  the  regular  army  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  the 
naval  force,  and  also  a  troop  of  servants  but  little  inferior  in 
number  to  the  army.  Moreover,  there  was  need  not  only  of 
such  an  abundance  of  supplies  as  might  be  sufficient  for  aU 
necessary  purposes,  but  also  for  all  the  superfluous  prodi- 
gality of  which  Caius  was  fond.  If  he  reads  these  A^Titings 
perhaps  he  will  not  only  not  be  angry,  but  will  be  even 
pleased  with  our  prudential  caution,  as  having  caused  this 
delay  not  from  any  regard  for  the  Jews,  but  for  the  sake  of 
providing  for  the  collection  of  the  harvest. 

XXXIV.  And  when  his  assessors  had  delivered  their 
opinions,  he  commanded  letters  to  be  written,  and  appointed 
active  men,  who  were  accustomed  to  make  rapid  journeys,  to 
convey  them.  And  they,  when  they  had  arrived  at  their 
journey's  end,  delivered  the  letters ;  but  the  emperor,  before 
he  had  finished  reading  them,  became  swollen  with  anger, 
and  went  on  making  marks  at  every  page,  in  fury  and 
indignation ;  and  when  he  had  come  to  the  end  of  the  letter, 
he  clapped  his  hands  together,  saying,  "  Of  a  truth,  Pe- 
tronius,  you  seem  but  little  to  comprehend  that  you  are 
the  subject  of  the  emperor ;  the  uninterrupted  series  of 
governments  to  which  you  have  been  preferred  have  filled 
you  with  guile.  Up  to  the  present  time  it  seems  to  me  that 
you  have  no  notion  of  acknowledging  that  you  know,  even 
by  hearsay,  that  Caius  is  emperor,  but  you  shall  very 
speedily  find  it  out  by  your  own  experience,  for  you  are 
careful  about  the  laws  of  the  Jews,  a  nation  which  I  hate 
above  every  other,  and  you  are  indifferent  about  the  imperial 
commands  of  your  sovereign.  You  fear  the  multitude. 
Had  you  not  with  you  then  the  military  forces  which  all  the 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         157 

eastern  nations,  and  the  chief  of  them  all,  the  Parthians, 
fear  ?  But  you  pitied  them,  you  paid  more  attention  to 
feelings  of  compassion  than  to  the  express  commands  of 
Caius. 

"  Make  your  pretext  of  the  harvest,  but  you  yourself  shall 
soon  find  that  you  have  brought  on  your  own  head  a  punish- 
ment which  cannot  be  averted  by  any  pretexts  or  excuses. 
Blame  the  necessity  for  collectiug  the  crops,  and  for  making 
adequate  provision  for  my  armies,  for  even  if  a  complete 
scarcity  were  to  oppress  Judsea,  still  are  there  not  vast 
regions  on  its  borders  of  great  fertility  and  productiveness, 
sufficient  and  able  to  supply  all  necessary  food,  and  to  make 
up  for  the  deficiency  of  one  district  ?  But  M'hy  do  I  speak 
in  this  way  before  acting  ?  And  why  is  there  no  one  who 
anticipates  my  intentions  ?  He  who  delays  shall  first  find 
out  that  he  is  receiving  the  wages  of  his  delay  by  sufiering  in 
his  own  person.  I  W'ill  say  no  more,  but  I  shall  not  forget 
the  matter." 

And  after  a  brief  interval,  he   dictated   to   one  of  his 
secretaries  an  answer  to  Petronius,  praising  him  in  appear- 
ance for  his  prudence,  and  for    his   careful  and   accurate 
consideration  of  the  future,  for  he  was  very  careful  with 
respect  to  the  governors  of  the  provinces,  seeing  that  they 
had  at  all  times  great  facilities  for  making  innovations  or 
revolutions,  especially  if  they  happened  to  be  in  districts  of 
importance,  and  in  command  of  powerful  armies  such  as  was 
on  the  Euphrates  for  the  protection  of  Syria.     Therefore, 
being  very  civil  to  him  in  words  and  in  his  letters,  he  con- 
L-ealed  his  anger  till  a  favourable  opportunity,  though  he  was 
very  much  exasperated ;  but  at  the  end  of  the  letter,  after 
laving  mentioned  every  other  subject,  he  desired  him  rot  to 
3e  so  anxious  about  anything  as  about  the  speedy  erection 
md  dedication  of  the  statue,  for  that  by  this  time  the  harvest 
luist  have  been  able  to  be  got  in,  whether  the  excuse  was 
liizinally  an  honest  and  true  or  only  a  plausible  one. 

XXXV.  However  a  short  time  afterwards  King  Agrippa 

1  lived  in  Home,  according  to  custom,  to  pay  his  respects  to 

aius,   and   he   knew   absolutely   nothing   either   of   what 

'rtronius  had  written  in  his  letter,  or  of  what  Caius  had 

jvritten  in  his  first  or  second  epistle,  but  by  his  irregular 

(lotions  and  agitations,  and  by  the  excitement  which  shone 


158  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

in  his  eyes,  he  conjectured  that  he  had  some  anger  smoulder- 
ing beneath,  and  he  considered,  and  pondered,  and  turned 
over  every  matter  in  every  direction,  racking  his  brain  for 
every  reason,  whether  great  or  small,  to  see  whether  he  had 
said  or  done  anything  unbecoming,  and  when  he  felt  sure 
that  he  had  done  absolutely  nothing,  he  conjectured,  as  was 
natural,  that  it  was  some  one  else  with  whom  he  was 
offended.  But  again,  when  he  saw  that  he  looked  morosely 
at  him,  and  that  he  kept  his  eyes  continually  fixed  on  him, 
and  on  no  one  else  who  was  ever  present,  he  began  to  be 
alarmed,  and  though  he  often  thought  of  putting  the 
question  to  him,  he  restrained  himself,  reflecting  in  this 
manner :  "  Perhaps  by  doing  so  I  may  draw  down  on  myself 
the  threats  which  as  it  is  are  destined  for  others,  by  bring- 
ing upon  myself  a  suspicion  of  being  a  busybody,  and  a  rash 
and  audacious  man." 

Therefore,  when  Cains  saw  that  he  was  in  a  state  of  great 
alarm  and  perplexity,  for  he  was  very  acute  at  comprehend- 
ing a  man's  inmost  designs  and  feelings  from  his  outward 
appearance  and  expression  of  countenance,  he  said,  "  You 
are  embarrassed,  0  Agrippa.     I  will  relieve  you  from  your 
perplexity.      Though  you  have  lived  with  me  for  such  a 
length  of  time,  are  you  yet  ignorant  that  I  speak  not  only 
with  my  voice,  but  also  with  my  eyes,  intimating  everything, 
to  say  the  least  of  it,  as  much  in  one  way  as  in  the  other  ? 
Tour  loyal  and  excellent  fellow  citizens,  the  only  nation  of 
men  upon  the  whole  face  of  the  earth  by  whom  Cains  is  not 
esteemed  to  be  a  god,  appear  now  to  be  even  desiring  to 
plot  my  death  in  their  obstinate  disobedience,  for  when  I 
commanded  my  statue  in  the  character  of  Jupiter  to  be 
erected   in   their   temple,  they  raised   the  whole   of  their 
people,  and  quitted  the  city  and  the  whole  country  in  a 
body,  under  pretence  of  addressing  a  petition  to  me,  but  in 
reality  being  determined  to  act  in  a  manner  contrary  to  the 
commands  which  I  had  imposed  upon  them." 

And  when  he  was  about  to  add  other  charges  againsi 
them  Agrippa  fell  into  such  a  state  of  grief  that  he  changec 
into  all  sorts  of  colours,  becoming  at  the  same  momem 
bloodshot,  and  pale,  and  livid,  for  he  was  all  over  agitatioi 
and  trembling  from  the  top  of  his  head  down  to  his  feet 
and  a  quivering  and  shakmg  seized  upon  and  disordered  al 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         159 

his  limbs  and  every  member  of  his  body,  all  his  sinews,  and 
muscles,  and  nerves  being  relaxed  and  enfeebled,  so  that  he 
fainted  avray,  and  would  have  fallen  down  if  some  of  the 
bystanders  had  not  supported  him. 

And  they  being  commanded  to  carry  him  home,  bore  him 
to  his  palace,  where  he  lay  for  some  time  in  a  state  of  torpor 
without  any  one  understanding  what  sudden  misfortune 
had  brought  him  into  this  state.  Therefore  Caius  was 
exasperated  still  more  against  our  nation,  and  cherished  a 
more  furious  auger  against  us  than  before,  "  For,"  said  he, 
*'if  Agrippa,  who  is  my  most  intimate  and  dearest  friend, 
and  one  bound  to  me  by  so  many  benefits,  is  so  completely 
under  the  influence  of  his  national  customs  that  he  cannot 
bear  even  to  hear  a  word  against  them,  but  faints  away  to 
such  a  degree  as  to  be  near  dying,  what  must  one  expect 
will  be  the  feelings  of  others  who  have  no  motive  or  influence 
to  draw  them  the  other  way  ?" 

Agrippa,  then,  during  all  that  day  and  the  greater  portion 
of  the  next  day,  lay  in  a  state  of  profound  stupor,  being 
completely  unconscious  of  everything  that  passed;  but 
about  evening  he  raised  his  head  a  little,  and  for  a  short 
time  opened,  though  with  difficulty,  his  languid  eyes,  and 
with  dim  and  indistinct  vision  looked  upon  the  people  who 
surrounded  him,  though  he  was  not  as  yet  able  to  distinguish 
clearly  between  their  several  forms  and  features ;  and  then 
again  relapsing  into  sleep,  he  became  tranquil,  getting  into 
a  better  condition  than  at  first,  as  those  about  him  could 
conjecture  from  his  breathing  and  from  the  state  of  his 
body. 

And  afterwards,  when  he  awoke  again,  and  rose  up,  he 
asked,  "  Where  now  am  I  ?  Am  I  with  Caius  ?  Is  my 
lord  himself  here  ?"  *  And  they  replied,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ; 
you  are  by  yourself  in  your  own  palace.  Caius  is  not 
here.  You  have  now  had  a  sufficient  tranquil  sleep,  but 
now  turn  and  raise  yourself,  and  rest  upon  your  elbow,  and 
recognise  those  who  are  about  you ;  tliey  are  all  your  own 
people,  those  of  your  friends,  and  freedmen,  and  domestics, 
who  honour  you  above  all  others,  and  who  are  honoured  by 
you  in  return."  And  he,  for  he  was  now  beginning  to 
recover  from  his  state  of  stupefaction,  saw  feelings  of 
sympathy   in  every   one's   face,  and   when   his   physicians 


160  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

ordered  most  of  them  to  leave  tlie  room,  that  thej  might 
refresh  his  body  with  anointing  and  seasonable  food,  "  Go," 
said  he,  "  for  you  must  by  all  means  take  care  that  I  may 
have  a  more  carefully  regulated  way  of  life,  for  it  is  not 
sufficient  for  me,  unfortunate  man  that  I  am,  to  ward  off 
hunger  by  a  bare,  and  scanty,  and  economical,  and  precise 
use  of  necessary  food ;  nor  should  I  have  attended  to  any 
such  matters  if  it  had  not  been  my  object  to  provide  my 
miserable  motion  with  the  last  resource  which  my  mind 
suggests  to  me  by  way  of  assisting  it."  Accordingly,  he, 
shedding  abundance  of  tears,  and  eating  just  what  was 
necessary  without  any  sauce  or  seasoning,  and  drinking  no 
mixed  wine  but  only  tastiug  water,  soon  left  off  eating. 
"My  miserable  stomach,"  said  he,  "recoils  from  the  things 
which  it  demanded ;  and  now  what  ought  I  to  do  but  address 
myself  to  Caius  with  respect  to  existing  circumstances  ?" 

XXXVI.  And  having  taken  tablets,  he  writes  to  him  in 
the  following  manner :   "  0  master,  feur  and  shame  have 
taken  from  me  all  courage  to  come  into  your  presence  to 
address  you ;  since  fear  teaches  me  to  dread  your  threats ; 
and  shame,  out  of  respect  for  the  greatness  of  your  power 
and  dignity,  keeps  me  silent.     But  a  writing  will  show  my 
request,  which    I   now  here  offer   to   you   as   my  earnest 
petition.     In  all  men,  O  emperor !  a  love  of  their  country  is 
innate,  and  an  eager  for  dness  for  their  national  customs  and 
laws.     And  concerning  these  matters  there  is  no  need  that 
I  should  give  you  information,  since  you  have  a  heart-felt 
love  of  your  own  country,  and  a  deeply-seated  respect  for 
your  national  customs.     And  what  belongs  to  themselves 
appears  beautiful  to  every  one,  even  if  it  is  not  so  in  reality; 
for  they  judge  of  these  things  not  more  by  reason  than  by 
the  feelings  of  affection.     And  I  am,  as  you  know,  a  Jew; 
and  Jerusalem  is  my  country,  in  which  there  is  erected  the 
holy  temple  of  -the  most  high  God.     And  I  have  kings  for 
my  grandfathers  and  for  my  ancestors,  the  greater  part  of 
whom  have  been  called  high  priests,  looking  upon  their  roya] 
power  as  inferior  to  their  office  as  priests  ;  and  thinking  that 
the  high  priesthood  is  as  much  superior  to  the  power  of  .' 
king,  as  God  is  superior  to  man ;  for  that  the  one  is  occupie( 
in  rendering  service  to  God,  and  the  other  has  only  the  can 
of  governing  them.     Accordingly  I,  being  one  of  this  nation 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         161 

and  being  attached  to  tliis  country  and  to  sucli  a  temple, 
address  to  you  this  petition  on  behalf  of  them  all ;  on 
behalf  of  the  nation,  that  it  may  not  be  looked  upon  by  you 
in  a  light  contrary  to  the  true  one ;  since  it  is  a  most  pious 
and  holy  nation,  and  one  from  the  beginning  most  loyally 
disposed  to  your  family. 

"  Eor  in  all  the  particulars  in  which  men  are  enjoined  by 
the  laws,  and  in  which  they- have  it  m  their  power  to  show 
their  piety  and  loyalty,  my  nation  is  inferior  to  none  what- 
ever in  Asia  or  in  Europe,  whether  it  be  in  respect  of 
prayers,  or  of  the  supply  of  sacred  offerings,  or  in  the 
abundance  of  its  sacrifices,  not  merely  of  such  as  are  offered 
on  occasions  of  the  public  festivals,  but  in  those  which  are 
continually  offered  day  after  day ;  by  which  means  they 
show  their  loyalty  and  fidelity  more  surely  than  by  their 
mouth  and  tongue,  proving  it  by  the  designs  of  their  honest 
hearts,  not  indeed  saying  that  they  are  friends  to  Caesar,  but 
being  so  in  reality. 

"  Concerning  the  holy  city  I  must  now  say  what  is  necessary. 
It,  as  I  have  already  stated,  is  my  native  country,  and  the 
metropolis,  not  only  of  the  one  country  of  Judsea,  but  also 
of  many,  by  reason  of  the  colonies  which  it  has  sent  out  from 
thue  to  time  into  the  bordering  districts  of  Egypt,  Phoenicia, 
Syria  in  general,  and  especially  that  part  of  it  which  is  called 
Coelo-Syria,  and  also  with  those  more  distant  regions  of 
Pamphylia,  Cilicia,  the  greater  part  of  Asia  Minor  as  far  as 
Bithynia,  and  the  furthermost  comers  of  Pontus.  And  in 
the  same  manner  into  Europe,  into  Thessaly,  and  Boeotia, 
and  Macedonia,  and  ^tolia,  and  Attica,  and  Argos,  and 
Corinth  and  all  the  most  fertile  and  wealthiest  districts  of 
Peloponnesus.  And  not  only  are  the  continents  full  of 
Jewish  colonies,  but  also  all  the  most  celebrated  islands  are 
80  too ;  such  as  Euboea,  and  Cyprus,  and  Crete. 

"  I  say  nothing  of  the  countries  beyond  the  Euphrates,  for 
all  of  them  except  a  very  small  portion,  and  Babylon,  and 
all  the  satrapies  around,  which  have  any  advantages  whatever 
of  soil  or  climate,  have  Jews  settled  in  them.  !So  that  if  my 
native  land  is,  as  it  reasonably  may  be,  looked  upon  as 
entitled  to  a  share  in  your  favour,  it  is  not  one  city  only 
that  would  then  be  benefited  by  you,  but  ten  thousand  of 
them  in  every  region  of  the  habitable  world,  in  Europe,  in 

VOL.  IV.  M 


162  PHILO  JUD.«US. 

Asia,  and  in  Africa,  on  the  continent,  in  the  islands,  on  the 
coasts,  and  in  the  inland  parts.  And  it  corresponds  well 
to  the  greatness  of  your  good  fortune,  that,  by  conferring  |j 
benefits  on  one  city,  you  should  also  benefit  ten  thousand  ' 
others,  so  that  your  renown  may  be  celebrated  in  every  part 
of  the  habitable  world,  and  many  praises  of  you  may  be 
combined  with  thanksgiving. 

"  You  have  thought  the  native  countries  of  some  of  your 
friends  worthy  of  being  admitted  to  share  all  the  privileges 
of  the  Boman  constitution  ;  and  those  who  but  a  little  while 
ago  were  slaves,  became  the  masters  of  others  who  also 
enjoyed  your  favour  in  a  higher,  or  at  all  events  not  in  a 
lower  degree,  and  they  were  delighted  too  at  the  causes  of 
your  beneficence.  And  I  indeed  am  perfectly  aware  that  I 
belong  to  the  class  which  is  in  subjection  to  a  lord  and 
master,  and  also  that  I  am  admitted  to  the  honour  of  being 
one  of  your  companions,  being  inferior  to  you  in  respect  of 
my  birthright  and  natural  rank,  and  inferior  to  no  one 
whomsoever,  not  to  say  the  most  eminent  of  all  men,  in  good  . 
will  and  loyalty  towards  you,  both  because  that  is  my 
natural  disposition,  and  also  in  consequence  of  the  number 
of  benefits  with  which  you  have  enriched  me  ;  so  that  if  I  in 
consequence  had  felt  confidence  to  implore  you  myself  on 
behalf  of  my  country,  if  not  to  grant  to  it  the  Homan  con- 
stitution, at  least  to  confer  freedom  and  a  remission  of  taxes 
on  it,  I  should  not  have  thought  that  I  had  any  reason  to 
fear  your  displeasure  for  preferring  such  a  petition  to  you, 
and  for  requesting  that  most  desirable  of  all  things,  your 
favour,  which  it  can  do  you  no  harm  to  grant,  and  which  is 
the  most  advantageous  of  all  things  for  my  country  to 
receive. 

"  For  what  can  possibly  be  a  more  desirable  blessing  for  a 
subject  nation  than  the  good  will  of  its  sovereign  ?  It  was 
at  Jerusalem,  0  emperor !  that  your  most  desirable  succes- 
sion to  the  empire  was  first  announced ;  and  the  news  o1 
your  advancement  spread  from  the  holy  city  all  over  tb( 
continent  on  each  side,  and  was  received  with  great  gladness 
And  on  this  account  that  city  deserves  to  meet  with  favou] 
at  your  hands  ;  for,  as  in  families  the  eldest  children  receiv< 
the  highest  honours  as  their  birthright,  because  they  wen 
the  first  to  give  the  name  of  father  and  mother  to  thei 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         1  G3 

parents,  so,  in  like  manner,  since  this  is  first  of  all  the  cities 
in  the  east  to  salute  you  as  emperor,  it  ought  to  receive 
greater  benefit  from  you  than  auy  other ;  or  if  not  greater, 
at  all  events  as  great  as  any  other  city. 

"Having  now  advanced  these  pleas  on  the  ground  of  justice, 
and  made  these  petitions  on  behalf  of  my  native  country,  I 
now  come  at  last  to  my  supplication  on  behalf  of  the  temple. 
0  my  lord  and  master,  Caius !  this  temple  has  never,  from 
the  time  of  its  original  foimdation  until  now,  admitted  any 
form  made  by  hands,  because  it  has  been  the  abode  of  God. 
Now,  pictures  and  images  are  only  imitations  of  those  gods 
who  are  perceptible  to  the  outward  senses ;  but  it  was  not 
considered  by  our  ancestors  to  be  consistent  with  the 
reverence  due  to  God  to  make  any  image  or  representation 
of  the  invisible  God.  Agrippa,  when  he  came  to  the  temple, 
did  honour  to  it,  and  he  was  thy  grandfather ;  and  so  did 
Augustus,  when  by  his  letters  he  commanded  all  first  fruits 
from  all  quarters  to  be  sent  thither ;  and  by  the  continual 

sacrifice.     And  thy  great  grandmother 

"  On  which  account,  no  one,  whether  Greek  or  barbarian, 
satrap,  or  king,  or  implacable  enemy ;  no  sedition,  no  war, 
no  capture,  no  destruction,  no  occurrence  that  has  ever 
taken  place,  has  ever  threatened  this  temple  with  such 
innovation  as  to  place  in  it  any  image,  or  statue,  or  any 
work  of  any  kind  made  with  hands ;  for,  though  enemies 
have  displayed  their  hostility  to  the  inhabitants  of  the 
country,  still,  either  reverence  or  fear  has  possessed  them 
sufliciently  to  prevent  them  from  abrogating  any  of  the  laws 
which  were  established  at  the  beginning,  as  tending  to  the 
honour  of  the  Creator  and  Father  of  the  universe ;  for  they 
knew  that  it  is  these  and  similar  actions  which  bring  after 
them  the  irremediable  calamities  of  heaven-sent  afflic- 
tions. On  which  account  they  have  been  careful  not  to 
sow  an  impious  seed,  fearing  lest  they  should  be  compelled 
to  reap  its  natural  harvest,  in  a  fruit  bearing  utter 
destruction. 

XXXVII.  "But  why  need  I  invoke  the  assistance  of 
foreign  witnesses  when  I  have  plenty  with  whom  I  can 
furnish  you  from  among  your  own  countrymen  and  friends  ? 
Marcus  Agrippa,  your  own  grandfather  on  the  mother's 
side,  the  moment  that  he  arrived  in  Judaea,  when  Herod, 

M  2 


1C4  PHTLO  JUDiEUS. 

my  f^randfather,  was  king  of  the  country,  thought  fit  to  go 
up  from  the  searcoast  to  the  metropolis,  which  was  inland. 
And  when  he  had  beheld  the  temple,  and  the  decorations  of 
the  priests,  and  the  piety  and  holiness  of  the  people  of  the 
country,  he  marvelled,  looking  upon  the  whole  matter  as 
one  of  great  solemnity  and  entitled  to  great  respect,  and 
thinking  that  he  had  beheld  what  was  too  magnificent  to  be 
described.  And  he  could  talk  of  nothing  else  to  his  com- 
panions but  the  magnificence  of  the  temple  and  every  thing 
connected  with  it. 

"  Therefore,  every  day  that  he  remained  in  the  city,  by 
reason  of  his  friendship  for  Herod,  he  went  to  that  sacred 
place,  being  delighted  with  the  spectacle  of  the  building, 
and  of  the  sacrifices,  and  all  the  ceremonies  connected  with 
the  worship  of  Grod,  and  the  regularity  which  was  observed, 
and  the  dignity  and  honour  paid  to  the  high  priest,  and  his 
grandeur  when  arrayed  in  his  sacred  vestments  and  when 
about  to  begin  the  sacrifices.  And  after  he  had  adorned 
the  temple  with  all  the  ofi'erings  in  his  power  to  contribute, 
and  had  conferred  many  benefits  on  the  inhabitants,  doing 
them  many  important  services,  and  having  said  to  Herod 
many  friendly  things,  and  having  been  replied  to  in 
corresponding  terms,  he  was  conducted  back  again  to  the 
sea  coast,  and  to  the  harbour,  and  that  not  by  one  city  only 
but  by  the  whole  country,  having  branches  strewed  in  his 
road,  and  being  greatly  admired  and  respected  for  his 
piety. 

"  What  again  did  your  other  grandfather,  Tiberius  CsBsar, 
do  ?  does  not  he  appear  to  have  adopted  an  exactly  similar 
line  of  conduct  ?  At  all  events,  during  the  three  and 
twenty  years  that  he  was  emperor,  he  preserved  the  form  of 
worship  in  the  temple  as  it  had  been  handed  down  from  the 
earliest  times,  without  abrogating  or  altering  the  slightest 
particular  of  it. 

XXXYIII.  "  Moreover,  I  have  it  in  my  power  to  relate 
one  act  of  ambition  on  his  part,  though  I  suffered  an 
infinite  number  of  evils  when  he  was  alive ;  but  nevertheless 
the  truth  is  considered  dear,  and  much  to  be  honoured  by 
you.  Pilate  was  one  of  the  emperor's  lieutenants,  having 
been  appointed  governor  of  Judaea.  He,  not  more  with  the 
odject  of  doing  honour  to  Tiberius  than  with  that  of  vexing 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         1G5 

the  multitude,  dedicated  some  gilt  shields  in  the  palace  of 
Herod,  in  the  holy  city ;  which  had  no  form  nor  any  other 
forbidden  thing  represented  on  them  except  some  necessary 
inscriptiou,  which  mentioned  these  two  facts,  the  name  of 
the  person  who  had  placed  them  there,  and  the  person  in 
whose  honour  they  were  so  placed  there.  But  when  the 
multitude  heard  what  had  been  done,  and  when  the  circum- 
stance became  notorious,  then  the  people,  putting  forward 
the  four  sons  of  the  king,  who  were  in  no  respect  inferior  to 
the  kings  themselves,  in  fortune  or  in  rank,  and  his  other 
descendants,  and  those  magistrates  who  were  among  them 
at  the  time,  entreated  him  to  alter  and  to  rectify  the  inno- 
vation which  he  had  committed  in  respect  of  the  shields ; 
and  not  to  make  any  alteration  in  their  national  customs, 
which  had  hitherto  been  preserved  without  any  interruption, 
without  being  in  the  least  degree  changed  by  any  king  or 
emperor. 

"  But  when  he  steadfastly  refused  this  petition  (for  he  was 
a  man  of  a  very  inflexible  disposition,  and  very  merciless  as 
well  as  very  obstinate),  they  cried  out:  'Do  not  cause  a 
sedition;  do  not  make  war  upon  us;  do  not  destroy  the 
peace  which  exists.  The  honour  of  the  emperor  is  not 
identical  with  dishonour  to  the  ancient  laws ;  let  it  not  be 
to  you  a  pretence  for  heaping  insult  on  our  nation.  Tibe- 
rius is  not  desirous  that  any  of  our  laws  or  customs  shall  be 
destroyed.  And  if  you  yourself  say  that  he  is,  show  us 
either  some  command  from  him,  or  some  letter,  or  some- 
thing of  the  kind,  that  w^e,  who  have  been  sent  to  you  as 
ambassadors,  may  cease  to  trouble  you,  and  may  address  our 
supplications  to  your  master.' 

"  But  this  last  sentence  exasperated  him  in  the  greatest 
possible  degree,  as  he  feared  lest  they  might  in  reality  go  on 
an  embassy  to  the  emperor,  and  might  impeach  him  with. 
respect  to  other  particulars  of  his  government,  in  respect  of 
his  corruption,  and  his  acts  of  insolence,  and  his  rapine,  and 
his  habit  of  insulting  people,  and  his  cruelty,  and  his 
continual  murders  of  people  untried  and  uncondemned,  and 
his  never  ending,  and  gratuitous,  and  most  grievous  in- 
humanity. Therefore,  being  exceedingly  angry,  and  being 
at  all  times  a  man  of  most  ferocious  passions,  he  was  in 
great  perplexity,  neither  venturing  to  take  down  what  he 


166  PHILO  JUDillQS. 

had  once  set  up,  nor  wishing  to  do  any  thing  which  could 
be  acceptable  to  his  subjects,  and  at  the  same  time  being 
sufficiently  acquainted  with  the  firmness  of  Tiberius  on  these 
points.  And  those  who  were  in  power  in  our  nation,  seeing 
this,  and  perceiving  that  he  was  inclined  to  change  his  mind 
as  to  what  he  had  done,  but  that  he  was  not  willing  to  be 
thought  to  do  so,  wrote  a  most  supplicatory  letter  to 
Tiberius.  And  he,  when  he  had  read  it,  what  did  he  say  of 
Pilate,  and  what  threats  did  he  utter  against  him !  But  ic 
is  beside  our  purpose  at  present  to  relate  to  you  how  very 
angry  he  was,  although  he  was  not  very  liable  to  sudden 
anger ;  since  the  facts  speak  for  themselves ;  for  immedi- 
ately, without  putting  any  thing  off  till  the  next  day,  he 
wrote  a  letter,  reproaching  and  reviling  him  in  the  most 
bitter  manner  for  his  act  of  unprecedented  audacity  and 
wickedness,  and  commanding  him  immediately  to  take  down 
the  shields  and  to  convey  them  away  from  the  metropolis  of 
Judaea  to  Caesarea,  on  the  sea  which  had  been  named 
Caesarea  Augusta,  after  his  grandfather,  in  order  that  they 
might  be  set  up  in  the  temple  of  Augustus.  And  accord- 
ingly, they  were  set  up  in  that  edifice.  And  in  this  way  he 
provided  for  two  matters :  both  for  the  honour  due  to  the 
emperor,  and  for  the  preservation  of  the  ancient  customs  ot 
the  city. 

XXXIX.  "  Now  the  things  set  up  on  that  occasion  were 
shields,  on  which  there  was  no  representation  of  any  living 
thing  whatever  engraved.  But  now  the  thing  proposed  to 
be  erected  is  a  colossal  statue.  Moreover,  then  the  erection 
was  in  the  dwelling-house  of  the  governor ;  but  they  say, 
that  which  is  now  conte  nplated  is  to  be  in  the  inmost  part 
of  the  temple,  in  the  very  holy  of  holies  itself,  into  which, 
once  in  the  year,  the  high  priest  enters,  on  the  day  called 
the  great  fast,  to  ofier  incense,  and  on  no  other  day,  being 
then  about  in  accordance  with  our  national  law  also  to  ofier 
up  prayers  for  a  fertile  and  ample  supply  of  blessings,  and 
for  peace  to  all  mankind.  And  if  any  one  else,  I  will  not 
say  of  the  Jews,  but  even  of  the  priests,  and  those  not  of  the 
lowest  order,  but  even  those  who  are  in  the  rank  next  to  the 
first,  should  go  in  there,  either  with  him  or  after  him,  or 
even  if  the  very  high  priest  himself  should  enter  in  thither 
on  two  days  in  the  year,  or  three  or  four  times  on  the  same 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.         167 

day,  he  is  subjected  to  inevitable  death  for  his  impiety,  so 
great  are  the  precautions  taken  by  our  lawgiver  with  respect 
to  the  holy  of  holies,  as  he  determined  to  preserve  it  alone 
inaccessible  to  and  untouched  by  any  human  being. 

"  How  many  deaths  then  do   you  not    suppose  that   the 
people,  who  have  been  taught  to  regard  this  place  with  such 
holy  reverence,  would  willingly  endure   rather  than  see  a 
statue  introduced  into  it  ?     I  verily  believe  that  they  would 
rather  slay  all  their  whole  families,  with  their  wives  and 
children,  and  themselves  last  of  all,  in  the  ruins  of  their 
houses  and  families,  and  Tiberius  knew  this  well.    And  what 
did  your  great-grandfather,  the  most   excellent   of  all  em- 
perors that  ever  lived  upon  the  earth,  he  who  was  the  first  to 
have  the-appella4}ion  of  Augustus  given  him,  on  account  of 
his  virtue  and  good  fortune ;  he  who  diffused  peace  in  every 
direction  over  earth  and  sea,  to  the  very  furthest  extremities 
of  the  world  ?     Did  not  he,  when  he  had  heard  a  report  of 
the  peculiar  characteristics  of  our  temple,  and  that  there  is 
in  it  no  image  or  representation  made  by  hands,  no  visible 
likeness  of  Him  who  is  invisible,  no  attempt  at  any  imita- 
tion of  his  nature,  did  not  he,  I  say,  marvel  at  and  honour 
it  ?  for  as  he  was  imbued  with  something  more  than  a  mere 
smattering  of  philosophy,  inasmuch  as  he  had  deeply  feasted 
on  it,  and  continued  to  feast  on  it  every  day,  he  partly  retraced 
in  his  recollection  all  the  precepts  of  philosophy  which  his 
mind  had  previously  leiirat,  and  partly  also  he  kept  his 
learning  alive  by  the  conversation  of  the  literary  men  who 
were  always  about  him ;  for  at  his  banquets  and  entertain- 
ments, the  greatest  part  of  the  time  was  devoted  to  learned 
conversation,  in  order  that  not  only  his  friends'  bodies  but 
their  minds  also  might  be  nourished. 

XL.  "  And  though  I  might  be  able  to  establish  this  fact, 
and  demonstrate  to  you  the  feelings  of  Augustus,  your  great 
grandfather,  by  an  abundance  of  proofs,  I  will  be  content  with 
two ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  he  sent  commandments  to  all 
the  governors  of  the  different  provinces  throughout  Asia, 
because  he  heard  that  the  sacred  first  fruits  were  neglected, 
enjoining  them  to  permit  the  Jews  alone  to  assemble 
together  in  the  synagogues,  for  that  these  assemblies  were 
not  revels,  which  from  drunkenness  and  intoxication  pro- 
ceeded to  violence,  so  as  to  disturb  the  peaceful  condition  of 


168  PHILO  JUD^US. 

the  country,  but  were  rather  schools  of  temperance  anrl  jus- 
tice, as  the  men  who  met  in  them  were  studiers  of  virtue, 
and  contributed  the  first  fruits  every  year,  sending  com- 
missioners to  convey  the  holy  things  to  the  temple  in 
Jerusalem. 

"  And,  in  the  next  place,  he  commanded  that  no  one  should 
hinder  the  Jews,  either  on  their  way  to  the  synagogues,  or 
when  bringipg  their  contributions,  or  when  proceeding  in 
obedience  to  their  national  laws  to  Jerusalem,  for  these 
things  were  expressly  enjoined,  if  not  in  so  many  words, 
at  all  events  in  effect ;  and  I  subjoin  one  letter,  in  order  to 
bring  conviction  to  you  who  are  our  master,  what  Cains 
Korbanus  Flaccus  wrote,  in  which  he  details  what  had  been 
written  to  him  by  Csesar,  and  the  superscription  of  the 
letter  is  as  follows : — 

CAIUS  NOEBANUS  FLACCTTS,  PEOCONSUL,  TO  THE  G0VEEN0E3 
OF  TUE  EPHESIANS,  GEEETING. 

" '  Caesar  has  written  word  to  me,  that  the  Jews,  wherever 
they  are,  are  accustomed  to  assemble  together,  in  compli- 
ance with  a  peculiar  ancient  custom  of  their  nation,  to  con- 
tribute money  which  they  send  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  he  does 
not  choose  that  they  should  have  any  hindrance  offered  to 
them,  to  prevent  them  from  doing  this ;  therefore  I  have 
written  to  you,  that  you  may  know  that  I  command  that 
they  shall  be  allowed  to  do  these  things.' 

"  Is  not  this  a  most  convincing  proof,  O  emperor,  of  the 
intention  of  C»sar  respecting  the  honours  paid  to  our  tem- 
ple which  he  had  adopted,  not  considering  it  right  that 
because  of  some  general  rule,  with  respect  to  meetings,  the 
assemblies  of  the  Jews,  in  one  place  should  be  put  down, 
which  they  held  for  the  sake  of  offering  the  first  fruits,  and 
for  other  pious  objects  ? 

"  There  is  also  another  piece  of  evidence,  in  no  respect 
inferior  to  this  one,  and  which  is  the  most  undeniable  proof 
of  the  will  of  Augustus,  for  he  commanded  perfect  sacrifices 
of  whole  burnt  offerings  to  be  offered  up  to  the  most  high 
God  every  day,  out  of  his  own  revenues,  which  are  per- 
formed up  to  the  present  time,  and  the  victims  are  two 
sheep  and  a  bull,  with  which  Caesar  honoured  the  altar  oi 
God,  well  knowing  that  there  is  in  the  temple  no  image 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        169 

erected,  either  in  open  sight  or  in  any  secret  part  of  it.  Bat 
that  great  ruler,  who  was  inferior  to  no  one  in  philosophy, 
considered  within  himself,  that  it  is  necessary  in  terrestrial 
things,  that  an  especial  holy  place  should  be  set  apart  for 
the  invisible  God,  who  will  not  permit  any  visible  represent- 
ation of  himself  to  be  made,  by  which  to  arrive  at  a  partici- 
pation in  favourable  hopes  and  the  enjoyment  of  perfect 
blessings. 

"  And  your  grandmother,  Julia  Augusta,  following  the 
example  of  so  great  a  guide  in  the  patlis  of  piety,  did  also 
adorn  the  temple  with  some  golden  vials  and  censers,  and 
with  a  great  number  of  other  offerings,  of  the  most  costly 
and  magnificent  description;  and  wliat  was  her  object  in 
doing  this,  when  there  is  no  statue  erected  within  the  tem- 
ple ?  for  the  minds  of  women  are,  in  some  degree,  weaker 
than  those  of  men,  and  are  not  so  well  able  to  comprehend 
a  thing  which  is  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  without 
any  aid  of  objects  addressed  to  the  outward  senses ;  but  she, 
as  she  surpassed  all  her  sex  in  other  particulars,  so  also  was 
she  superior  to  them  in  this,  by  reason  of  the  pure  learning 
and  wisdom  which  had  been  implanted  in  her,  both  by 
nature  and  by  study ;  so  that,  having  a  masculine  intellect, 
she  was  so  sharpsighted  and  profound,  that  she  compre- 
hended what  is  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  even  more 
than  those  things  which  are  perceptible  by  the  outward 
senses,  and  looked  upon  the  latter  as  only  shadows  of  the 
former. 

XLI.  "  Therefore,  0  master,  having  all  these  examples 
most  nearly  connected  with  yourself  and  your  family,  of  our 
purposes  and  customs,  derived  from  those  from  whom  you 
are  sprung,  of  whom  you  are  born,  and  by  whom  you  have 
been  brought  up,  I  implore  you  to  preserve  those  principles 
which  each  of  those  persons  whom  I  have  mentioned  did 
preserve ;  they  who  were  themselves  possessed  of  imperial 
power  do,  by  their  laws,  exhort  you,  the  emperor ;  they  who 
were  august,  speak  to  you  who  are  also  Augustus ;  your 
grandfathers  and  ancestors  speak  to  their  descendant ;  num- 
:ber8  of  authorities  address  one  individual,  all  but  saying,  in 
jexpress  words:  Do  not  you  destroy  those  things  in  our 
j councils  which  remain,  and  which  have  been  preserved  as 
permanent  laws  to  this  very  day ;  for  even  if  no  mischief 


170  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

were  to  ensue  from  the  abrogation  of  them,  still,  at  all 
events,  the  result  would  be  a  feeling  of  uncertainty  respect- 
ing the  future,  and  such  uncertainty  is  full  of  fear,  even  to 
the  most  sanguine  and  confident,  if  they  are  not  despisers 
of  divine  things. 

"  If  I  were  to  enumerate  the  benefits  which  I  myself  have 
received  at  your  hands,  the  day  would  be  too  short  for  me ; 
besides  the  fact  that  it  is  not  proper  for  one  who  has  under- 
taken to  speak  on  one  subject  to  branch  off  to  a  digression 
about  some  other  matter.  And  even  if  I  should  be  silent, 
the  facts  themselves  speak  and  utter  a  distinct  voice.  You 
released  me  when  I  was  bound  in  chains  and  iron.  Who  is 
there  who  is  ignorant  of  this  ?  But  do  not,  after  having 
done  so,  O  emperor!  bind  me  in  bonds  of  still  greater 
bitterness :  for  the  chains  from  which  you  released  me 
surrounded  a  part  of  my  body,  but  those  which  I  am  now 
anticipating  are  the  chains  of  the  soul,  which  are  likely  to 
oppress  it  wholly  and  in  every  part ;  you  abated  from  me  a 
fear  of  death,  continually  suspended  over  my  head;  you 
received  me  when  I  was  almost  dead  through  fear ;  you 
raised  me  up  as  it  were  from  the  dead.  Continue  your 
favour,  O  master,  that  your  Agrippa  may  not  be  driven 
wholly  to  forsake  life  ;  for  I  shall  appear  (if  you  do  not  do  so) 
to  have  been  released  from  bondage,  not  for  the  purpose  of 
being  saved,  but  for  that  of  being  made  to  perish  in  a  more 
conspicuous  manner. 

"  You  have  given  me  the  greatest  and  most  glorious  in- 
heritance among  mankind,  the  rank  and  power  of  a  king,  at 
first  over  one  district,  then  over  another  and  a  more  import- 
ant one,  adding  to  my  kingdom  the  district  called  Trachonitis 
and  Gralilee.  Do  not  then,  0  master !  after  having  loaded 
me  with  means  of  superfluity,  deprive  me  of  what  is  actually 
necessary.  Do  not,  after  you  have  raised  me  up  to  the  most 
brilliant  light,  cast  me  down  again  from  my  eminence  to  the 
most  profound  darkness.  I  am  willing  to  descend  from 
this  splendid  position  in  which  you  have  placed  me  ;  I  do 
not  deprecate  a  return  to  the  condition  in  which  I  was  a 
short  time  ago  ;  I  will  give  up  everything ;  I  look  upon 
everything  as  of  less  importance  than  the  one  point  of  pre- 
serving the  ancient  customs  and  laws  of  my  nation  unaltered  : 
for  if  they  are  violated,  what   could  I  say,  either  to  m} 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        171 

ellow  countrymen  or  to  any  other  men  ?  It  would  follow 
)f  necessity  that  I  must  be  looked  upon  as  one  of  two 
ihings,  either  as  a  betrayer  of  my  people,  or  as  one  who  is 
10  longer  accounted  a  friend  by  you.  And  what  could  be  a 
greater  misery  than  either  of  these  two  things  ?  For  if  I 
tra  still  reckoned  among  the  company  of  your  friends,  I  shall 
hen  receive  the  imputation  of  treason  against  my  own 
lation,  if  neither  my  country  is  preserved  free  from  all  mis- 
brtune,  nor  even  the  temple  left  inviolate.  Eor  you,  great 
rien,  preserve  the  property  of  your  companions  and  of  those 
vho  take  refuge  in  your  protection  by  your  imperial  splen- 
lour  and  magnificence.  And  if  you  have  any  secret  grief  or 
'exation  in  your  mind,  do  not  throw  me  into  prison,  like 
Ciberius,  but  deliver  me  from  any  anticipation  of  being 
ihrown  into  prison  at  any  future  time ;  command  me  at 
)nce  to  be  put  out  of  the  way.  Eor  what  advantage  would 
t  be  to  me  to  live,  who  place  my  whole  hopes  of  safety  and 
lappiness  in  your  friendship  and  favour  ?" 

XLII.  Having  written  this  letter  and  sealed  it,  he  sent  it 
;o  Caius,  and  then  shutting  himself  up  he  remained  in  his 
3\vn   house,    full   of  agony,    confusion,   and   disorder,   and 
uixiety,  as  to  what  was  the  best  way  of  approaching  and  ad- 
iressing  the  emperor  ;  for  he  and  his  people  had  incurred  no 
slight  danger,  but  they  had  reason  to  apprehend  expulsion 
from  their  country,  and  slavery,  and  utter  destruction,  as 
impending  not  only  over  those  who  were  dwelling  in  the 
holy  land,  but  over  all  the  Jews  in  every  part  of  the  world. 
But  the  emperor,  having  taken  the  letter  and  read  it,  and 
having  considered  every  suggestion  which  was  contained  in 
it,  was  very  angry,  because  his  intentions  had  not  been  exe- 
cuted :  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  he  was  moved  by  the 
appeals  to  his  justice  and  by  the  supplications  which  were 
tluis  addressed  to  him,  and  in  some  respects  he  was  pleased 
with  Agrippa,  and  in  some  he  blamed  him.    He  blamed  him 
jtor  his  excessive  desire  to  please  his  fellow  countrymen,  who 
iA'ere  the  only  men  who  had  resisted  his  orders  and  shown 
iuiy   unwillingness   to   submit   to   his    deification;   but   he 
)raised  him  for  concealing  and  disguising  none  of  his  feel- 
ngs,  which  conduct  he  said  was  a  proof  of  a  liberal  and 
loble  disposition.     Therefore  being  somewhat  appeased,  at 
east  as  far  as  appearance  went,  he  condescended  to  return 


172  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

a  somewhat  favourable  answer,  granting  to  Agrippa  that 
highest  and  greatest  of  all  favours,  the  consent  that  this 
erection  of  his  statue  should  not  take  place ;  and  he  com- 
manded letters  to  be  written  to  Publius  Petronius  the 
governor  of  Syria,  enjoining  him  not  to  allow  any  alterations 
or  innovations  to  be  made  with  respect  to  the  temple  of  the 
Jews.  Nevertheless,  though  he  did  grant  him  the  favour, 
he  did  not  grant  it  without  any  alloy,  but  he  mingled  with  it 
a  grievous  terror ;  for  he  added  to  the  letter, — 

"  If  any  people  in  the  bordering  countries,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  the  metropolis  itself,  wishing  to  erect  altars  or 
temples,  nay,  images  or  statues,  in  honour  of  me  and  of  my 
family  are  hindered  from  doing  so,  I  charge  you  at  once  to 
punish  those  who  attempt  to  hinder  them,  or  else  to  bring 
them  before  the  tribunal."  Now  this  was  nothing  else  but  a 
beginning  of  seditions  and  civil  wars,  and  an  indirect  way  of 
annulling  the  gift  which  he  appeared  to  be  granting.  For 
some  men,  more  out  of  a  desire  of  mortifying  the  Jews  than 
from  any  feelings  of  loyalty  towards  Caius,  were  inclined  to 
fill  the  whole  country  with  erections  of  one  kind  or  another. 
But  they  who  beheld  the  violation  of  their  national  customs 
practised  before  their  eyes  were  resolved  above  all  things 
not  to  endure  such  an  injury  unresistingly.  But  Caius, 
judging  those  who  were  thus  excited  to  disobedience  to  be 
worthy  of  the  most  severe  punishment  possible,  a  second 
time  orders  his  statue  to  be  erected  in  the  temple.  But  by 
the  providence  and  care  of  God,  who  beholds  all  things  and 
governs  all  things  in  accordance  with  justice,  not  one  of  the 
neighbouring  nations  made  any  movement  at  all )  so  that 
there  was  no  occasion  for  these  commands  being  carried  into 
effect,  and  these  inexorably  appointed  calamities  all  termi- 
nated in  only  a  moderate  degree  of  blame. 

What  advantage,  then,  was  gained  ?  some  one  will  say  ' 
for  even  when  they  were  quiet,  Caius  was  not  quiet ;  but  he 
had  already  repented  of  the  favour  which  he  had  showec 
to  Agrippa,  and  had  re-lcindled  the  desires  which  he  hac 
entertained  a  little  while  before  ;  for  he  commanded  anothei 
statue  to  be  made,  of  colossal  size,  of  brass  gilt  over,  in  Borne 
no  longer  moving  the  one  which  had  been  made  in  Sidon,  u 
order  that  the  people  might  not  be  excited  by  its  boin| 
moved,  but  that  while  they  remained  in  a  state  of  tranquillit 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        173 

and  felt  released  from  their  suspicions,  it  might  in  a  period 
of  peace  be  suddenly  brought  to  the  country  in  a  ship,  and 
be  suddenly  erected  without  the  multitude  being  aware  of 
what  was  going  on. 

XLIII.  And  he  was  intending  to  do  this  while  on  his 
royage  along  the  coast  during  the  period  which  he  had 
allotted  for  his  sojourn  in  Egypt.  For  an  indescribable  de- 
sire occupied  his  mind  to  see  Alexandria,  to  which  he  was 
eager  to  go  with  all  imaginable  haste,  and  when  he  had 
arrived  there  he  intended  to  remain  a  considerable  time, 
urging  that  the  deification  about  which  he  was  so  anxious, 
might  easily  be  originated  and  carried  to  a  great  height 
in  that  city  above  all  others,  and  then  that  it  would 
be  a  model  to  all  other  cities  of  the  adoration  to  which  he 
was  entitled,  inasmuch  as  it  was  the  greatest  of  all  the  cities 
of  the  east,  and  built  in  the  finest  situation  in  the  world. 
For  all  inferior  men  and  nations  are  eager  to  imitate  great 
men  and  great  states. 

Moreover,  Caius  was  in  other  respects  a  man  in  whose 
nature  there  was  nothing  stable  or  trustworthy  so  that, 
even  if  he  did  anything  good  or  kind,  he  speedily  repented 
of  it,  and  in  such  a  manner  that  he  soon  attempted  to  annul 
■what  he  had  done  in  such  a  way  as  to  cause  even  greater 
affliction  and  injury  to  those  whom  he  had  favoured.  For 
instance,  he  released  some  prisoners,  and  then  for  no  reason 
whatever  he  threw  them  into  prison  a  second  time,  inflicting 
upon  them  a  second  calamity  more  grievous  than  the  first, 
namely,  that  which  was  caused  by  unexpected  misfortune. 
Again,  he  condemned  some  persons  to  banishment  who  had 
expected,  sentence  of  death ;  not  because  they  were  con- 
scious of  having  committed  crimes  deserving  of  death,  or 
indeed  of  any  punishment  at  all,  even  the  lightest,  but 
because  of  the  extravagant  inhumanity  of  their  master  they 
did  not  expect  to  escape.  Now  to  these  men,  banishment 
jwas  a  downright  gain,  and  equivalent  almost  to  a  restoration, 
pince  they  looked  upon  it  that  they  had  escaped  the  greatest 
pf  all  evils,  the  danger  of  death.  But  no  long  period  elapsed 
:)rfore  he  sent  some  soldiers  after  them,  though  no  nesv 
circumstances  had  arisen,  and  put  to  death  simultaneously 
he  most  excellent  and  nobly-born  of  the  exiles  who  were 
iving  in  the  different  islands  as  their  own  countries,  and 


174  PniLO  JUD-TIUS. 

vrho  were  bearing  their  misfortunes  in  the  most  contented 
manner,  inflicting  in  this  way  the  greatest  and  most  pitiable 
and  unexpected  misery  on  many  of  the  noblest  families  in 
Kome. 

And  if  he  ever  gave  any  one  a  sum  of  money  as  a  gift,  he 
demanded  it  back  again  at  some  future  time,  not  a  simple 
loan  but  he  also  required  interest  and  compound  interest, 
and  often  treating  the  persons  themselves  who  had 
received  it  from  him  as  thieves,  and  punishing  them  with 
the  severest  penalties  for  having  stolen  it ;  for  he  was  not 
contented  that  those  miserable  men  should  return  what  had 
been  given  to  them,  but  he  compelled  them  also  to  give  up 
all  their  property  which  they  had  inherited  from  their 
parents,  or  relations,  or  from  any  friends,  or  which,  having 
selected  a  life  of  industry  and  profit,  they  had  acquired  by 
their  own  resources. 

And   those  who  appeared  to  be  in  the  greatest   credit 
with  him,  and  who  lived  with  him  in  a  round  of  pleasure,  at 
one  may  say,  with  great  appearances  of  friendship  and  gooc 
will,  were  greatly  injured  by  him,  being  compelled  to  expenc 
large  sums  in  irregular,  and  illegal,  and  sudden  journeys 
and  in  entertainments ;  for  they  lavished  whole  properties 
in  the  preparation  of  a  single  banquet,  so  that  they  wer( 
compelled  to  have  recourse  to  usurers,  so  vast  was  his  pro 
digality  ;  therefore  many  men  deprecated  the  receiving  o 
any  favours  from  him,  thinking  not  only  that  it  was  of  n* 
advantage,  but  even  that  they  were  only  a  bait  and  a  snar 
to  lead  them  into  intolerable  suffering. 

So  great  therefore  was  his  inequality  of  temper  toward 
every  one,  and  most  especially  towards  the  nation  of  th 
Jews  to  which  he  was  most  bitterly  hostile,  and  accordingl 
beginning  in  Alexandria  he  took  from  them  all  their  synj 
gogues  there,  and  in  the  other  cities,  and  filled  them  a 
with  images   and  statues  of  his  own  form  ;  for  not  cario 
about  any  other  erection  of  any  kind,  he  set  up  his  ow 
statue  every  where  by  main  force ;  and  the  great  temp 
in  the  holy  city,  which  was  left  untouched  to  the  last,  havir 
been  thought  worthy  of  all  possible  respect  and  preservatio 
he  altered  and  transformed  into  a  temple  of  his  own,  that  1 
might  call  it  the  temple  of  the  new  Jupiter,  the  illustrioi 
Caius. 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        175 

"What  is  this  that  you  say  ?  Do  you,  who  are  a  man, 
seek  to  take  to  yourself  the  air  and  the  heaven,  not  being 
content  with  the  vast  multitude  of  continents,  and  islands, 
md  nations,  and  countries  of  which  you  enjoy  the  sove- 
•eignty  ?  And  do  you  not  think  any  one  of  the  gods  who 
ire  worshipped  in  that  city  or  by  our  people  worthy  of  any 
ountry  or  city  or  even  of  any  small  precinct  which  may 
lave  been  consc^crated  to  them  in  old  time,  and  dedicated  to 
hem  with  oracles  and  sacred  hymns,  and  are  you  intending 
0  deprive  them  of  that,  that  in  all  the  vast  circumference  of 
lie  world  there  may  be  no  visible  trace  or  memorial  to  be 
bund  of  any  honour  or  pious  worship  paid  to  the  true  real 
iving  Grod  ?  Truly  you  are  suggesting  fine  hopes  to  the 
■ace  of  mankind ;  are  you  ignorant  that  you  are  opening  the 
buntains  of  evils  of  every  kind,  making  innovations,  and 
committing  acts  of  audacious  impiety  such  as  it  is  wicked  to 
lo  and  even  to  think  of  ? 

XLIV.  It  is  worth  while  to  make  mention  of  what  we 
)oth  saw  and  heard,  when  we  were  sent  for  to  encounter  a 
contest  on  behalf  of  our  national  constitution ;  for  the  mo- 
Tient  that  we  entered  into  the  presence  of  the  emperor  we 
aerceived,  from  his  looks  and  from  tlie  state  of  agitation  in 
*vhich  he  was,  that  we  had  come  not  before  a  judge  but 
before  an  accuser,  or  rather  I  should  say  before  the  open 
3nemy  of  those  whom  he  looked  upon  as  opposed  to  his  will ; 
for  it  would  have  been  the  part  of  a  judge  to  sit  with 
assessors  selected  because  of  their  virtue  and  learning,  when 
!i  question  of  the  greatest  importance  was  being  investigated 
which  had  lain  dormant  for  four  hundred  years,  and  which 
was  now  raised  for  the  first  time  among  many  myriads  of 
Alexandrian  Jews ;  and  it  would  have  been  proper  for  the 
contending  parties  with  their  advocates  to  stand  on  each 
iide  of  him,  and  for  him  to  listen  to  them  both  in  turn ;  first 
-0  the  accusation  and  then  in  turn  to  the  defence,  according 
;o  a  period  measured  by  water,*  and  then  retiring  the 
udge  should  deliberate  with  his  assessors  as  to  what  he 
lught  publicly  to  deliver  as  his  sentence  on  the  justice  of 

he  case ;  but  what  was  actually  done  resembled  rather  the 

*  The  time  allotted  to  the  speeches  of  advocates  in  the  Athenian 
ourts  of  justice  was  measured  by  a  water-clock,  KXixpvSpa,  something 
ke  our  hour-glass  of  sand. 


176  PIIILO  JUD.EUS. 

conduct   of  an  implacable  tyrant,  exhibiting   uncontrolled 
authority  and  displeasure  and  pride. 

For  besides  that  he  in  no  particular  behaved  in  the  man- 
ner which  I  have  just  been  describing  as  proper,  having 
sent  for  the  managers  of  two  gardens,  the  Maecenatian  and 
the  Lamian  garden,  and  they  are  near  one  another  and  close 
to  the  city,  in  which  he  had  spent  three  or  four  days,  for 
that  was  the  place  in  which  this  theatrical  spectacle,  aimed 
at  the  happiness  of  a  whole  nation,  was  intended  to  be 
enacted  in  our  presence,  he  commanded  all  the  outer  build- 
ings to  be  opened  for  him,  for  that  he  wished  to  examine 
them  all  minutely ;  but  we,  as  soon  as  we  were  introduced 
into  his  presence,  the  moment  that  we  saw  him,  bent  to  the 
ground  with  all  imaginable  respect  and  adoration,  and  saluted 
him  calling  him  the  emperor  Augustus ;  and  he  replied  to  us 
in  such  a  gentle  and  courteous  and  humane  manner  that  we 
not  only  despaired  of  attaining  our  object,  but  even  of  pre- 
serving our  lives ;  for,  said  he,  "  You  are  haters  of  (xod, 
inasmuch  as  you  do  not  think  that  I  am  a  god,  I  who  am 
already  confessed  to  be  a  god  by  every  other  nation,  but 
who  am  refused  that  appellation  by  you."  And  then, 
stretching  up  his  hands  to  heaven,  he  uttered  an  ejacula- 
tion which  it  was  impious  to  hear,  much  more  would  it  be 
so  to  repeat  it  literally. 

And  immediately  all  the  ambassadors  of  the  opposite 
portion  were  filled  with  all  imaginable  joy,  thinking  that 
their  embassy  was  already  successful,  on  account  of  the  first 
words  uttered  by  Cains,  and  so  they  clapped  their  hands  and 
danced  for  joy,  and  called  him  by  every  title  which  is  appli- 
cable to  any  one  of  the  gods. 

XLV.  And  while  he  was  triumphing  in  these  super- 
human appellations,  the  sycophant  Isidorus,  seeing  the 
temper  in  which  he  was,  said,  "  0  master,  you  will  hate  with 
etill  juster  vehemence  these  men  whom  you  see  before  yoi; 
and  their  feUow  countrymen,  if  you  are  made  acquainted  wit! 
their  disaffection  and  disloyalty  towards  yourself;  for  whei 
all  other  men  were  offering  up  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  fo? 
your  safety,  these  men  alone  refused  to  offer  any  sacrifice  a 
all ;  and  when  I  say,  '  these  men,'  I  comprehend  all  th( 
rest  of  the  Jews."  And  when  we  all  cried  out  with  on 
accord,  "  0  Lord  Cains,  we  are  falsely  accused ;  for  we  dii 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        177 

sacrifice,  and  we  offered  up  entire  hecatombs,  the  blood  of 
which  we  poured  in  a  libation  upon  the  altar,  and  the  flesh 
we  did  not  carry  to  our  homes  to  make  a  feast  and  banquet 
upon  it,  as  it  is  the  custom  of  some  people  to  do,  but  we 
committed  the  victims  entire  to  the  sacred  flame  as  a  burnt 
offering:  and  we  have  done  this  three  times  already,  and 
not  once  only ;  on  the  first  occasion  when  you  succeeded  to 
the  empire,  and  the  second  time  when  you  recovered  from 
that  terrible  disease  with  which  all  the  habitable  world  was 
afflicted  at  the  same  time,  and  the  third  time  we  sacrificed 
in  hope  of  your  victory  over  the  Glermans." 

"Grant,"  said  he,  "that  all  this  is  true,  and  that  you 
did  sacrifice;  nevertheless   you   sacrificed  to  another   god, 
and  not  for  my  sake ;  and  then  what  good  did  you  do  me  ? 
Moreover  you  did  not  sacrifice  to  me."     Immediately  a  pro- 
found shuddering  came  upon  us  the  first  moment  that  we 
heard  this  expression,  similar  to  that  which  overwhelmed  us 
when  we  first  came  into  his  presence.     And  while  he  was 
saying  this  he  entered  into  the  outer  buildings,  examining 
the  chambers  of  the  men  and  the  chambers  of  the  women, 
and  the  rooms  on  the  ground  floor,  and  all  the  apartments 
in  the  upper  story,  and  blaming  some  points  of  their  prepa- 
ration as  defective,  and  planning  alterations  and  suggesting 
designs,  and  giving  orders  himself  to  make  them  more  costly 
and  then  we  being  driven  about  in  this  way  followed  him 
up  and  down  through  the  whole  place,  being   mocked  and 
ridiculed  by  our  adversaries  like  people  at  a  play  in  the 
theatre ;  for  indeed  the  whole  matter  was  a  kind  of  farce :  the 
judge  assumed  the  part  of  an  accuser,  and  the  accusers  the 
part  of  an  unjust  judge,  who  look  upon  the  defendants  with 
an  eye  of  hostility,  and  act  in  accordance  with  the  nature  of 
truth.    And  when  a  judge  invested  with  such  mighty  power 
begins  to  reproach  the  person  who  is  on  his  trial  before  him 
it  is  necessary  to  be  silent ;  for  it  is  possible  even  to  defend 
one's  self  in  silence,  and  especially  for  people  who  are  able  to 
make  no  reply  on  any  of  the  subjects  which  he  was  now 
investigating  and  desiring  to  understand,  inasmuch  as  our 
laws  and  our  customs  restrained  our  tongues,  and  shut  and 
sewed  up  our  mouths. 
But  when  he  had  given  some  of  his  orders  about  the 

VOL.  IV.  N 


178  PHILO   JUDi^US. 

buildings,  he  then  asked  a  very  important  and  solemn  ques- 
tion ;  "  why  is  it  that  you  abstain  from  eating  pig's  flesh  ?" 
And  then  again  at  this  question  such  a  violent  laughter  was 
raised  by  our  adversaries,  partly  because  they  were  really 
delighted,  and  partly  as  they  wished  to  court  the  emperor 
out  of  flattery,  and  therefore  wished  to  make  it  appear  that 
this  question  was  dictated  by  wit  and  uttered  with  grace, 
that  some  of  the  servants  who  were  following:  him  were 
indignant  at  their  appearing  to  treat  the  emperor  with  so 
little  respect,  since  it  was  not  safe  for  his  most  intimate 
friends  to  do  so  much  as  smile  at  his  words.  And  when  we 
made  answer  that,  "  different  nations  have  different  laws,  and 
there  are  some  things  of  which  the  use  is  forbidden  both  to 
us  and  to  our  adversaries ;"  and  when  some  one  said,  "  there 
are  also  many  people  who  do  not  eat  lamb's  flesh  which  is 
the  most  tender  of  all  meat,"  he  laughed  and  said,  "  they 
are  quite  right,  for  it  is  not  nice."  Being  joked  with  and 
trifled  with  and  ridiculed  in  this  manner,  we  were  in  great 
perplexity ;  and  at  last  he  said  in  a  rapid  and  peremptory 
manner,  "  I  desire  to  know  what  principles  of  justice  you 
recognise  with  regard  to  your  constitution." 

And  when  we  began  to  reply  to  him  and  to  explain  it,  he, 
as  soon  as  he  had  a  taste  of  our  pleading  on  the  principles 
of  justice,  and  as  soon  as  he  perceived  that  our  arguments 
were  not  contemptible,  before  we  could  bring  forward  the 
more  important  things  which  we  had  to  say,  cut  us  short 
and  ran  forward  and  burst  into  the  principal  building,  and 
as  soon  as  he  had  entered  he  commanded  the  windows 
which  were  around  it  to  be  filled  up  with  the  transparent 
pebbles  very  much  resembling  white  crystal  which  do  not 
hinder  the  light,  but  which  keep  out  the  wind  and  the  heat 
of  the  sun.  Then  proceeding  on  deliberately  he  asked 
in  a  more  moderate  tone,  "  What  are  you  saying?"  And 
when  we  began  to  connect  our  reply  with  what  we  had 
said  before,  he  again  ran  on  and  went  into  another  house, 
in  which  he  had  commanded  some  ancient  and  admirable 
pictures  to  be  placed. 

But  when  our  pleadings  on  behalf  of  justice  were  thus 
broken  up,  and  cut  short,  and  interrupted,  and  crushed  as 
one  may  almost  say,  we,  being  wearied  and  exhausted,  and 
having  no  strength  left  in  us,  but  being  in  continual  expect- 


ON  THE  VIRTUES  AND  OFFICE  OF  AMBASSADORS.        179 

ation  of  nothmg  else  than  death,  could  no  longer  keep  our 
hearts  as  they  had  heen,  but  in  our  agony  we  took  refuge  in 
supplications  to  the  one  true  God,  praying  him  to  check 
the  wrath  of  this  falsely  called  god.  And  he  took  compas- 
sion on  us,  and  turned  his  mind  to  pity.  And  he  becoming 
pacified  merely  said,  "  These  men  do  not  appear  to  me  to  be 
wicked  so  much  as  unfortunate  and  foolish,  in  not  believing 
that  I  have  been  endowed  with  the  nature  of  God ; "  and  so 
he  dismissed  us,  and  commanded  us  to  depart. 

XLYI.  Having  then  escaped  from  what  was  rather  a 
theatre  and  a  prison  than  a  court  of  justice  (for  as  in  a 
theatre,  there  was  a  great  noise  of  people  hissing,  and 
groaning,  and  ridiculing  us  in  an  extravagant  manner,  and 
as  in  a  prison,  there  were  many  blows  inflicted  on  our 
bodies,  and  tortures,  and  things  to  agitate  our  whole  souls 
by  the  blasphemies  which  those  around  us  uttered  against 
the  Deity,  and  the  threats  which  they  breathed  forth  against 
ourselves,  and  which  the  emperor  himself  poured  forth  with 
such  vehemence,  being  indignant  with  us  not  in  behalf  of 
any  one  else,  for  in  that  case  he  would  soon  have  been 
appeased,  but  because  of  himself  and  his  great  desire  to  be 
declared  a  god,  in  w^hich  desire  he  considered  that  the  Jews 
were  the  only  people  who  did  not  acquiesce,  and  who  were 
unable  to  subscribe  to  it),  we  at  last  recovered  our  breath,  not 
because  we  had  been  afraid  of  death  from  a  base  hankering 
after  life,  since  we  would  have  cheerfully  embraced  death  as 
immortality  if  our  laws  and  customs  could  have  been 
established  by  such  means,  but  because  we  knew  that  we 
should  be  destroyed  with  great  ignominy,  without  any 
desirable  object  being  secured  by  such  means,  for  whatever 
insults  ambassadors  are  subjected  to  are  at  all  times  referred 
to  those  who  sent  them. 

It  was  owing  to  these  considerations  that  we  were  able  to 
hold  up  our  heads  for  a  while,  but  there  were  other  circum- 
stances which  terrified  us,  and  kept  us  in  great  perplexity 
and  distress  to  hear  what  the  emperor  would  decide,  and 
what  he  would  pronounce,  and  what  kind  of  sentence  he 
would  ultimately  deliver ;  for  he  heard  the  general  tenor  of 
our  arguments,  though  he  disdained  to  attend  to  some  of  our 
facts.  But  would  it  not  be  a  terrible  thing  for  the  interests 
of  all  the  Jews  throughout  the  whole  world  to  be  th^ow^^ 

N  2 


180  PHILO   JUD^US. 

into  confusion  by  the  treatment  to  which  we,  its  five  embas- 
sadors, were  exposed  ?  For  if  lie  were  to  give  us  up  to  our 
enemies,  what  other  city  could  enjoy  tranquillity  ?  "What 
city  would  there  be  in  which  the  citizens  would  not  attack 
the  Jews  living  in  it  ?  What  synagogue  would  be  left 
uninjured  ?  What  state  would  not  overturn  every  principle 
of  justice  in  respect  of  those  of  their  countrymen  who 
arrayed  themselves  in  opposition  to  the  national  laws  and 
customs  of  the  Jews  ?  They  will  be  overthrown,  they  will 
be  shipwrecked,  they  will  be  sent  to  the  bottom,  with  all  the 
particular  laws  of  the  nation,  and  those  too  which  are 
common  to  all  and  in  accordance  with,  the  principles  of 
justice  recognized  in  every  city. 

We,  then,  being  overwhelmed  witb  affliction,  in  our 
misery  perplexed  ourselves  with  such  reasonings  as  these ; 
for  even  those  who  up  to  this  time  had  seemed  to  co-operate 
with  us  were  now  wearied  of  taking  our  part.  Therefore, 
when  we  called  them  forth,  they  being  within,  did  not 
remain,  but  came  forth  privily  in  fear,  knowing  well  the 
desire  which  the  emperor  had  to  be  looked  upon  as  Grod. 

We  have  now  related  in  a  concise  and  summary  manner 
the  cause  of  the  hatred  of  Caius  to  the  whole  nation  of  the 
Jews ;  we  must  now  proceed  to  make  our  palinode  to  Caius. 


A  TEEATISE 

CONCERNING  THE  WORLD.* 

I.  There  is  no  existing  thing  equal  in  honour  to  God, 
but  he  is  the  one  E-uler,  and  Governor,  and  King,  to  whom 
alone  it  is  lawful  to  govern  and  regulate  everything ;  for  the 
verse — 

"  A  multitude  of  masters  is  not  good, 
Let  there  one  sovereign  be,  one  king  of  all,"  + 

is  not  more  appropriate  to  be  said  with  respect  to  cities  and 
men  than  to  the  world  and  God,  for  it  follows  inevitably 

•  It  will  be  seen  that  a  great  part  of  this  treatise  is  identical,  word 
for  word,  with  that  on  the  Incorruptibility  of  the  World, 
t  Horn.  II.  ii.  204. 


ON   THE   "WORLD.  181 

that  there  must  be  one  Creator  and  Master  of  one  world ; 
and  this  position  ba\'ing  been  laid  down  and  conceded  as  a 
preliminary,  it  is  only  consistent  with  sense  to  connect  with 
it  what  follows  from  it  of  necessity.  Let  us  now,  therefore, 
consider  what  inferences  these  are. 

God  being  one  being,  has  two  supreme  powers  of  the  \ 
greatest  importance.  By  means  of  these  powers  the  incor- 
poreal world,  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  was  put 
together,  which  is  the  archetypal  model  of  this  world  which 
is  visible  to  us,  being  formed  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be 
perceptible  to  our  invisible  conceptions  just  as  the  other  is 
to  our  eyes.  Therefore  some  persons,  marvelling  at  the 
nature  of  both  these  worlds,  have  not  only  worshipped  them 
in  their  entirety  as  gods,  but  have  also  deified  the  most 
beautiful  parts  of  them,  I  mean  for  instance  the  sun,  and  the 
moon,  and  the  whole  heaven,  which,  without  any  fear  or 
reverence,  they  called  gods.  And  Moses,  perceiving  the 
ideas  which  they  entertained,  says,  "  O  Lord,  King  of  all 
gods,"*  in  order  to  point  out  the  great  superiority  of  the 
Euler  to  his  subjects. 

And  the  original  founder  of  the  Jewish  nation  was  a 
Chaldtean  by  birth,  being  the  son  of  a  father  who  was  much 
devoted  to  the  study  of  astronomy,  and  being  among  people 
who  were  great  studiers  of  mathematical  science,  who  think 
the  stars,  and  the  whole  heaven,  and  the  whole  world  gods ; 
and  they  say  that  both  good  and  evil  result  from  theii* 
speculations  and  belief,  since  they  do  not  believe  in  anything 
as  a  cause  which  is  apart  from  those  things  which  are  visible 
to  the  outward  senses. 

But  what  can  be  worse  than  this,  or  more  calculated  to 
display  the  want  of  true  nobility  existing  in  the  soul,  than 
the  notion  of  causes  in  general  being  secondary  and  created 
causes,  combined  with  an  ignorance  of  the  one  first  cause, 
the  uncreated  God,  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  who  lor 
these  and  innumerable  other  reasons  is  most  excellent, 
reasons  which  because  of  their  magnitude  human  intellect  is 
unable  to  apprehend  ?  but  this  founder  of  tlie  Jewish  nation 
having  conceived  an  idea  of  him  in  his  mind,  and  looking 
upon  him  as  the  true 'God,  forsook  his  native  country  and 
his  family,  and  his  father's  house,  knowing  that  il'  he 
*  Deuteronomy  x.  17. 


]82  PniLO   JUDiEUS. 

remained,  the  deceits  of  the  polytheistic  doctrine  also  re- 
maining in  his  soul  would  render  his  intellect  incapable  of 

!  discovering  the  nature  of  the  one  God,  who  is  alone  ever- 
lasting, and  the  father  of  everything  else,  whether  appre- 

i  ciable  only  by  the  intellect  or  perceptible  to  the  outward 
senses ;  but  if  he  departed  and  emigrated,  then  he  saw  that 
deceit  would  also  depart  from  his  mind,  which  would  then 
change  its  erroneous  opinions  into  truth.  And  at  the  same 
time  the  oracular  commands  of  God,  which  had  been  given 
to  him,  did  furthor  excite  the  desire  which  he  felt  to  become 
acquainted  with  the  living  God.  And  he  went  forth  like  a 
man  under  the  immediate  guidance  of  others,  with  the  most 
unhesitating  promptness,  to  search  after  the  knowledge  of 
the  one  God ;  and  he  did  not  relax  in  his  search  till  he  had 
arrived  at  a  more  accurate  and  correct  perception,  not 
indeed  of  his  essences  (for  that  is  impossible),  but  of  his 
existence  and  of  his  providence ;  on  which  account  he  is  the 
first  man  of  whom  it  is  said  that  he  believed  in  God,  since 
he  was  the  first  who  had  an  accurate  and  positive  notion  of 
him,  believing  that  there  is  one  supreme  cause  of  all  things, 
which  by  his  providence  takes  care  of  the  world  and  of  all 
things  that  are  therein. 

Since  the  Creator  of  the  world  bringing  an  essence  pre- 
viously without  any  order  and  in  complete  confusion,  into 
distinct  order  and  regularity,  began  to  arrange  and  adorn 
the  earth  and  the  water,  and  established  them  in  the  middle 
of  the  world,  and  the  trees,  and  air,  and  fire  he  drew  up  from 
the  middle  to  the  higher  regions,  and  he  fixed  the  regions  of 
the  aether  all  around,  placing  it  as  a  boundary  to  and  a  pre- 
server of  the  things  which  were  inside,  from  which  also  it 
derived  its  name  of  heaven.*  And  these  things,  then,  were 
the  perfect  seeds  of  the  whole  universe,  but  the  great  and 
all  productive  tree  raised  from  this  seed  is  this  world,  of 
which  the  aforesaid  branches  are  the  offshoots. 

II.  Where,  then,  God  placed  the  roots,  and  what  founda^ 
tion  it  has  upon  which  it  is  so  firmly  fixed  like  a  statue,  we 
must  now  consider.  It  is  not  natural  that  any  body  which 
is  left  behind  should  wander  out  of  its  limits,  since  God  has 
made  and  arranged  in  its  proper  place,  the  materials  of  the 

*  "Opog  is  the  Greek  word  for  bouudary,  from  which  Philo  thinks 
that  ovpavbq,  "heaven,"  is  derived. 


ON   THE   WORLD.  183 

whole  universe.  For  it  was  fitting  that  the  greatest  of  all  [ 
works,  being  also  the  most  perfect,  should  be  created  by  the 
greatest  of  all  workmen.  And  it  would  not  have  been  com- 
pletely perfect  if  it  had  not  been  completed  in  perfect  parts. 
So  that  if  this  world  consists  of  every  kind  of  material, 
nothing  being  beyond,  and  not  even  the  most  insignificant 
thing  being  omitted,  it  follows  of  necessity  that  whatever 
is  outside  the  world  must  either  be  vacuum  or  nothing  at 
all.  If  it  be  a  vacuum,  then  how  can  it  be  found  to  balance 
the  world,  which  is  full  and  closely  packed,  and  the  heaviest 
of  all  things,  when  there  is  nothing  solid  to  support  it  ? 
from  which  consideration  it  would  appear  to  resemble  a 
vision.  Since  the  mind  is  always  looking  for  a  corporeal 
basis,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  one  whole  should  have 
such  a  thing  if  it  happens  to  be  put  in  motion,  and  the 
world  above  all  things,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  greatest  of 
bodies,  and  as  it  embraces  in  its  bosom  a  multitude  of  other 
bodies  as  its  own  appropriate  parts.  Therefore,  if  any  one 
wishes  to  escape  the  perplexities  which  arise  in  treating  of 
doubtful  matters,  let  him  speak  his  mind  freely,  and  afiirm 
that  there  is  no  material  so  strong  as  to  be  able  to  support 
the  weight  of  the  world.  But  the  eternal  law  of  the  ever- 
lasting God  is  the  strong  and  lasting  support  of  the  universe. 
This  law  being  extended  from  the  centre  of  the  world  to  its 
furthest  extremities,  and  again  back  from  its  extremities  to 
the  centre,  moves  on  in  the  unwearied  irresistible  course  of 
nature,  uniting  and  binding  together  all  the  parts  of  the 
universe.  For  the  Father  who  established  it  made  it  to  be 
the  indissoluble  bond  of  the  universe. 

Therefore  we  are  naturally  led  to  conclude  that  the  whole 
earth  will  not  be  dissolved  by  water,  which  its  bosoms  con- 
tain ;  nor  again  will  fire  be  extinguished  by  the  air,  nor 
again  will  the  air  be  burnt  up  and  consumed  by  fire,  since 
the  divine  law  has  placed  itself  as  a  boundary  to  keep  all 
these  elements  distinct  from  one  another.  As  yet  the  all- 
productive  plant  was  not  rooted,  and  had  not  the  power 
which  was  to  be  derived  from  being  rooted.  But  of  the 
subordinate,  particular,  and  less  important  plants,  some 
were  moveable  in  such  a  way  as  easily  to  change  their  places, 
and  some,  without  being  liable  to  any  change  of  places,  were 


184  PHILO  JUD^OS. 

made  as  if  they  were  to  stand  for  ever  in  the  same  position. 
Those  therefore  which  are  exposed  to  a  motion  which  involves 
a  change  of  place,  which  we  call  animals,  were  added  to  the 
most  entire  and  perfect  parts  of  the  universe.  The  earth 
receiving  the  terrestrial  animals,  the  water  the  aquatic 
animals ;  the  air  those  creatures  which  fly ;  and  the  stars 
being  assigned  to  the  heaven. 

III.  But  the  Creator  created  two  different  kinds  both  in 
the  earth,  and  in  the  water,  and  in  the  air.  In  the  air  he 
placed  those  animals  which  fly,  and  other  powers  also  which 
cannot  by  any  means,  or  on  any  occasion,  be  comprehended 
by  the  outward  senses.  Thus  the  company  of  incorporeal 
souls  is  arranged  in  regular  order  according  to  their  nature. 
For  it  is  said  that  some  of  them  are  separated  off  and 
assigned  to  mortal  bodies,  and  that,  at  certain  definite  and 
predetermined  periods,  they  again  depart  from  them.  But 
that  others  of  a  more  divine  nature  are  utterl}^  regardless 
of  any  situation  on  earth,  but  are  raised  to  a  great  height, 
and  placed  in  the  aether  itself,  being  of  the  purest  possible 
character,  which  those  among  the  Greeks  who  have  studied 
philosophy  caU  heroes  and  daemones,  and  which  Moses, 
giving  them  a  most  felicitous  appellation,  calls  angels,  acting 
as  they  do  the  part  of  ambassadors  and  messengers,  an- 
nouncing to  the  subjects  all  kinds  of  blessings  from  their 
rulers,  and  acting  as  servants  to  the  king  to  whom  they  are 
subject ;  and  they,  descending  into  the  body  as  into  a  river, 
at  one  time  are  carried  away  by  the  violence  of  a  most  irre- 
sistible current  and  swallowed  up,  and  at  other  times,  being 
wholly  unable  to  resist  the  powers  of  destruction,  at  first, 
indeed,  raise  their  heads  above  the  flood,  and  afterwards  sink 
down  again  to  the  place  from  whence  they  have  started. 

These,  then,  are  the  souls  of  those  who  devote  themselves 
to  the  vigorous  study  of  philosophy  respecting  divine  sub- 
jects, from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  their  existence 
studying  things  which  may  concern  them  after  the  life 
has  left  the  body,  that  thus  they  may  enjoy  an  incorporeal 
and  endless  life  in  the  presence  of  the  uncreated  and  im- 
mortal God.  But  those  souls  of  other  men  which  I  have 
spoken  of  as  being  overwhelmed,  being  such  as  have  disre- 
garded wisdom,  giving  themselves  up  to  uncertain  circuin- 


ON    THE   WORLD.  185 

stances,  such  as  depend  wholly  on  chance,  of  which  none 
have  any  reference  to  the  soul  or  to  the  intellect,  hut  all  to 
the  body,  which  is  but  a  corpse  to  which  we  are  joined,  or 
to  other  things  even  more  inanimate  and  insensible  than 
that ;  I  mean  such  things  as  glory,  and  riches,  and  power, 
and  honour,  and  all  such  other  things  as  through  the  de- 
ceitfulness  of  false  opinions  are  looked  upon  as  real  and 
living  objects  by  people  who  do  not  see  what  is  really 
beautiful. 

Therefore,  if  you  look  upon  souls,  and  damones,  and  angels, 
as  things  differing  indeed  in  name,  but  as  meaning  in  reality 
one  and  the  same  thing,  you  will  thus  get  rid  of  the  heaviest 
of  all  evils,  superstition.  For  as  people  in  general  speak  of 
good  daemones  and  bad  daemones,  in  the  same  manner  also 
do  they  speak  of  good  and  bad  souls ;  and  so  they  speak  of 
some  angels  as  being  by  their  title  worthy  ambassadors  from 
men  to  God,  and  from  God  to  men,  being  sacred  and  in- 
violable guardians  on  account  of  their  blameless  and  most 
excellent  service  which  they  have  allotted  to  them.  And, 
again,  if  you  look  upon  others  as  unholy  and  unworthy  of 
any  such  appellation,  you  will  not  err.  And  the  Psalmist 
himself  is  a  witness  in  favour  of  what  I  have  here  asserted, 
where  he  speaks  as  follows :  "  He  sent  among  them  the 
anger  of  his  wrath,  by  the  operation  of  evil  angels."* 

Again,  all  animals  that  swim  and  zoophytes  are  allotted  to 
the  water,  and  all  terrestrial  animals  and  plants  to  the  land. 
And  the  plants  he  placed  with  their  heads  downwards,  fixing 
their  heads  in  the  deepest  parts  of  the  earth  ;  but  the  heads 
of  the  irrational  animals  he  dragged  up  from  the  earth  and 
placed  upon  a  lofty  neck,  placing  the  fore -feet  beneath  them 
as  a  kind  of  pedestal.  But  man  has  had  a  separate  forma- 
tion of  a  higher  character ;  for  in  the  case  of  other  animals, 
God  has  placed  their  eyes  in  the  side  of  their  heads  and 
bent  them  down  to  the  ground,  on  which  account  they  are 
all  inclined  downwards  to  the  earth.  But  the  eyes  of  man, 
on  the  other  hand,  he  has  raised  up,  that  he  might  behold 
the  heavens,  being  not  a  terrestrial  but  a  celestial  plant,  as 
the  old  saying  is.f 

*  Psalm  Ixxvii.  49. 

t  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  idea  of  Ovid,  who  says — 
Pronaque  dum  spectant  animalia  coctera  terram, 


186  PniLO  JUD.EUS. 

But  the  other  class,  who  affirm  that  our  intellect  is  a 
portion  of  ethereal  nature,  connect  man  in  a  relationship 
with  the  air.  Accordingly,  the  great  Moses  has  not  spoken 
of  the  rational  soul  as  it  resembled  in  its  species  any  created 
thing,  but  he  has  called  it  the  image  of  the  divine  and  invi- 
sible Grod,  looking  upon  it  to  be  a  glorious  and  carefully 
wrought  image,  the  seal  of  God,  the  character  of  which  ia 
the  everlasting  Word  ;  for,  says  he,  "  Grod  breathed  into  his 
face  the  breath  of  life."*  So  that  it  follows  inevitably 
that  he  who  received  it  must  be  made  in  the  image  and 
likeness  of  him  who  sent  it.  On  which  account  he  also  says 
that  man  was  created  in  the  image  of  Grod,  and  not  in  the 
likeness  of  any  created  thing. 

TV.  But,  taking  up  our  discourse  again  at  the  beginning 
for  the  sake  of  clearness,  let  us  say  that  of  bodies  some 
have  put  on  habit,  and  others  nature,  and  others  soul, 
and  others  a  rational  soul.  Therefore  those  stocks  and 
stones  which  are  torn  from  any  intimate  connection,  have 
made  for  themselves  that  strongest  of  all  forms,  namely 
habit,  and  that  is  a  breath  returning  constantly  to  itself; 
for  it  begins  at  the  centre  and  extends  to  the  furthest  ex- 
tremities, and  when  it  has  touched  the  outermost  circum- 
ference it  turns  back  again  until  it  arrives  at  the  same  place 
from  which  it  originally  started.  This  is  the  continued 
course  of  habit  over  which  it  runs  and  returns.  And  he  has 
allotted  a  nature  of  their  own  to  plants,  having  combined  it 
of  many  powers,  especially  the  nutritious  and  the  generative 
power.  And  the  Creator  has  made  the  soul  different  from 
nature  in  three  particulars — the  outward  sense,  and  fancy, 
and  impulse.  Now  plants  have  no  participation  in  any  of 
these  things,  but  every  living  animal  has  a  share  in  all  of 
them.  Therefore  the  outward  sense,  as  its  very  name  in  my 
opinion  shows,  is  a  certain  imposition  which  represents  to 


Os  homini  sublime  dedit,  cselumque  tueri 
Jussit  et  erectos  ad  sidera  tollere  vultus. 
Which  may  be  translated — 

"  And  while  all  other  creatures  from  their  birth, 
With  downcast  eyes  gaze  on  their  kindred  earth, 
Man  walks  erect,  and  proudly  scans  the  heaven 
From  "which  he  sprung,  to  which  his  hopes  are  given." 

*  Genesis  ii.  7. 


J 


ON   THE   WORLD.  187 

the  intellect  tlie  things  which  have  appeared  to  it.  And  it 
represents  to  the  fancy  a  sort  of  outline  in  the  soul,  being, 
as  it  were,  a  kind  of  representation  of  light ;  for  those  things 
which  each  of  the  outward  senses  has  introduced,  like  a  ring 
as  it  were  or  a  seal,  it  impresses  on  them  its  own  character, 
or  else  it  preserves  the  impression  which  has  been  made 
until  the  rival  of  memory,  forgetfulness,  having  softened  the 
impression,  at  least  makes  it  very  dim,  or  else  entirely 
effaces  it ;  and  what  has  appeared  to  have  been  impressed 
upon  it  disposes  the  soul  at  one  time  as  if  it  belonged  to  it, 
and  at  another  time  as  if  it  belonged  to  some  other :  and 
this  feeling  is  called  impulse,  which  those  who  have  at- 
tempted to  give  accurate  definitions  have  called  the  primary 
motion  of  the  soul. 

V.  In  such  important  particulars  are  animals  superior  to 
plants.  Let  us  now  therefore  see  in  what  man  is  superior 
to  the  other  animals.  He  now  has  received  as  an  especial 
and  pre-eminent  honour,  the  gift_ofmtellect,  by  which  he  is 
accustomed  to  comprehend  the  naturesoTall  things,  whether 
they  be  bodies  or  things ;  for  as  the  predominant  part  in 
the  body  is  the  sight,  and  as  the  nature  of  light  is  the  most 
important  part  of  the  universe,  so  in  the  same  manner  the 
most  important  and  influential  of  all  the  parts  in  us  is  the 
mind ;  for  this  is  the  light  of  the  soul,  being  irradiated  and 
(mlightened  by  its  own  beams,  by  which  that  dense  and  pro- 
Ibund  darkness,  ignorance  of  facts  which  was  shed  around  it, 
is  dissipated. 

And  this  portion  of  the  soul  is  not  composed  of  the  same 

elements  as  those  of  which  the  other  parts  are  made,  but  it 

has  a  pure   and  more  excellent  essence,  from  which  the 

divine  natures  were  made ;  on  which  account  the  intellect 

alone,  of  all  the  parts  within  us,  appears  very  reasonably  and 

naturally  to  be  imperishable,  for  that  is  the  only  portion 

Avhich  the  Father  w^ho  generated  it  has  thought  worthy  of 

■'reedom,  and  loosing  the  bands  of  necessity,  he  has  allowed 

t  to  roam  at  large  without  restraint,  having  endowed  it  with 

I  share  of  his  own  most  glorious  and  becoming  attribute, 

ree-will,  the  highest  present  which  it  was  able  to  receive. 

l^'or  the  other  animals  in  whose  souls  there  does  not  exist 

hat  intellect  which  is  thus  especially  appropriated  to  free- 

lom,  have  been  given  up  to  men  to  submit  to  their  yoke 


188  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

and  to  receive  their  bridle  in  their  moutlis,  so  as  to  serve 
them  as  servants  obey  their  masters. 

But  man  ha™g  a  spontaneous  will,  subject  to  no  prompt- 
ings but  those  of  his  own  nature,  and  exerting  his  energies 
in  accordance  with  his  own  deliberate  purpose,  is  very 
properly  subject  to  blame  for  whatever  unjust  actions  he 
commits  from  deliberate  intention,  and  to  praise  for  all  the 
good  deeds  which  he  intentionally  performs ;  for  as  he  has 
received  from  Grod  a  power  of  voluntary  motion,  and  as  he 
is  in  this  respect  like  unto  God  himself,  being  delivered 
from  all  subservience  to  that  most  severe  and  grievous 
mistress,  necessity,  he  very  properly  is  open  to  accusa- 
tion when  he  does  not  pay  worship  to  that  being  who 
has  thus  delivered  him.  Therefore  he  will  most  justly  in 
such  a  case  suffer  the  punishment  which  has  been  inexorably 
pronounced  against  ungrateful  people  who  do  not  deserve 
freedom.  On  which  account  also,  the  body  being  raised  up 
towards  the  purest  portion  of  the  universe,  the  heaven, 
raises  its  eyes  upwards,  that  so,.by^n  observation  of  what 
is  vi..sible,  it  may  arrive  iit,  an  adequalie~comprehensibn  of 

what  is  invisible.  "       -" 

Since,  therefore,  it  would  be  impossible  to  behold  the 
attraction  of  the  intellect  towards  the  living  God,  excepting 
as  far  as  those  who  are  attracted  towards  him  can  them- 
selves perceive  it,  for  each  man  in  an  individual  and  especial 
degree  knows  what  happens  to  himself,  he  has  made  a  visible 
image  of  the  invisible  eye,  namely,  the  eyes  of  the  body 
which  are  thus  able  to  look  towards  the  sky.    For  when  the 
eyes,  which  are  made  of  perishable  materials,  have  gone  tc 
such  heights  as  even  to  soar  upwards  to  the  heaven  whicl 
is  removed  to  such  an  immense  "llistance  from  the  regions  o 
I      the  earth,  and  to  touch  its  borders,  to  how  great  a  distance 
J      must  we  not  suppose  that  the  eyes  of  the  soul  can  reach '. 
\      which,  being  excited  by  a  vehement  desire  to  see  the  om 
i      Being  clearly  and  distinctly,  stretch  forward  not  only  to  th' 
I     furthest  extremity  of  the  sky,  but,*leaving  beneath  them  th- 
I     boundaries  of  the  universal  world,  hasten  onwards  to  th 
uncreated. 

yi.  Having  now,  therefore,  gone  through  the  whol 
question  of  the  more  important  plants  in  the  world,  let  u 
Bee  in  what  manner  also  the  all-wise  God  has  fashioned  th 


ON  THE   WORLD.  189 

trees  whicli  exist  in  man,  that  lesser  world.  Therefore  im- 
mediately having  taken  our  body  as  a  region  of  fertile  soil, 
he  has  made  in  it  the  outward  senses  as  so  many  channels ; 
and  then  he  has  carefully  trained  eacli  of  those  outward 
aenses  as  a  plant  susceptible  of  cultivation  and  of  the  , 
greatest  use,  implanting  the  sense  of  hearing  in  the  ears,  and 
that  of  seeing  in  the  eyes,  and  that  of  smell  in  the  nostrils, 
md  all  the  other  senses  in  the  places  akin  to  and  appropriate 
bo  them.  And  I  have  a  witness  in  favour  of  this  my  argu- 
QQent  in  that  god-like  man  who  speaks  thus  in  the  Psalms  : 
'''  He  that  planted  the  ear,  shall  he  not  hear  ?  and  he  that 
fashioned  the  eye,  must  not  he  see  ?  * 

Moreover,  those  other  faculties  whicli  reside  apart  from  ] 
the  main  body,  being  situated  in  the  legs  and  hands  and  the  j 
Dther  parts  of  the  body,  whether  within  or  without,  all 
these  faculties,  I  say,  are   noble  and  excellent  offshoots,  j 
And  the  more  excellent  and  more  perfect  parts  he  very  ' 
appropriately  stationed  near  the  dominant  portion  of  the 
v/hole,  as  being  in  the  centre,  and  able  pre-eminently  to 
bring  forth  fruit,  as  being  the  lord  of  the  whole.    And  these 
faculties  are  perception  and  comprehension,  and  felicity  of 
conjecture,  and  study,  and  recollection,  and  habit,  and  dis- 
position, and  every  variety  of  art,  and  certainty  of  know- 
ledge, and  an  ever-mindful  apprehension  of  the  speculations 
of  every  kind  of  virtue.      Now,  no  one  can  properly  or 
sufficiently  cultivate  any  one  of  these  within,  but  the  on© 
uncreated  Maker  of  them,  and  who  has  not  merely  created 
them,  but  who  also  makes  all  these  plants  to  correspond  to 
everything  which  takes  place ;  he  alone  can  manage  them  and 
perfect  them  as  they  should  be  perfected. 

VII.  And  the  way  in  which  Paradise  was  planted  is  in 
strict  conformity  with  what  has  been  here  said ;  for  we  read 
that  "  Grod  planted  a  Paradise  in  Eden,  towards  the  east, 
and  there  he  placed  the  man  whom  he  had  made."t  Now, 
|to  think  that  this  means  that  God  planted  vines  and  olives, 
jind  trees  of  apples  and  pomegranates,  and  things  of  that 
jltind,  is  great  and  incurable  folly.  But  in  order  that  no  one 
jTiight  imagine  that  the  Creator  had  need  of  anything  that 
le  had  created,  Moses  has  made  a  most  important  declara- 

ion  when  he  says,  "  The  Lord,  the  King  of  ages,  for  ever 
*  Psalm  xciii,  9.  f  Genesis  ii.  S. 


190  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

and  ever."*  Accordingly,  God  is  both  the  Father,  and 
the  Creator,  and  the  Governor,  in  reality  and  truth,  of  all 
the  things  that  are  in  heaven  and  in  the  vv^hole  world.  And, 
indeed,  the  future  is  concealed  and  separated  from  the 
present  moment  at  one  time  by  a  brief,  and  at  another  time 
by  a  long  interval.  But  God  is  also  the  Creator  of  time, 
for  he  is  the  Father  of  that  which  is  the  father  of  time ; 
and  the  father  of  time  is  the  world,  which  proves  that  its 
own  birth  is  the  motion  of  time.  But  nothing  is  future  to 
God,  because  he  is  in  possession  of  and  the  author  of  the 
boundaries  of  time ;  for  it  is  not  time,  but  rather  the  arche- 
type and  model  of  time.  But  in  eternity  nothing  is  passed, 
nothing  is  future,  but  pvprythirig"  ia  ^OTip  present  moment. 
VIII.  Having  now,  then,  discussed  these  matters  at  suf- 
ficient  length,  we  must  proceed  to  investigate  its  imperish- 
ableness.  Now,  there  are  three  .opinions  in  vogue  among 
the  philosophers  on  this  subject :  some  affirming  it  is  everlast- 
ing, and  uncreated,  and  free  from  all  liability  to  destruction ; 
others,  on  the  contrary,  that  it  is  created  and  perishable. 
There  is  also  a  sect  which  has  adopted  some  portions  of 
the  doctrine  of  each  of  the  beforementioned  parties,  taking 
from  the  latter  sect  the  doctrine  that  it  is  created,  and  from 
tbe  former  the  idea  that  it  is  imperishable ;  and  thus  they 
have  left  a  mixed  opinion,  looking  upon  it  as  at  the  same 
time  created  and  yet  imperishable. 

Therefore  Democritus,  and  Epicurus,  and  the  chief  body 

of  the  philosophers  of  the  Stoic  school,  leave  the  generation 

and  also  the  destructibility  of  the  world ;  but  they  do  not  all 

do  so  in  the  same  manner.    For  some  give  a  sketch  of  many 

worlds,  the  creation  of  which  they  attribute  to  the  concourse 

>  and  conflicting  combination  of  atoms,  and  their  destruc- 

4  tion  they  attribute  to  the  repercussion  and  shattering  of 

;  what  has  been  thus  formed.   But  the  Stoics  affirm  that  there 

■  is  one  world,  and  that  God  is  the  cause  of  its  creation,  bat 

that  God  is  not  the  cause  of  its  destruction ;  but  that  the 

power  which  is  contained  in  existing  things,  in  the  long 

periods  of  never-ending  time,  attracts  everything  to  itself 

from  which  again  a  regeneration  of  the  world  is  caused  b\ 

the  prudence  of  the  Creator. 

But  Aristotle  pronounced  the  world  to  be  both  uncreatec 
^  *  Exodus  XV.  18. 


ON   TFiE   WORLD.  ]9l 

,11(1  imperishable,  and  he  affirmed  that  those  who  maintained  a 
oiitrary  doctrine  were  guilty  of  terrible  impiety,  as  they  con- 
idered  that  so  great  a  work  of  God  was  in  no  respect  superior 

0  things  made  by  the  hand  of  men.  And  they  say  too  that 
t  has  been  proved  to  be  both  uncreated  and  imperishable  by 
^lato  in  his  Timaeus. 

But  some  persons  interpret  Plato's  words  sophistically,  and 
hink  that  he  affirms  that  the  world  was  created,  not  inas- 
nuch  as  it  has  had  a  beginning  of  creation,  but  inasmuch  as 
f  it  had  been  created  it  could  not  possibly  have  existed  in  any 
ither  manner  than  that  in  which  it  actually  does  exist  as  has 
)een  described,  or  else  because  it  is  in  its  creation  and  change 
hat  the  parts  are  seen.  But  the  forementioned  opinion  is 
)etter  and  truer,  not  only  because  throughout  the  whole/ 
reatise  he  affirms  that  the  Creator  of  the  gods  is  also  the  fatherj 
md  creator  and  maker  of  everything,  and  that  the  world  is  a] 
nost  beautiful  work  of  his  and  his  offspring,  being  an  imita- ' 
ion  visible  to  the  outward  senses  of  an  archetypal  model 
ippreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  comprehending  in  itself  as 
nany  objects  of  the  outward  senses  as  the  model  does  objects 
)f  the  intellect,  since  it  is  a  most  perfect  impression  of  a 
nost  perfect  model,  and  is  addressed  to  the  outward  sense  as 
;he  other  is  to  the  intellect. 

But  also  because  Aristotle  bears  witness  to  this  fact  in  the 
'■ase  of  Plato,  who,  from  his  great  reverence  for  philosophy, 
.vould  never  have  spoken  falsely. 

But  some  persons  think  that  the  father  of  the  Platonic 
heory  was  the  poet  Hesiod,  as  they  conceive  that  the  world  is 
^poken  of  by  him  as  created  and  indestructible ;  as  created, 
>\hen  he  says, — 

"  First  did  Chaos  rule ; 
Then  the  broad-chested  earth  was  brought  to  light, 

1  Foundation  firm  and  lasting  for  whatever 
I  Exists  among  mankind  ;"* 

nd  as  indestructible,  because  he  has  given  no  hint  of  its  dis- 

olution  or  destruction. 
Now  Chaos  was  conceived  by  Aristotle  to  be  a  place,  because 
is  absolutely  necessary  that  a  place  to  receive  them  must  be 

1  eiustence  before  bodies.     But  some  of  the  Stoics  think  that 

*  Hesiod,  Theogon.  116. 


192  rniLO  JUDiEUS. 

it  is  water,  imagining  that  its  name  has  been  derived  from 
effusion.*  But  however  that  may  be,  it  is  exceedingly  plain 
that  the  world  is  spoken  of  by  Hesiod  as  having  been  created : 
and  a  very  long  time  before  him  Moses,  the  lawgiver  of  tlio 
Jews,  had  said  in  his  sacred  volumes  that  the  world  j  was  both 
created  and  indestructible,  and  the  number  of  the  books  is  five. 
The  first  of  which  he  entitled  Genesis,  in  which  he  begins  in 
the  following  manner :  "In  the  beginning  God  created  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  ;  and  the  earth  was  invisible  and  without 
form." 

IX.  But  we  must  place  those  arguments  first  which  make 
out  the  world  to  be  uncreated  and  indestructible,  because  of 
our  respect  for  that  which  is  visible,  employing  an  appropriate 
commencement.  To  all  things  which  are  liable  to  destruction 
there  are  two  causes  of  that  destruction,  one  being  internal 
and  the  otlier  external ;  therefore  you  may  find  iron,  and 
brass,  and  aTT'ot^et  substances  of  that  kind  destroyed  b)- 
themselves  when  rust,  like  a  creeping  disease,  overruns  and 
devours  them ;  and  by  external  causes  when,  if  a  house  or  £ 
city  is  burnt,  they  also  are  consumed  in  the  conflagration 
being  melted  by  the  violent  impetuosity  of  the  fire. 

A  similar  end  also  befalls  animals,  partly  when  they  an 
sick  of  diseases  arising  internally,  and  partly  when  they  an 
destroyed  by  external  causes,  being  sacrificed,  or  stoned,  o 
burnt,  or  when  they  endure  an  unclean  death  by  hanging. 

And  if  the  world  also  is  destroyed,  then  it  must  of  necessit 

^^'^be  so  either  by  some  external  cause,  or  else  by  some  one  c 

■the   powers  which  exist  within  itself;  and  both  these  alter 

■natives  are  impossible,  for  there  is  nothing  whatever  outside  c 

ithe  world,  since  all  things  are  brought  together  in  order  t 

make  it  complete  and  full,  for  it  is  in  this  way  that  it  will  b 

one,  and  whole,  and  free  from  old  age  ;  it  will  be  one,  becaus 

if  anything  were  left  outside  of  it,  then  another  world  migt 

be  created   resembling   that  which   exists  now ;   and  whol* 

because  the  whole  of  its  essence  is  expended  on  itself ;  an 

exempt  from  old  age  and  from  all  disease,  since  those  bodi( 

which  are  liable  to  be  destroyed  by  disease  or  old  age  ai 

violently  overthrown  by  external  causes,  such  as  heat,  an 

cold,  and  other  contrary  qualities,  no  power  of  which  is  able 

escape  so  as  to  surround  and  attack  the  world,  all  those  beii 

*  X i> aig,  a.3  if  chaos  were  derived  from  x'^)  "  to  pour." 


ON   THE   WORLD.  193 

sntirely  enclosed  within,  without   any  part   whatever   being 
separated  from  the  rest. 

But  if  indeed  there  is  any  external  thing  it  must  by  all 
means  be  a  vacuum,  or  else  a  nature  absolutely  impossible, 
kvhich  it  would  be  impossible  should  either  suffer  or  do  any- 
thing.     And   again,   it   ^vill   also    not   be   dissolved   by   any  i 
3ause  existing  within  itself;  first  of  all  because,  if  it  were,! 
then  the  part  would  be  greater  and  more  powerful  than  the! 
ivhole,  which  is  the  greatest  possible  absurdity,  for  the  world,! 
3njoying  an  unsurpassable  power,  influences  all  its  parts,  and! 
is  not  itself  influenced  or  moved  by  any  one  of  them ;  in  the 
second  place  because,  since  there  are  two  causes  of  corruption, 
the  one  being  internal  and  the  other  external,  those  things 
which  are  competent  to  admit  the  one  must  also  by  all  means 
be  liable  to  the  other ;  and  a  proof  of  this  may  be  found  in 
3xen,  and  horses,  and  men,  and  other  animals  of  similar  kinds, 
because  it  is  their  nature  to  be  destroyed  by  the  sword,  or  to 
be  liable  to  die  by  disease. 

X.  Since,  therefore,  the  arrangement  of  the  world  is  such  as 
I  have  endeavoured  to  describe  it,  so  that  there  is  no  part  what- 
ever left  out,  so  as  for  any  force  to  be  applied,  it  has  now  been 
proved  that  the  world  will  not  be  destroyed  by  any  external 
thing,  because  in  fact  nothing  whatever  external  has  been  left 
at  all ;  nor  will  it  be  destroyed  by  anything  in  itself  on  account 
of  the  proof  which  has  already  been  considered  and  stated, 
according  to  which  that  which  was  obnoxious  to  the  power  of 
one  of  those  causes  was  also  naturally  susceptible  of  the 
influence  of  the  other. 

And  there  are  testimonies  also  in  the  Timoeus  to  the  fact 

of  the  world  being   exempt  from  disease  and  not  liable  to 

destruction,  such  as  these :    "  Accordingly,    of  the  four  ele- 

Inients  the  constitution  of  the  world  receives  each  in  all  its 

j  ntegrity  ;  for  he  who  compounded  it  made  it  to  consist  of  the 

jvhole  of  fire,  and  the  whole  of  water,  and  the  whole  of  air, 

iiud  the  whole  of  earth,  not  leaving  any  portion  or  any  power 

I'f  any  one  of  them  outside,  from  the  following  intentions  : — 

jn  the  first  place,  in  order  that  the  whole  might  be  as  far  as 

j'ossible  a  perfect  animal  made   up   of  perfect  parts.     And 

esides  all  these  things,  he  ordained  that  it  should  be  one,  in- 

smuch  as  there  is  nothing  left  out  of  which  another  similar 

orld  could  be  composed.     Moreover,  he  wLUed  that  it  should 

VOL,  IV.  "  O 


194  PHILO   JTJD^US. 


be  exempt  from  old  age,  and  free  from  all  disease,  considering 
that  those  things  which  in  the  body  are  hot  or  cold,  or  which 
have  mighty  powers,  if  standing  all  around  and  falling  upon  j 
it  unseasonably,  would  be  likely  to  dissolve  it,  and,  by  intro- 
ducing diseases  and  old  age,  cause  it  to  decay  and  perish.  For 
this  cause,  and  because  of  this  reason,  God  made  the  whole 
universe  to  consist  of  entire  and  perfect  elements,  and  exempt 
from  old  age  and  free  from  disease." 

XI.  Let  this  be  taken  as  a  testimony  delivered  by  Plato  to 
the  imperishable  nature  of  the  world.  Its  uncreated  character 
follows  from  the  truth  of  natural  philosophy  ;  for  dissolution 
must  of  necessity  attend  everything  which  is  born,  and  incor- 
ruptibility must  inevitably  belong  to  everything  which  is  un- 
born ;  since  the  poet  who  wrote  the  following  iambic  verse, 

'*  All  that  is  born  must  surely  die,"  * 

appears  to  have  spoken  very  correctly  when  he  asserted  this 
connection  of  destructibility  with  birth. 

The  argument  may  be  stated  in  a  different  way  as  follows. 
All  compound  things  which  are  destroyed  are  dissolved  into 
the  elements  of  which  they  were  compounded ;  accordingly, 
dissolution  is  nothing  else  but  a  return  of  everything  to  its 
original  constituent  parts ;  just  as,  on  the  contrary,  composition 
is  that  which  compels  the  things  combined  to  come  together  in 
a  manner  contrary  to  their  nature  ;  and  indeed,  this  appears 
to  be  the  most  exact  truth ;  for  men  are  composed  of  the  four 
elements  which  together  make  up  the  whole  of  the  univerae, 
the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  air,  and  fire,  borrowing  a  few  parts 
of  each  in  a  manner  at  first  sight  hardly  consistent  with 
nature.  But  the  things  which  are  thus  combined  together  are 
necessarily  deprived  of  a  motion  in  accordance  with  nature  ;  for 
instance,  warmth  is  deprived  of  its  upward  motion,  and  coldness 
of  its  downward  tendency,  the  earthy  and  somewhat  weighty 
substance  being  lightened  and  assuming  the  higher  place,, 
which  the  most  earth-like  of  our  own  parts,  the  head,  has 
obtained  in  us.  But  of  all  bonds,  that  is  the  worst  which  is 
forged  by  violence,  and  which,  being  violent,  is  also  short-  j 
lived  ;  for  it  is  speedily  broken  by  those  who  are  bound  in  it, 
since  they  become  restive  from  their  desire  for  a  motion  in  ac- 


♦  Timajus,  p.  32. 


ON   THE  WORLD.  196 

cordance  with  nature,  to  which  they  hasten ;  for  as  the  tragic 
poet  says,* — 

**  And  for  things  sprung  from  earth,  they  must 
Return  unto  their  parent  dust, 
While  those  from  heavenly  seed  which  rise 
Are  borne  uplifted  to  the  skies. 
Nought  that  has  once  existed  dies, 
Though  often  what  has  been  combined 
Before,  we  separated  find, 
Invested  with  another  form." 

And  this  law  and  ordinance  is  estabhshed  with  reference  to 
everything  which  is  destroyed,  that  wherever  composite  things 
are  existing  in  combination  they  are  thrown  into  disorder 
instead  of  into  the  order  in  accordance  with  nature,  which  they 
previously  enjoyed,  and  they  are  removed  to  situations  opposite 
to  those  in  which  they  were  previously  placed,  so  that  they 
seem  in  a  manner  to  be  sojourners ;  and  when  they  are  dis- 
solved again,  then  they  return  to  the  appropriate  parts  allotted 
to  them  by  nature. 

But  since  the  world  has  no  participation  in  that  irregularity 
which  exists  in  the  things  which  I  have  just  been  mentioning, 
let  us  stop  awhile  and  consider  this  point. 

If  the  world  were  liable  to  corruption  and  destruction,  it 
follows  of  necessity  that  all  its  parts  would  at  present  be 
arranged  in  a  position  not  in  accordance  with  nature  :  but  it  is 
impious  even  to  imagine  such  a  thing  as  this ;  for  all  the  parts 
of  the  world  have  received  the  most  excellent  position  possible, 
and  an  arrangement  of  the  purest  symmetry  and  harmony ;  so 
that  each  individual  part,  being  content  with  its  place  as  a 
native  country  to  it,  does  not  seek  any  change  for  the  better. 
On  this  account  it  is  that  the  most  central  position  of  all  has 
been  assigned  to  the  earth,  to  which  all  things  belonging  to 
it  adhere,  and  to  which  they  descend  again  even  if  you  throw 
them  into  the  air :  and  this  is  a  proof  that  their  place  is  in 
accordance  with  nature ;  for  wherever  anything  is  borne  with- 
out any  violence,  and  where  it  then  remains  firm  and  stationary, 
that  is  clearly  its  natural  place.  And  then,  in  the  second 
place,  water  was  poured  over  the  earth,  and  air  and  fire 
have  gone  from  the  central  to  the  upper  part,  air  having 
I  received  for  its  portion  the  region  which  is  on  the  borders 
'  •  A  fraiment  from  the  Chrysippus  of  Euripidea 

i  ^  0  2 


196  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

between  air  and  fire,  and  fire  having  received  the  highest  place 
of  all :  on  which  account,  if  you  light  a  torch  and  press  it  down 
towards  the  ground,  nevertheless  the  flame  will  still  turn  in  a 
contrary  direction,  and  lightening  itself  in  accordance  with  the 
natural  motion  of  fire,  will  rise  upwards :  if,  then,  motion  con- 
trary to  nature  is  the  cause  of  corruptibility  and  destruction  in 
the  case  of  other  animals,  but  if  in  the  case  of  the  world  every- 
one of  its  parts  is  arranged  in  complete  accordance  with 
nature,  having  had  appropriate  positions  allotted  to  each  of 
them,  then  surely  the  world  must  most  justly  be  pronounced 
incorruptible  and  imperishable. 

XII.  Moreover  this  point  is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  every 
nature  is  desirous  to  keep  and  preserve,  and  if  it  were  possible 
to  make  immortal,  everything  of  which  it  is  the  nature  ;  the 
nature  of  trees,  for  instance,  desires  to  preserve  trees,  and  the 
nature  of  animals  desires  to  preserve  each  individual  animal. 
But  particular  nature  is  of  necessity  unable  to  conduct  what 
it  belongs  to  to  eternity  ;  for  want,  or  heat,  or  cold,  or  innu- 
merable other  ordinary  circumstances,  when  they  affect  parti- 
cular things,  shake  them  and  dissolve  the  bond  which  previ- 
ously held  them  together,  and  at  last  break  them  to  pieces ; 
but  if  nothing  resembling  any  of  these  things  were  lying  iu 
wait  outside,  then  in  that  case  nature  itself,  as  far  as  it  is 
possible,  would  preserve  everything  both  great  and  small  free 
from  old  age. 

It  follows  therefore  of  necessity,  that  the  nature  of  the 
world  must  desire  the  durability  of  the  universe  ;  for  it  is  not 
worse  than  particular  natures,  so  that  it  should  run  away  and 
desert  its  proper  duties,  and  attempt  to  produce  disease 
instead  of  health,  and  corruption  and  destruction  instead  of 
complete  safety,  since,* 

"  High  over  all  she  lifts  her  beauteous  face, 
And  towers  above  her  nymphs  with  heavenly  grace. 
Fair  as  they  all  appear." 

But  if  this  be  true,  then  the  world  cannot  be  capable  of 
destruction.  Why  so  ?  Because  the  nature  which  holds  it 
together  is  itself  invincible  by  reason  of  its  exceeding 
strength  and  power,  by  w^hich  it  gets  the  mastery  over  every 
thing  else  which  might  be  likely  to  injure  it ;  wherefore  Plato 

*  Homer,  Odyssey  vi.  107,  where  the  lines  quoted  are  applied  to 
Latona  among  her  nymphs. 


ON   THE   WORLD.  197 

has  well  said  :* — "  For  nothing  ever  departed  from  it,  nor  did 
anything  ever  come  to  it  from  any  quarter ;  for  that  was  not 
possible  ;  for  there  was  nothing  in  existence  which  could  come  ; 
for  since  it  supplies  itself  with  nutriment  out  of  its  own  con- 
sumption, it  also  does  everything  and  suffers  everything  in 
itself  and  by  itself,  and  is  compounded  with  the  most  consum- 
mate art.  For  he  who  created  it  thought  that  it  would  be 
better  if  wholly  self-sufficient,  than  if  in  continual  need  of 
accessories  from  other  quarters." 

XIII.  However,  this  argument  also  is  a  most  demonstra- 
tive one,  on  which  I  know  that  vast  numbers  of  philosophers 
pride  themselves  as  one  most  accurately  worked  out,  and 
altogether  irresistible ;  for  they  inquire  what  reason  there  is 
for  God's  destroying  the  world.  For.  if  he  destroys  it  at  all 
he  must  do  so  either  with  the  intention  of  never  making  a 
world  again,  or  with  the  object  of  creating  a  second  fresh  one  ; 
now  the  former  idea  is  inconsistent  with  the  character  of  God ; 
for  it  is  proper  to  change  disorder  into  order,  and  not  order 
into  disorder :  in  the  second  place,  it  is  so  because  it  would 
give  rise  to  repentance,  which  is  an  affliction  and  a  disease  of 
the  soul. 

For  he  ought  either  never  to  have  created  a  world  at  all, 

or  else,  if  he  judged  that  it  was  a  fitting  employment  for  him, 

he  ought  to  have  been  pleased  with  it  after  it  was  made.     But 

the  second  reason  deserves  no  superficial  examination  ;  for  if 

he  were  intending  to  make  another  world  instead  of  that  which 

exists   at  present,   then  of  necessity  this   second  world  that 

would  be  made,  in  that  case,  would  be  either  worse  than,  or 

similar  to.  or  better  than  the  first ;  everyone  of  which  ideas  is 

inadmissible ;  for  if  the  new  world  is  to  be  worse  than  the 

former,  then  the  maker  must  be  also  worse :  but  all  the  works 

of  God  are  without  blemish,  beyond  all  reproach  and  wholly 

faultless,  inasmuch  as  they  are  wrought  with  the  most  consum 

mate  skill  and  knowledge  ;  for  as  the  proverb  says  ; — 

"  For  e'en  a  -wouian's  wisdom's  not  so  coarse 
As  to  despise  the  good  and  choose  the  worse." 

But  it  is  consistent  with  the  character  of,  and  becoming  to 
God  to  give  form  to  what  is  shapeless,  and  to  invest  what  is 
most  ugly  with  admirable  beauty. 

Again,  if  the  new  world  is  to  be  exactly  like  the  old  one, 
♦  Timaeus,  p.  33. 


198  PHILO  JUD.'EUS. 

then  the  maker  is  only  wasting  his  labour,  and  differs  in  no 
respect  from  infant  children  who,  very  often  while  playing  on 
the  sea  shore  raise  up  little  mounds  of  sand,  and  then  pull 
them  down  again  with  their  hands  and  destroy  them ;  for  it 
would  have  been  much  better  than  making  another  world 
exactly  like  the  former,  neither  to  take  anything  from,  nor  to 
add  anything  to,  nor  to  change  either  for  the  better  or  for  the 
worse,  what  existed  originally,  but  to  let  it  remain  just  as  it 
was. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  he  is  about  to  make  a  world  better 
than  the  former  one,  then  the  maker  too  must  be  better  than 
the  maker  of  the  former  world,  so  that  when  he  made  the 
former  world  he  was  inferior  both  in  his  skill  and  in  his  intel- 
lect, which  it  is  impious  even  to  imagine,  for  God  is  at  all 
times  equal  and  similar  to  himself,  being  neither  capable  of 
any  relaxation  which  can  make  him  worse,  nor  of  any  extension 
which  can  make  him  better.  Men,  indeed,  do  admit  of  such 
inequalities  in  either  direction,  being  naturally  liable  to  alter 
either  for  the  better  or  for  the  worse,  and  continually  admitting 
of  increase,  and  advance,  and  improvement,  and  eveijthing 
contrary  to  these  states ;  and  besides  this,  the  works  of  us  who 
are  but  mortal  men  may  very  appropriately  be  perishable,  but 
the  works  of  the  immortal  must  in  all  consistency  and  reason 
be  likewise  imperishable,  for  it  is  natural  that  what  is  made 
should  resemble  the  nature  of  the  maker. 

XIV.  But  Boethus  adduces  the  most  convincing  arguments, 
which  we  shall  proceed  to  mention  immediately ;  for  if,  says  he, 
the  world  was  created  and  is  liable  to  destruction,  then  some- 
thing will  be  made  out  of  nothing,  which  appears  to  be  most 
absurd  even  to  the  Stoics.  Why  so?  Because  it  is  not 
possible  to  discover  any  cause  of  destruction  either  within  or 
without,  which  will  destroy  the  world.  For  on  the  outside 
there  is  nothing  except  perhaps  a  vacuum,  inasmuch  as  all  the 
elements  in  their  integrity  are  collected  and  contained  within 
it,  and  within  there  is  no  imperfection  so  great  as  to  be  the 
cause  of  dissolution  to  so  great  a  thing. 

Again,  if  it  is  destroyed  without  any  cause,  then  it  is  plain 
that  from  something  which  has  no  existence  will  arise  the 
engendering  of  destruction,  which  is  an  idea  quite  inadmissible 
by  reason ;  and,  indeed,  they  say  that  there  are  altogether 
three  generic  manners  of  corruption,  one  which  arises  from 


ON   THE   WORLD.  199 

division,  another  which  proceeds  from  a  destruction  of  the 
distinctive  quality  which  holds  the  thing  together,  and  the 
third  from  confusion ;  therefore  the  things  which  consist  of  a 
union  of  separate  members,  such  as  flocks  of  goats  herds  of 
oxen,  choruses,  armies ;  or,  again,  bodies  which  are  com- 
pounded of  limbs  joined  together,  are  dissolved  by  disjunction 
and  separation.  But  wax,  when  stamped  with  a  new  impres- 
sion, or  softened  before  being  remodelled  so  as  to  present  a 
new  and  different  appearance,  is  corrupted  by  a  destruction  of 
the  distinctive  quality  which  previously  held  it  together.  Other 
things  are  corrupted  by  confusion,  as  the  medicine  which  the 
physicians  call  tetrapharmacon,  for  the  powers  of  the  drugs 
brought  together  and  combined  were  destroyed  in  such  a 
manner  as  to  produce  one  perfect  medicine  of  especial  virtue. 
By  which,  then,  of  these  modes  of  corruption  is  it  becoming 
to  say  that  the  world  is  destroyed  ?  By  that  which  is  caused 
by  separation  ?  No,  for  it  is  not  compounded  of  separate 
members  so  that  its  different  parts  can  be  dispersed,  nor  of 
portions  joined  together  so  that  they  can  be  dissolved ;  nor  is 
it  united  together  in  a  similar  manner  to  our  own  bodies,  for 
they  have  the  seeds  of  decay  in  themselves,  and  they  are 
subject  to  influence  of  a  great  variety  of  things  by  which  they 
are  at  times  injured ;  but  the  power  of  the  world  is  invincible, 
since  by  its  great  superiority  to  other  things  it  has  dominion 
over  eveiything. 

Is  it  then  destroyed  by  a  complete  destruction  of  its  dis- 
tinctive qualities  ?  This  again  is  impossible,  for  there  remains, 
as  the  adversaries  affirm,  a  quality  of  arrangement  which  by 
j  the  process  of  conflagration  is  only  diminished  to  a  lesser  sub- 
1  stance  ...    Is  it  destroyed  then  by  confusion  ?     Away  with 
such  an  idea,  for  in  that  case  it  would  be  necessary  to  confess 
,  that  the  corruption  of  a  body  can  be  reduced  to  a  state  of 
i non-existence.     Why  so?     Because  if  each  of  the  particular 
'elements  were  destroyed  separately,  it  would  be  possible  for  it 
to  become  changed  into  another;  but  if  they  are  altogether 
destroyed  at  one  and  the  same  moment  by  confusion,  then  it 
Jttould  be  necessary  to  imagine  what  is  absolutely  impossible. 

XV.  Is  it  not  however  worth  while  to  examine  this  question, 
n  what  manner  there  can  be  a  regeneration  of  all  those  things 
vhich  have  been  destroyed  by  fire,  and  resolved  into  fire  ?  for 
vhen  their  substance  has  been  wholly  destroyed  by  the  fire,  it 


200  PHILO  JUD^US. 

follows  of  necessity  that  the  fire  itself  must  also  be  extinguished 
as  no  longer  having  any  nourishment.  Therefore,  as  long  as 
it  remained  the  seminal  principle  of  arrangement  was  likewise 
preserved,  but  when  it  is  destroyed  that  principle  is  destroyed 
with  it.  But  it  would  be  impious,  and  an  impiety  of  double 
dye,  not  only  to  attribute  destruction  to  the  world,  but  also  to 
take  away  the  possibility  of  its  regeneration ;  as  if  God 
delighted  in  disorder,  and  irregularity,  and  all  kinds  of  evil 
things.  But  we  must  examine  this  question  more  accurately, 
in  the  following  manner. 

There  are  three  species  in  fire  ;  the  coal,  and  the  flame,  and 
the  light.     Now  coal  is  the  fire  in  its  earthy  substance,  which, 
like  a  sort  of  spiritual  habit,  couches  and  lies  hid  in  a  sort  of 
cavern,  pervading  it  all  to  its  very  extremities.     And  the  flame 
is  that  part  which,  being  raised  on  high,  is  lifted  up  from  its 
fuel.     And  the  light  is  that  which  is  emitted  from  the  flame, 
so  as  to  co-operate  with  the  eyes,  in  order  to  enable  them  to 
comprehend  what  is  seen.     And  the  flame  occupies  the  middle 
position  between  the  coal  and  the  light ;  for  when  it  is  extin- 
guished it  ends  in  coal,  and  when  it  is  kindled  it  excites  the 
light,  which,  being  deprived  of  its  burning  power,  blazes.     If 
therefore,  we  affirm  that  the  world  is  dissolved  by  conflagration, 
it  would  not  be  coal,  because,  in  that  case  there  will  be  a  great 
deal  of  the  earthy  substance  left  behind,  in  which  also  fire 
must  necessarily  be  contained.     But  we  must  agree,  that  none 
of  the  other  bodies  subsist  any  longer,  but  that  earth,  and 
water,  and  air,  are  all  dissolved  into  unmixed  fire.     Nor,  again, 
would  it  become  flame ;  for  that  can  only  exist  in  connexion 
with  nourishment ;  and,  if  nothing  is  left  behind,  being  de- 
prived of  all  nourishment  it  will  immediately  be  extinguished. 
It  follows  from  all  this,  that  it  cannot  become  light  either  ;  for 
light  by  itself  has  no  substance  at  all,  but  flows  from  the  things 
before  mentioned,  coal  and  flame,  not  in  a  great  degree  from 
the  coal,  but  very  much  from  the  flame  ;  for  it  is  diffused  over 
a  very  great  space  indeed.     But  if,  as  has  been  already  proved, 
those  things  had  no  existence  from  the  conflagration  of  all 
things,  then  there  could  not  be  any  light  either.     So  that  it  is 
impossible  for  the  world  to  be  susceptible  of  any  regeneration, 
inasmuch   as    there   is   no    spermatic    principle    smouldering 
beneath ;  from  which  consideration  it  is  plain  that  it  is  un- 
created, and  that  it  will  be  for  ever  imperishable. 


ON   THE  WORLD.  201 

XVI.  However,  besides  what  has  been  here  said,  any  one 
may  use  this  argument  also  in  corroboration  of  his  opinion, 
which  will  certainly  convince  all  those  who  are  not  deter- 
mined to  be  obstinate  beyond  all  bounds  ;  of  those  things 
which  in  pairs  are  exactly  contrary  to  one  another  it  is  impos- 
sible that  one  thing  should  be,  and  that  the  other  should  not 
be ;  for  since  there  is  white  it  follows  as  a  matter  of  absolute 
necessity  that  there  must  also  be  black,  and  since  there  is  a 
great  there  must  likewise  be  a  little ;  since  there  is  an  odd 
there  must  inevitably  be  an  even  ;  since  there  is  a  sweet  there 
must  be  a  bitter ;  since  there  is  day  there  must  be  night ;  and 
so  on  in  an  infinite  number  of  similar  cases ;  but  if  a  conflagra- 
tion should  take  place,  then  something  would  ensue  which  is 
impossible ;  for  then,  of  things  in  a  pair,  the  one  will  happen 
and  the  other  will  not. 

Come,  now,  let  us  consider  the  matter  thus :  if  everything 
is  resolved  into  fire,  there  is  then  something  light,  and  rare, 
and  warm ;  for  all  these  are  the  especial  properties  of  fire ;  but 
there  can  be  nothing  heavy,  or  cold,  or  thick,  which  are  the 
opposites  of  the  qualities  which  I  have  just  enumerated.  How 
then  can  any  one  more  completely  overturn  the  idea  of  the 
universal  disorder  which  would  be  involved  in  such  a  confla- 
gration than  by  showing  that  those  things  which  by  a  law  of 
nature  must  exist  together,  are  by  this  process  separated  from 
their  natural  conjunction?  And  the  separation  has  extended 
to  such  a  degree,  that  those  who  maintain  this  doctrine  attri- 
bute eternal  durability  to  the  one  and  deny  any  existence  at 
all  to  the  other. 

Again,  there  is  this  assertion  made  by  some  of  those  who 
diligently  employ  themselves  in  investigating  truth  which 
appears  to  me  to  be  a  sufiiciently  felicitous  one  ;  if  the  world 
is  destroyed  it  will  either  be  destroyed  by  some  other  efficient 
cause,  or  by  God  ;  now  there  is  certainly  nothing  else  whatever 
from  which  it  can  receive  its  destruction,  for  there  is  nothing 
whatever  which  it  does  not  surround  and  contain  ;  but  that 
|which  is  surrounded  and  confined  within  something  else  is 
manifestly  inferior  in  power  to  that  which  surrounds  and 
confines  it,  by  which  it  is  therefore  mastered ;  on  the  other 
hand,  to  say  that  it  is  destroyed  by  God  is  the  most  impious  of 
ill  possible  assertions ;  for  God  is  the  cause  not  of  disorder, 
md  irregularity,  and  destruction,  but  of  order,  and  beautiful 


202  PHILO   JUD^US. 

regularity,  and  life,  and  of  every  good  thing,  as  is  confessed  by 
all  those  whose  opinions  are  based  on  truth, 

XVII.  But  some  of  those  persons  who  have  fancied  that 
the  world  is  everlasting,  inventing  a  variety  of  new  arguments, 
employ  also  such  a  system  of  reasoning  as  this  to  establish 
their  point :  they  affirm  that  there  are  four  principal  manners 
in  which  corruption  is  brought  about,  addition,  taking  away, 
transposition,  and  alteration ;  accordingly,  the  number  two  is 
by  the  addition  of  the  unit  corrupted  so  as  to  become  the 
number  three,  and  no  longer  remains  the  number  two ;  and 
the  number  four  by  the  taking  away  of  the  unit  is  corrupted 
so  as  to  become  the  number  three  ;  again,  by  transposition  the 
letter  Z  becomes  the  letter  H  when  the  parallel  lines  which 
were  previously  horizontal  ^  are  placed  perpendicularly  II, 
and  when  the  line  which  did  before  pass  upwards  I,  so  as  to 
connect  the  two  is  now  made  horizontal,  and  still  extended 
between  them  so  as  to  join  them.  And  by  alteration  the  word 
ohoc,  wine,  becomes  o^og,  vinegar. 

But  of  the  manner  of  corruption  thus  mentioned  there  is 
not  one  which  is  in  the  least  degree  whatever  applicable  to  the 
world,  since  otherwise  what  could  we  say  ?  Could  we  affirm 
that  anything  is  added  to  the  world  so  as  to  cause  its  destruc- 
tion ?  But  there  is  nothing  whatever  outside  of  the  world 
which  is  not  a  portion  of  it  as  the  whole,  for  everything  is 
surrounded,  and  contained,  and  mastered  by  it.  Again,  can 
we  say  that  anything  is  taken  from  the  world  so  as  to  have 
that  effect  ?  In  the  first  place  that  which  would  be  taken 
away  would  again  be  a  world  of  smaller  dimensions  than  the 
existing  one,  and  in  the  second  place  it  is  impossible  that  any 
body  could  be  separated  from  the  composite  fabric  of  the 
whole  world  so  as  to  be  completely  dispersed.  Again,  are  we 
to  say  that  the  constituent  parts  of  the  world  are  transposed  ? 
But  at  all  events  they  remain  in  their  original  positions  without 
any  change  of  place,  for  never  at  any  time  shall  the  whole 
earth  be  raised  up  above  the  water,  nor  the  water  above  the 
air,  nor  the  air  above  the  fire.  But  those  things  which  are 
by  nature  heavy,  namely  the  earth  and  the  water,  will  have 
the  middle  place,  the  earth  supporting  everything  like  a  solid 
foundation,  and  the  water  being  above  it;  and  the  air  and  the 
tire,  which  are  by  nature  light,  will  have  the  higher  position, 
but  not  equally,  for  the  air  is  the  vehicle  of  the  fire ;  and  that 


ON   THE   WORLD.  203 

hich  is  carried  by  anything  is  of  necessity  above  that  which 
irries  it. 
Once  more :  we  must  not  imagine  that  the  world  is  de- 
royed  by  alteration,  for  the  change  of  any  elements  is  equi- 
Dllent,  and  that  which  is  equipollent  is  the  cause  of  unvarying 
eadiness,  and  of  untroubled  durability,  inasmuch  as  it 
sither  seeks  any  advantage  itself,  and  is  not  subject  to  the 
iroads  of  other  things  which  seek  advantages  at  its  expense  ; 
►  that  this  retribution  and  compensation  of  these  powers  is 
[ualized  by  the  rules  of  pro])ortion,  being  the  produce  of 
3alth  and  endless  preservation,  by  all  which  considerations 
le  world  is  demonstrated  to  be  eternal. 
XVIII.  Theophrastus,  moreover,  says  that  those  men  who 
tribute  a  beginning  and  destructibihty  to  the  world  are 
3ceived  by  four  particulars  of  the  greatest  importance,  the 
lequalities  of  the  earth,  the  retreat  of  the  sea,  the  dissolution 
■  each  of  the  parts  of  the  universe,  and  the  destruction  of 
.fferent  terrestrial  animals  in  their  kinds ;  and  he  proceeds  to 
Jtablish  the  first  point  thus :  if  the  earth  had  never  had  any 
^ginning  of  its  creation,  then  there  would  have  been  no 
)rtion  of  it  rising  above  the  rest  so  as  to  be  conspicuous,  but 
1  the  mountains  would  have  been  level,  and  all  the  pieces  of 
sing  ground  would  have  been  even  with  the  plain. 
For  as  there  are  such  vast  showers  falling  from  heaven 
iroughout  all  ages,  it  would  be  natural  that  of  any  places 
Inch  were  originally  raised  on  high  some  would  be  broken 
•vvn  and  washed  away  by  torrents,  and  others  would  subside 
their  own  accord  and  so  become  lowered,  and  that  every 
ace  everywhere  would  be  smoothed  ;  but  now,  as  things  are, 
e  constant  inequalities  which  exist,  and  the  vast  heights  of 
iny  mountains,  reaching  up  even  to  the  sky,  are  so  many 
oofs  that  the  earth  is  not  eternal. 

For  otherwise,  as  I  have  said  before,  all  the  earth  would 
ig  since  have  been  rendered  level  from  one  extremity  to  the 
ler  by  the  vast  rains  which  would  have  fallen  from  the 
'mal  commencement  of  time  ;  for  it  is  the  character  of  the 
ture  of  water,  and  especially  of  such  as  descends  in  a  heavy 
I  from  lofty  places,  to  push  some  things  away  by  force,  and 
cut  out  and  hollow  other  places  by  its  continual  dropping. 
i  in  this  manner  to  operate  on  the  hard,  rugged,  stony 
i'Und  not  less  than  men  digging.     And  again,  the  sea,  as 


204  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

they  affirm,  is  already  somewhat  diminished,  and  for  proof  of  | 
this  fact  we  can  appeal  to  the  most  celehrated  islands,  Rhodes 
and  Delos,  for  these  were  in  ancient  times  invisible,  being 
overwhelmed  by  and  sunk  under  the  sea,  but  by  lapse  of  time, ' 
as  the  sea  gradually  diminished,  they  by  slow  degrees  rose 
above  it  and  came  into  sight,  as  the  histories  which  are 
written  concerning  them  record.  And  they  used  to  call  Delos 
Anaphe,  confirming  the  account  here  given  by  both  names, 
since  when  it  appeared  above  the  waters  *  it  became  evident,t 
having  been  formerly  invisible  and  unseen. 

And  in  addition  to  these  arguments  they  adduce  the  facts 
that  many  great  and  deep  bays  and  gulfs  of  vast  seas  have 
been  dried  up,  and  have  become  land,  and  have  so  turned  out 
no  insignificant  addition  to  the  adjacent  country  when  sown' 
and  planted,  and  on  that  soil  there  is  still  left  plenty  of  proof; 
of  such  spots  having  formerly  been  sea,  in  the  pebbles,  and  i 
shells,  and  other  things  w^hich  are  commonly  washed  up  on 
the  sea-shore  being  found  in  them. 

But  if  the  sea  is  gradually  being  diminished  then  the  earth 
also  will  be  diminished ;  and  in  long  revolutions  of  years  every 
one  of  the  elements  w-ill  be  entirely  consumed  and  destroyed ; 
and  the  whole  air  will  be  consumed,  being  diminished  by  little 
and  little  ;  and  all  things  will  be  absorbed  and  dissolved  into 
the  one  substance  of  fire. 

And  for  the  purpose  of  establishing  the  third  alter- 
native of  this  question  they  use  the  following  argument : 
beyond  all  question  that  thing  is  destroyed  all  the  parts  of 
which  are  liable  to  destruction ;  but  all  the  parts  of  the  world 
are  liable  to  destruction,  therefore  the  world  also  is  liable  to 
destruction. 

But  we  must  now  proceed  to  consider  the  question  which 
we  postponed  till  the  present  time.  What  sort  of  a  part  of 
the  earth  is  that,  that  we  may  begin  from  this,  whether  it  is 
greater  or  less,  that  is  not  dissolved  by  time  ?  Do  not 
the  very  hardest  and  strongest  stones  become  hard  and  de- 
cayed through  the  weakness  of  their  conformation  (and  this 
conformation  is  a  sort  of  course  of  a  highly  strained  spirit,  9 
bond  not  indissoluble,  but  only  very  difficult  to  unloose),  ii^ 

*  The  Greek  word  is  ava<pavtl(Ta,  from  which  'Avafy  is  derived. 
+  Arikr),  from  which  AfjXog  is  derived. 


ON  THE   WORLD.  205 

consequence  of  which  they  are  broken  up  and  made  fluid,  so 
that  they  are  dissolved  first  of  all  into  a  thin  dust,  and  after- 
wards are  wholly  wasted  away  and  destroyed  ?  Again,  if  the 
water  were  never  agitated  by  the  winds,  but  were  left  immove- 
able for  ever,  would  it  not  from  inaction  and  tranquillity 
become  dead  ?  at  all  events  it  is  changed  by  such  stagnation,  and 
becomes  very  foetid  and  foul-smelling,  like  an  animal  deprived 
of  life.  And  so  also  the  corruptions  of  the  air  are  plain  to 
everyone,  for  it  is  the  nature  of  the  atmosphere  to  become 
sick  and  to  decay,  and,  as  one  may  say,  in  a  manner  to  die  ; 
since  what  else  is  it  which  a  man,  who  is  not  aiming  at  select- 
ing plausible  language,  but  only  at  truth,  would  call  a  plague 
except  a  death  of  the  atmosphere,  which  diffuses  its  own 
disease  and  suffering  to  the  destruction  of  evei7thing  which  is 
endowed  with  life  ? 

And  why  need  I  speak  at  great  length  concerning  fire  ?  for 

if  it  is  deprived  of  nourishment  it  is  immediately  extinguished. 

If  then,  each  of  the  separate  parts  of  the  world  awaits  utter 

destruction,  it  is  plain  that  the  world  which  is  compounded  of 

these  can  not  be  itself  exempt  from  destruction. 

We  must  now  consider  with  accuracy  the  fourth  and  remain- 
ing argument.    Thus  they  argue :  if  the  world  were  eternal  then 
the  animals  also  would  be  eternal,  and  much  more  the  human 
race,  in  proportion  as  that  is  more  excellent  than  the  other 
animals ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  those  who  take  delight  in  inves- 
tigating the  mysteries  of  nature  consider  that  man  has  only 
been  created  in  the  late  ages  of  the  world ;  for  it  is  likely,  or  I 
should  rather  say  it  is  inevitably  true,  that  the  arts   co-exist 
with  man,  so  as  to  be  exactly  co-eval  with  him,  not  only  because 
methodical  proceedings  are  appropriate  to  a  rational  nature, 
■  but  also  because  it  is  not  possible  to  live  without  them  ;  let  us 
^  therefore  examine  the  dates  of  each  of  these,  disregarding  the 
\  fables  invented  by  the  tragedians  about  the  gods ;   but  if  man 
[  is  not  eternal  then  neither  is  any  other  animal,  so  that  then 
j  neither  are  the  places  which  receive  them,  the  earth,  or  the 
water,  or  the  air  ;  from  all  which  considerations  it  is  plain  that 
(this  world  is  liable  to  destruction. 

i  XIX.  But  it  is  necessary  to  encounter  such  quibbling 
j  arguments  as  these,  lest  some  persons  of  too  little  experience 
j  should  yield  to  and  be  led  away  by  them ;  and  we  must  begin 
jOur  refutation  of  them  from  the  same  point  from  which  the 


206  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

Sophists  begin  their  deceit.  They  say,  *'  There  could  no  longer 
he  any  inequalities  existing  on  the  earth,  if  the  world  were 
eternal."  Why  not,  my  most  excellent  friends  ?  For  other 
persons  will  come  up  and  say  that  the  natures  of  trees  are  in 
no  respect  different  from  mountains;  but  just  as  they  at 
certain  seasons  lose  their  leaves,  and  again  at  certain  seasons 
recover  their  verdure  again ;  (on  which  account  there  is  admi- 
rable truth  in  those  lines  of  the  poet : — 

"  Like  leaves  on  trees  the  race  of  man  is  found, 
Now  green  in  youth,  now  withering  on  the  ground  j 
Another  race  the  following  spring  supplies ; 
They  fall  successive  and  successive  rise.")  * 

And  so  in  like  manner  some  portions  of  the  mountains  are 
broken  off,  and  others  grow  in  their  stead  :  but  after  a  long 
lapse  of  time  the  additional  growth  becomes  conspicuous, 
because  the  trees  having  a  more  rapid  nature  display  their 
increase  with  great  rapidity ;  but  mountains  have  a  slower 
character,  on  which  account  it  happens  that  the  additions 
^vhich  take  place  in  their  case  are  not  perceptible  by  the 
outward  senses  except  after  a  long  time. 

And  these  men  appear  to  be  ignorant  of  the  manner  in 
which  they  are  produced,  since  if  they  had  not  been,  perhaps 
they  would  have  been  silent  out  of  shame  ;  but  still  there  is 
no  reason  why  we  should  not  teach  them ;  but  there  is  nothing 
new  in  what  is  now  said,  neither  are  they  our  words  but  the 
ancient  sayings  of  wise  men,  by  whom  nothing  which  was 
necessary  for  knowledge  has  been  left  uninvestigated ;  when 
the  fiery  principle  which  is  contained  beneath,  in  the  earth,  is 
thrust  upwards  by  the  natural  power  of  fire,  it  proceeds  to  its 
own  appropriate  place ;  and  if  it  meets  with  any  respite  or 
relaxation,  though  ever  so  slight,  it  draws  up  with  it  a  large 
portion  of  the  earthy  substance,  as  much  as  it  can  ;  and  when 
it  has  emerged  from  the  earth  it  proceeds  more  slowly ;  but 
the  earthy  substance  being  compelled  to  follow  it  for  a  long 
time,  being  at  last  raised  to  an  immense  height,  is  contracted 
at  the  top,  and  at  last  comes  to  end  on  a  sharp  point  imitating 
the  general  appearance  of  the  flame  of  fire ;  for  there  arises 
then  a  most  violent  contention  between  two  things  which  are 
natural  adversaries,  the  lightest  and  the  heaviest  of  things, 
each  of  them  pressing  onwards  to  reach  its  own  place,  and 
*  Homer,  II.  vi.  147, 


ON  THE  WORLD.  207 

each  striving  against  the  violent  efforts  of  the  other ;  accord- 
ingly the  fire,  which  is  drawing  up  the  earth  with  it,  is  com- 
pelled to  sink  down  by  its  descending  power ;  and  the  earth 
naturally  inclining  to  the  lowest  point  is  nevertheless  to  a 
certain  degree  made  light,  and  lifted  up  by  the  upward  ten- 
dencies of  fire,  and  so  is  raised  on  high,  and  being  at  last 
overpowered  by  the  more  influential  power  which  lightens  it  is 
thrust  upwards  towards  the  natural  seat  of  fire,  and  established 
on  high. 

Why  then  need  we  wonder  if  the  mountains  are  not  entirely 
washed  away  by  the  impetuosity  of  the  rains,  when  so  great 
a  power,  which  keeps  them  together,  and  by  which  they  are 
raised  up,  is  very  firmly  and  steadfastly  connected  with  them  ? 
For  if  they  were  released  from  the  bond  which  holds  them 
together,  it  would  be  natural  for  them  to  be  entirely  dissolved 
and  to  be  dispersed  by  the  water ;  but  since  they  are  bound 
together  by  this  power  of  fire,  they  resist  the  impetuosity  of 
the  rains  more  surely. 

XX.  These  things,  then,  may  be  said  by  us  with  respect 
to  the  argument  that  the  inequalities  of  the  surface  of  the 
earth  are  no  proof  of  the  world  having  been  created  and  being 
liable  to  destruction ;  but  with  respect  to  that  argument  which 
was  endeavoured  to  be  established  by  the  diminution  of  the 
sea,  we  may  reasonably  adduce  this  statement  in  opposition  to 
it :  "  Do  not  look  only  at  the  islands  which  have  risen  up  out 
of  the  sea,  nor  at  any  portions  of  land  which,  having  been  for- 
merly buried  by  the  waters,  have  in  subsequent  times  become 
dry  land  ;  for  obstinate  contention  is  very  unfavourable  to  the 
consideration  of  natural  philosophy,  which  considers  the  search 
after  truth  to  be  the  chief  object  of  rational  desire ;  but  look 
mther  at  the  contrary  effects  :  consider  how  many  districts  on 
the  main-land,  not  only  such  as  were  near  the  coast,  but  even 
such  as  were  completely  in-land,  have  been  swallowed  up  by 
the  waters ;  and  consider  how  great  a  portion  of  land  has 
become  sea  and  is  now  sailed  ov^er  by  innumerable  ships." 
Are  you  ignorant  of  the  celebrated  account  which  is  given  of 
that  most  sacred  Sicilian  strait,  which  in  old  times  joined 
Sicily  to  the  continent  of  Italy  ?  and  where  vast  seas  on  each 
side  being  excited  by  violent  storms  met  together,  coming 
from  opposite  directions,  the  land  between  them  was  over- 
whelmed and   broken  away;   from   which    circumstance  the 


208  PHILO  JUD.f:US. 

city  built  in  the  neighbourhood  was  called  Rhegium,*  and 
the  result  was  quite  different  from  what  any  one  would  have 
expected ;  for  the  seas  which  had  formerly  been  separated 
now  flowed  together  and  were  united  in  one  expanse ;  and  the 
land  which  had  previously  united  was  now  separated  into  two 
portions  by  the  strait  which  intersected  it,  in  consequence  of 
which  Sicily,  which  had  previously  formed  a  part  of  the  main- 
land, was  now  compelled  to  be  an  island. 

XXI.  And  it  is  said  that  many  other  cities  also  have  disap- 
peared, having  been  swallowed  up  by  the  sea  which  overwhelmed 
them  ;  since  they  speak  of  three  in  Peloponnesus — 

"  ^gira  and  fair  Bura's  walls, 
And  Helica's  lofty  halls, 
And  many  a  once  renowned  town, 
With  wreck  and  seaweed  overgrown," 

as  having  been  formerly  prosperous,  but  now  overwhelmed  by 
the  violent  influx  of  the  sea.  And  the  island  of  Atalantes 
which  was  greater  than  Africa  and  Asia,  as  Plato  says  in  the 
Timaeus,  in  one  day  and  night  was  overwhelmed  beneath  the 
sea  in  consequence  of  an  extraordinary  earthquake  and  inun- 
dation and  suddenly  disappeared,  becoming  sea,  not  indeed 
navigable ,  but  full  of  gulfs  and  eddies.  Therefore  that  imagi- 
nary and  fictitious  diminution  of  the  sea  has  no  connection  with 
the  destruction  or  durability  of  the  world  ;  for  in  fact  it  ap- 
pears to  recede  indeed  from  some  parts,  but  to  rise  higher  in 
others ;  and  it  would  have  been  proper  rather  not  to  look  at 
only  one  of  these  results  but  at  both  together,  and  so  to  form 
one's  opinion,  since  in  all  the  disputed  questions  which  arise 
in  human  life,  a  wise  and  honest  judge  will  not  deliver  his 
opinion  before  he  has  heard  the  arguments  of  the  advocates  or 
both  sides. 

XXII.  And  as  for  the  third  argument,  it  is  convicted  b^^ 
itself,  as  being  derived  only  from  an  unsound  system  of  ques 
tioning  proceeding  from  the  assertions  originally  made  ;  forn 
truth  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  a  thing,  all  the  part; 
of  which  are  liable  to  corruption,  is  likewise  perishable  itself 
but  this  is  only  inevitably  true  of  that  thing  of  which  a) 
the  parts  are  perishable  when  taken  collectively  and  togethe 
in  the  same  place  and  at  the  same  time,  since  in  the  case  of 
person  who  has  the  tip  of  his  finger  cut  off,  he  is  not  disable 

*  'Ff}yiov,  from  ptjyvvfii,  "  to  break," 


ON   THE   WORLD.  ^  209 

from  living,  but  if  he  had  the  whole  collection  of  all  his  parts 
and  limbs  cut  off  at  once,  he  would  die  immediately.  There- 
fore in  the  same  manner,  if  all  the  elements  of  the  world 
together  were  all  to  disappear  at  one  and  tlie  same  moment, 
then  it  would  be  necessary  to  admit  that  the  world  was  liable  to 
corruption  and  destruction ;  but  if  each  of  these  elements 
separately  only  changes  its  nature  so  as  to  assimilate  to  that  of 
its  nature,  it  is  then  rendered  immortal  rather  than  destroyed, 
according  to  the  philosophical  statement  of  the  tragic  poet — 

*'  Nought  that  has  once  existed  dies, 
Though  often  what  has  been  combine 
Before,  we  separated  find, 
Invested  with  another  form." 

For  it  is  the  greatest  folly  imaginable  to  estimate  the  antiquity 
of  the  human  race  from  the  state  of  art ;  for  if  any  one  were  to 
follow  the  absurdity  of  such  a  system  of  reasoning  as  this,  he 
will  prove  the  world  to  be  very  young  indeed,  and  to  have  been 
made  scarcely  a  thousand  years,  since  all  those  men  whom  we 
have  heard  of  traditionally  as  the  discoverers  in  different 
branches  of  science  do  not  go  back  to  a  greater  number  of 
years  than  that  which  I  have  mentioned. 

But  if  we  must  speak  of  the  arts  as  co-eval  with  the  race  of 
mankind,  then  we  must  speak,  drawing  our  arguments  from, 
natural  history,  and  not  inconsiderately  or  carelessly.  And 
what  is  this  history  ?  Th^  destruction  of  the  things  on  the 
earth,  not  all  together,  but  of  the  greatest  number  of  them,  is 
attributed  to  two  principal  causes,  the  indescribable  violence 
and  power  of  fire  and  water.  And  they  say  that  each  of  these 
elements  attacks  them  in  its  turn,  after  very  long  periods  of 
revolving  years.  When,  therefore,  a  conflagration  seizes  upon 
things,  a  stream  of  ethereal  fire  being  poured  down  from  above 
is  frequently  diffused  over  them,  overrunning  many  districts  of 
the  habitable  world ;  and  when  a  deluge  draws  down  tlie  whole 
of  the  rainy  nature  of  water,  the  regular  rivers  and  torrents 
overflowing,  and  not  only  that,  but  even  far  exceeding  the 
ordinary  measure  of  a  common  flood. 

Accordingly,  when  the  greater  part  of  mankind  is  destroyed 
in  the  manners  above  mentioned,  besides  an  infinity  of  other 
ways  of  less  power  and  importance,  it  follows  of  necessity  that 
the  arts  also  must  fail,  for  it  cannot  be  possible  to  discuss 
science  by  itself  without  some  one  to  reduce  it  to  method  and 

VOL.  IV.  P 


no  PHILO  JUD^US. 

practice.  But  when  those  common  pestilences  relax  their 
fury,  and  when  the  human  race  begins  again  to  recover  vigour 
and  to  flourish,  descending  from  those  who  have  not  been 
previously  destroyed  by  the  evils  which  pressed  upon  them, 
then  the  arts  also  begin  again  to  exist,  not  indeed  as  they  were 
at  first,  but  in  thinner  numbers  from  the  diminution  of  the 
numbers  of  those  who  practise  them. 

I  have  now  then  set  forth  to  the  best  of  my  ability  what  I 
have  been  able  to  learn  or  to  understand  concerning  the 
indestructibility  of  the  world. 


THE  FRAGMENTS  OF  THE  LOST  WORKS. 

From  Eusebius'  Prepar.  of  the  Gospel. — Lib.  viii.  c.  13. 

But  that  you  may  not  think  that  I  am  here  arguing  in  a 
sophistical  manner,  I  will  produce  a  man  who  is  a  Hebrew  as 
the  interpreter  for  you  of  the  meaning  of  the  scripture ;  a 
man  who  inherited  from  his  father  a  most  accurate  knowledge 
of  his  national  customs  and  laws,  and  who  had  learnt  the 
doctrines  contained  in  them  from  learned  teachers ;  for  such  a 
man  was  Philo.  Listen  then,  to  him,  and  hear  how  he  inter- 
■prets  the  words  of  God. 

Why,  then,  does  he  use  the  expression,  "  In  the  image  of 
God  I  made  man,"*  as  if  he  were  speaking  of  that  of  some 
other  God,  and  not  of  having  made  him  in  the  likeness  of  him- 
self ?  This  expression  is  used  with  great  beauty  and  wisdom. 
For  it  was  impossible  that  anything  mortal  should  be  made  in 
the  likeness  of  the  most  high  God  the  Father  of  the  universe ; 
but  it  could  only  be  made  in  the  likeness  of  the  second  God, 
who  is  the  Word  of  the  other  ;  for  it  was  fitting  that  the 
rational  type  in  the  soul  of  man  should  receive  the  impression 
of  the  Word  of  God,  since  the  God  below  the  Word  is  superior 
to  all  and  every  rational  nature ;  and  it  is  not  lawful  for  any 
created  thing  to  be  made  like  the  God  who  is  above  reason, 
and  who  is  endowed  with  a  most  excellent  and  special  form  ap- 
propriated to  himself  alone. 

*  Genesis  i.  27. 


FRAGMENTS.  211 

This  is  what  I  wish  to  quote  from  the  first  book  of  the  ques- 
tions and  answers  of  Philo. 

From  the  same  work,  c.  21. 

And  the  Hebrew  Philo,  in  his  treatise  on  Providence,  speaks 
in  this  way  concerning  matter. 

But  concerning  the  quantity  of  the  essence,  if  indeed  it 
really  has  any  existence,  we  must  also  speak.  God  took  care 
at  the  creation  of  the  world  that  there  should  be  an  ample  and 
most  sufficient  supply  of  matter,  so  exact  that  nothing  might 
be  wanting  and  nothing  superfluous.  For  it  would  have  been 
absurd  in  the  case  of  particular  artisans,  for  them,  when  they  are 
occupied  in  making  anything,  and  especially  anything  of  much 
value,  to  calculate  the  exact  quantity  of  materials  which  they  re- 
quire; but  for  that  being  who  is  the  original  inventor  of  numbers 
and  measures,  and  the  qualities  which  exist  and  are  found  in 
them,  to  omit  to  take  care  to  have  just  what  was  proper.  I 
will  speak  now  with  all  freedom,  and  say  that  the  world  had 
need  for  its  fabrication  of  some  precise  quantity  of  materials, 
neither  more  nor  less  ;  since  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been 
perfect,  nor  complete  in  all  its  parts,  being  thoroughly  well 
made,  nor  would  it  have  been  made  perfect  of  a  perfect 
essence. 

For  it  is  an  indispensable    part   of  a    workman    who    is 

I  thoroi-ighly  well  skilled  in  his  art,  before  he  begins  making 

ijany  thing,  to  see  that  his  materials  are    exactly   sufficient; 

therefore  a  man,  even  if  he  were  most  eminently  skilled  in  the 

|knowledge  of  other  things,  still  if  he  were  not  able  altogether 

|to  avoid  error,  which  is  so  natural  to  mortals,  would  be  very 

ikely  to  be  deceived  in  respect  of  the  quantity  of  materials 

vhich  he  required  when  he  was  about  to  proceed  to  the  exer- 

'ise  of  art ;  sometimes  adding  to  it  as  too  little,  and  sometimes 

aking  away  from  it  as  too  much.    But  that  Being  who  is,  as  it 

yere,  a  kind  of  fountain  of  all  knowledge,  was  not  likely  to  sup- 

ly  anything  in  deficient  or  in  superfluous  quantities,  inasmuch 

|3  he  employs  measures  elaborated  in  a  most  wonderful  man- 

er,  80  as  to  display  perfect   accuracy,  and  all  of  the  most 

raiscworthy   character.      But    he    who   is   inclined    to   talk 

Dnsense,   at  random,    will    easily  do   it,  looking   upon  the 

fferent  works  of  all  artisans  as  causes,  and  as  having  been 

ade  in  a  more  excellent  manner,  either  by  the  addition  or  by 

P  2 


212  pniLo  JUD7EUS. 

the  subtraction  of  some  material  or  other.  But  it  is  the 
pecuhar  occupation  of  sophistry  to  quibble  and  cavil ;  while  it  is 
the  task  of  wisdom  to  investigate  accurately  everything  that 
exists  in  nature. 

And  this  is  the  way  in  which  Philo  speaks  on  this  subject. 

From  the  eighth  book  of  the  same  author,  c.  5. 

And  first  of  all  I  will  adduce  what  Philo  says  respecting 
the  journey  of  the  Jews  into  Egypt,  of  which  he  has  given  an 
account,  following  that  which  is  given  by  Moses  in  the  first 
book  of  the  Pentateuch,  to  which  he  has  affixed  the  superscrip- 
tion, "  hypothetically ;  "  where,  arguing  in  behalf  of  the 
Jews  as  if  he  were  addressing  himself  to  their  accusers,  he 
speaks  in  the  following  manner,  affirming, — 

That  their  ancient  ancestor,  the  original  founder  of  their 
race,  was  a  Chaldaean ;  and  that  this  people  emigrated  from 
Egypt,  after  having  in  former  times  left  its  abode  in  Syria, 
being  very  numerous  and  consisting  of  countless  myriads  of 
people  ;  and  that  when  the  land  was  no  longer  able  to  contain 
them,  and  moreover  when  a  high  spirit  began  to  show  itself 
in  the  dispositions  of  their  young  men,  and  when,  besides  this, 
God  himself  by  visions  and  dreams  began  to  show  them  that 
he  willed  that  they  should  depart,  and  when,  as  the  Deity 
brought  it  about,  nothing  was  less  an  object  of  desire  to  them 
than  their  ancient  native  land  ;  on  that  account  this  ancestor 
of  theirs  departed  and  journeyed  into  Egypt,  whether  in  conse- 
quence of  some  express  determination  of  God,  or  whether  it 
was  in  consequence  of  some  prophetic  instinct  of  his  own ;  so 
that  from  that  time  to  the  present  the  nation  has  had  an 
existence  and  a  durability,  and  has  become  so  exceedingly 
populous,  as  it  is  at  this  moment. 

And  then,  after  a  few  more  sentences,  he  says, — 

And  they  were  led  in  this  journey  and  emigration  of  theirs 
by  a  man  who,  if  you  will  have  it  so,  was  in  no  respect  superior 
to  the  generality  of  his  fellow  countrymen,  so  incessantly  did 
they  reproach  him  as  a  trickster  and  one  who  deceived  them 
with  words.  An  admirable  amount  and  kind  of  trickery  and 
deceit  no  doubt  it  was,  by  which  he  not  only  completely  saved 
the  whole  people  which  was  oppressed  by  want  of  water  and 
hunger,  and  by  ignorance  of  the  way,  and  in  a  complete  stat^ 
of  destitution  of  all  things,  and  led  them  forward  as  if  in  ail 


FRAGMENTS.  -  213 

prosperity,  and  conducted  them  through  all  the  nations  lying 
around,  and  kept  them  without  any  quarrelhng  with  one  another, 
and  in  a  state  of  complete  subordination  and  obedience  to  him- 
self. And  this  too,  not  for  a  short  time,  but  for  a  period  of 
such  length,  that  it  is  not  likely  that  even  a  single  family  would 
continue  in  perfect  unanimity  and  prosperity  for  such  a  time ; 
for  no  thirst,  no  hunger,  no  decay  of  body,  no  fear  of  the 
future,  no  ignorance  of  what  was  to  befall  them,  ever  excited 
that  deceived  people,  who  were  being  led,  as  some  will  have  it, 
to  their  destruction,  to  rise  against  him  who  was  deceiving  them. 
Yet  what  would  you  have  us  say  ?  That  he  had  such  excessive 
art,  or  such  great  eloquence  of  speech,  or  such  shrewdness, 
that  he  could  triumph  over  so  many  difficulties  of  such  a 
nature,  which  seemed  likely  to  lead  to  the  destruction  of  them 
all  ?  Surely  you  must  confess,  either  that  the  natures  of  the 
men  under  him  were  not  utterly  ignorant  or  obstinate,  but 
were  obedient  and  not  inclined  to  neglect  a  prudent  care  of 
the  future  ;  or  else  that  they  were  as  wicked  and  perverse  as 
possible,  but  that  God  softened  their  obstinacy,  and  was,  as  it 
were,  a  leader  to  them  in  respect  both  of  the  present  and  of 
the  future. 

For  that  of  these  alternatives  which  appears  to  you  to  be  the 
truest  of  the  two,  appears  equally  to  contribute  to  the  praise, 
and  honour,  and  admiration  of  the  whole  nation. 

These  things,  then,  are  what  I  have  to  say  about  this 
exodus.  But  when  they  came  into  this  land,  how  they  were 
settled  here,  and  how  they  got  possession  of  the  country,  they 
show  in  their  sacred  records.  And  I  moreover  do  not  think  it 
necessary  to  describe  it  as  by  way  of  history,  but  rather  to 
enter  into  some  speculations  concerning  them  as  to  what  was 
their  natural  and  likely  course.  For  which  of  these  two  alterna- 
tives will  you  embrace  ?  That  while  they  were  still  very 
numerous,  although  at  last  they  were  evilly  afflicted,  still,  while 
they  were  powerful  and  had  arms  in  their  hands,  they  took  the 
country  by  force,  fighting  with  and  defeating  both  the  Syrians 
and  Phoenicians  who  met  them  in  that  their  land  ?  Or  shall 
we  suppose  that  they  were  unwarlike,  and  destitute  of  manly 
courage,  and  altogether  deficient  in  point  of  numbers,  and 
destitute  of  any  supplies  for  war ;  but  that  they  met  with  respect- 
ful treatment  from  those  nations,  and  obtained  their  land  from 


214  rniLO  jud^eus. 

them,  who  willingly  surrendered  it  to  tliem  ?  and  that  tlien 
immediately,  or  at  no  distant  period,  they  built  a  temple,  and 
did  everything  else  which  has  any  bearing  on  religion  and 
piety  ? 

For  these  circumstances,  as  it  seems,  would  prove  them  to 
have  been  a  God-loving  people,  and  beloved  by  God,  and  con- 
fessed to  be  such  even  by  their  enemies ;  for  those  people  into 
whose  territories  they  had  suddenly  come,  as  if  to  deprive  them 
of  them,  were  of  necessity  their  enemies.  And  if  they  met 
with  respectful  treatment  and  honour  from  them,  how  can  we 
deny  that  they  surpassed  all  other  men  in  good  fortune  ? 

And  what  shall  we  say  after  this  in  the  second  place,  or  in 
the  third  place?  Shall  we  speak  of  their  admirable  code  of 
laws,  of  their  obedience,  or  of  their  devotion,  and  justice,  and 
holiness,  and  piety?  But  in  truth  they  looked  upon  that  man, 
whoever  he  was,  who  gave  them  these  laws,  with  such  excessive 
admiration  and  veneration,  that  whatever  he  approved  of  they 
immediately  thought  best  also.  Therefore,  whether  he  spoke, 
being  influenced  by  his  own  reason,  or  because  he  was 
inspired  by  the  Deity,  they  referred  every  word  of  his  to  God. 
And  though  many  years  have  passed,  I  cannot  tell  the  exact 
number,  but  more  than  two  thousand,  still  they  have  never 
altered  one  word  of  what  was  written  by  him,  but  would  rather 
endure  to  die  ten  thousand  times  than  to  do  any  thing  in 
opposition  to  his  laws  and  to  the  customs  which  he  esta- 
blished. 

After  Philo  has  said  this,  he  proceeds  to  give  an  abridgment 
of  the  constitution  established  in  the  nation  of  the  Jews  by  the 
laws  of  Moses,  speaking  thus  : — 

From  the  same  hook,  c.  7 

Now,  is  there  anything  among  that  people  resembling  these 
circumstances,  anything  which  appears  to  be  of  a  mild  and 
gentle  character,  and  which  admits  of  invocations  of  justice, 
and  pleas,  and  delays,  and  of  assessments  of  damages,  and  ow 
the  other  hand  of  counter  assessments?  Not  a  word,  but 
every  thing  is  simple,  plain,  and  straightforward.  If  you 
indulge  in  illicit  connexions,  if  you  commit  adultery,  if  you  do 
violence  to  a  child  (for  do  not  speak  of  doing  so  to  a  boy,  but 
even  to  a  female  child)  ;  and  in  like  manner,  if  you  prostitute 


FRAGMENTS.  2  1 5 

yourself,  if  you  suffer  any  thing  disgraceful  contrary  to  what 
becomes  your  age,  or  appear  to  do  so,  or  are  about  to  do  so, 
death  is  the  penalty  for  such  wickedness. 

Again,  if  you  behave  with  insult  towards  a  slave,  or  towards 
a  free  person,  if  you  confine  such  an  one  in  bonds,  if  you  lead 
him  away  and  sell  him,  if  you  steal  any  thing,  whether 
common  or  sacred,  if  you  commit  acts  of  impiety,  not  only  by 
your  deeds  but  even  by  any  chance  word,  I  will  not  venture 
to  say  against  God  himself  (may  God  be  merciful  to  us,  and 
of  the  same  opinion  about  these  matters),  but  against  your 
father,  or  your  mother,  or  your  benefactor,  death  is  equally  the 
penalty.  And  that  too,  not  a  common,  or  ordinary,  or  natural 
death ;  but  he  who  has  merely  uttered  a  single  impious  word 
must  be  stoned,  as  having  committed  no  inferior  impiety. 

He  also  gives  many  other  injunctions,  such  as  these, 
that  wives  shall  serve  their  husbands,  not  indeed  in  any  par- 
ticular so  as  to  be  insulted  by  them,  but  in  the  spirit  of 
reasonable  obedience  in  all  things ;  that  parents  shall  govern 
their  children  for  their  preservation  find  benefit ;  that  every 
one  shall  be  the  lord  of  his  own  possessions,  provided  he  has 
not  dedicated  them  to  God,  nor  spoken  of  God  as  their  owner ; 
but  if  he  has  vowed  them  only  by  a  single  word,  then  it  is  not 
lawful  for  him  to  lay  hands  upon  or  to  touch  them,  but  he  must 
at  once  separate  himself  from  them  all.  May  I  never  be 
guilty  of  plundering  the  things  which  belong  to  God,  or  of 
stealing  what  has  been  offered  and  dedicated  to  him  by  others. 
And  even,  as  1  have  said  before,  if  a  single  word  to  that  effect 
has  unintentionally  fallen  from  a  man,  he  must,  instead  of 
taking  away  from  what  is  already  dedicated,  add  some  offering 
of  his  own ;  for  if  he  has  said  the  word,  he,  by  so  speaking, 
deprives  himself  of  every  thing.  But  if  he  repents,  or  wishes 
to  recall  and  amend  what  he  has  said,  he  shall  be  deprived  also 
of  his  very  life.  And  the  same  principle  extends  to  other 
things,  of  which  he  is  the  owner. 

If  a  man  by  any  words  dedicates  that  which  is  requisite  to 
support  a  wife,  she  shall  be  sacred  and  entitled  to  receive  the 
support.  If  a  father  makes  such  a  promise  to  his  son,  or  a 
master  to  his  servant,  the  rule  is  the  same.  And  the  way  in 
which  a  man  may  be  released  from  any  promise  or  vow  which 
he  has  made  in  such  a  manner  can  only  be  in  the  most  perfect 
and  complete  way,  when  the  high  priest  discharges  him  from 


21 G  PfllLO   JUDiEUS. 

it ;  for  he  is  the  person  entitled  to  receive  it  in  due  subordi- 
nation to  God.  And  the  next  way  is  that  which  consists  in 
propitiating  the  mercy  of  God  in  behalf  of  those  who  are  the 
more  immediate  owners  of  the  thing  vowed,  so  that  he  may 
not  accept  of  what  is  thus  dedicated,  since  it  is  necessary  to 
them.  There  are,  besides  these  rules,  ten  thousand  oiher 
precepts,  which  refer  to  the  unwritten  customs  and  ordinances 
of  the  nation. 

Moreover,  it  is  ordained  in  the  laws  themselves  that  no  one 
shall  do  to  his  neighbour  what  he  would  be  unwilling  to  have 
done  to  himself. 

That  a  man  shall  not  take  up  what  he  has  not  put  down, 
neither  out  of  a  garden,  nor  out  of  a  wine-press,  nor  out  of  a 
threshing-floor ;  and  that  absolutely  no  one  shall  take  anything, 
whether  it  be  great  or  small,  out  of  a  heap.  That  no  one  shall 
refuse  fire  to  one  who  begs  it  of  him. 

That  no  one  shall  cut  off  a  stream  of  water,  but  that  every- 
one shall  contribute  food  to  beggars  and  cripples,  and  that 
buch  shall  have  favour  with  God.     That  no  one  shall  keep 
any  one  from  performing  funeral  honours  to  the    dead,  but 
shall  even  throw  upon  them  so  much  earth  as  is  sufficient  to 
protect  them  from  impiety  :  that  no  one  shall  violate  or  move, 
in  any  manner  or  degree  whatever,  the  graves,  or  tombs,  or 
memorials  of  those  who  are  dead.     That  no  one  shall  add 
bonds,  or  any  evil,  or  heap  any  additional  suffering  on  him 
who  is  in  trouble.    That  no  one  shall  eradicate  the  f>enerative 
powers  of  a  man.    That  no  one  shall  cause  the  offspring  of 
women  to  be  abortive  by  means  of  miscarriage,  or  by  any  other 
contrivance.    That  no  one  shall  treat  animals,  in  any  respect, 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  the  injunctions  imposed,  whether  by 
God  or  by  a  lawgiver. 

That  no  one  shall  cause  his  seed  to  disappear.  That  no  one 
shall  enslave  his  offspring.  That  no  one  shall  apply  a  false 
balance,  or  an  inadequate  measure,  or  bad  money.  That  no  one 
shall  tell  the  secrets  of  his  friends  in  a  foreign  land.  Where; 
in  God's  name,  are  these  yokes  of  oxen  of  ours  gone  ?  And 
look  also  at  other  commandments  besides  these.  It  is  or- 
dained, that  no  one  shall  fix  the  residence  of  the  parents  apart 
from  that  of  the  children,  not  even  if  they  are  prisoners  of 
war ;  nor  that  of  a  wife  from  that  of  her  husband,  even  though 
a.  man  may  be  her  master,  having  purchased  her  lawfully. 


FKAGMENTS.  2 1  7 

These  commandments  now  are  of  a  more  solemn  and  import- 
ant character,  but  there  are  others  of  apparently  a  trivial  and 
ordinary  kind.  It  is  not  lawful,  says  the  lawgiver,  to  strip  a 
nest  wholly  of  its  young ;  it  is  not  lawful  to  reject  the  sup- 
plication of  animals  of  any  kind  whatever,  which  flee  to  you 
for  refuge,  not  even  if  any  of  them  are  very  insignificant.  You 
may  say,  perhaps,  that  these  things  are  of  no  consequence 
whatever,  but  still,  at  least,  the  law  which  speaks  of  these  par- 
ticulars is  of  importance,  and  deserving  of  all  imaginable  care 
and  attention ;  and  the  declarations  are  important,  and  so  are 
the  curses  which  threaten  those  who  violate  these  laws  with 
destruction ;  and  God  looks  over  all  such  matters,  and  is  an 
avenger  and  punisher  on  every  occasion  and  in  every  place. 

And  then  after  a  few  more  sentences  he  adds, — 

And  if  it  should  happen  that  during  a  whole  day,  or  I 
should  rather  say,  not  one  day  only  but  many,  and  those  too 
not  coming  immediately  one  after  another,  but  with  intervals 
between  them,  even  intervals  of  a  week  at  a  time,  the  custom, 
as  is  always  natural,  which  is  drawn  from  ordinary  days  pre- 
vails. Do  you  not  wonder,  that  not  a  single  one  of  all  these 
commandments  has  been  violated  ?  Is  not  this  a  mark  of  great 
temperance  and  self-restraint,  derived  to  them  from  practice 
alone,  so  that  they  act  towards  one  another  with  perfect 
equality,  and  are  able  to  derive  strength  from  those  actions  if 
it  be  necessary  ?  Surely  not  so ;  but  the  lawgiver  thought 
that  it  ought  to  be  derived  from  some  great  and  admirable 
circumstance,  that  they  should  not  only  be  competent  to  do 
other  things  in  the  same  manner,  but  should  also  be  imbued 
with  a  thorough  knowledge  of  their  national  laws  and  cus- 
toms. 

What  then  did  he  do  on  this  sabbath  day  ?  he  commanded 
all  the  people  to  assemble  together  in  the  same  place,  and 
sitting  down  with  one  another,  to  listen  to  the  laws  with  order 
and  reverence,  in  order  that  no  one  should  be  ignorant  of  any- 
thing that  is  contained  in  them;  and,  in  fact,  they  do  con- 
stantly assemble  together,  and  they  do  sit  down  one  with 
another,  the  multitude  in  general  in  silence,  except  when  it  is 
customary  to  say  any  words  of  good  omen,  by  way  of  assent  to 
what  is  being  read.  And  then  some  priest  who  is  present,  or 
some  one  of  the  elders,  reads  the  sacred  laws  to  them,  and 
intcprets  each  of  them  separately  till    eventide ;    and  then 


218  pniLO  juDiEus. 

when  separate  they  depart,  having  gained  some  skill  in  the 
sacred  laws,  and  having  made  great  advances  towards  piety. 

Do  not  these  objects  appear  to  you  to  be  of  greater  im- 
portance than  any  other  pursuit  can  possibly  be?  Therefore 
they  do  not  go  to  interpreters  of  laws  to  learn  what  they  ought 
to  do ;  and  even  without  asking,  they  are  in  no  ignorance 
respecting  the  laws,  so  as  to  be  likely,  through  following  their 
own  inclinations,  to  do  wrong ;  but  if  you  violate  or  alter  any 
one  of  their  laws,  or  if  you  ask  any  one  of  them  about  their 
national  laws  or  customs,  they  can  all  tell  you  at  once,  without 
any  difficulty;  and  the  husband  appears  to  be  a  master,  en- 
dowed with  sufficient  authority  to  explain  these  laws  to  his 
wife,  a  father  to  teach  them  to  his  children,  and  a  master  to 
his  servants. 

And  again,  it  is  easy  to  speak  in  the  same  manner  with 
respect  to  the  seventh  year,  though,  perhaps,  one  is  not  to  say 
exactly  the  same  things,  for  they  do  not  abstain  from  all  w^ork 
as  they  do  on  the  sabbath  days,  only  they  leave  their  land 
fallow  till  the  next  year,  in  order  that  so  it  may  become  pro- 
ductive  ;  for  they  think  that  thus  it  becomes  much  better  after 
having  had  this  rest,  and  then  that  it  may  be  cultivated  again, 
and  not  be  dried  up  and  exhausted  by  the  uninterrupted  con- 
tinuance of  cultivation ;  and  you  may  see  that  a  similar  prac- 
tice conduces  to  strength  of  body,  for  not  only  do  intervals  of 
relaxation  contribute  to  health,  but  you  may  see  too  that  phy- 
sicians also  enjoin  a  degree  of  rest  at  times  from  w^ork ;  for 
what  is  incessant,  and  uninterrupted,  and  always  the  same,  is 
likely  to  be  injurious,  especially  in  the  case  of  hard  work,  the 
cultivation  of  the  land. 

And  a  proof  of  this  is,  that  if  any  one  were  to  recommend 
the  people  to  cultivate  the  land  itself  much  more,  and  to  add 
this  seventh  year  also,  and  should  promise  them  that  the  usual 
crops  of  fruit  should  reward  their  labours,  they  still  would  not 
adopt  his  advice,  for  they  think  that  they  are  not  alone  entitled 
to  rest  from  their  labours,  and  yet  even  if  they  were  to  do  so, 
it  would  be  nothing  strange  ;  but  they  think  that  their  land 
also  deserves  a  certain  degree  of  rest  and  exemption,  in  order 
again  to  receive  a  fresh  beginning  of  care  and  cultivation; 
since,  in  God's  name,  what  could  hinder  them  from  letting  it 
out  during  the  year  of  jubilee  thus  proposed,  and  then  receiv- 
ing itij  annual  produce  once  a  year  from  those  who  rented  and 


FRAGMENTS.  Ql9 

cultivated  it  ?  But  as  1  said  before,  they  will  not  admit  of  any 
such  expedient  in  any  manner  or  degree  whatever,  out  of  care, 
as  it  seems  to  me,  for  the  welfare  of  the  land ;  and  this  is 
truly  a  very  great  proof  of  their  humanity  and  moderation. 

For,  since  they  themselves  rest  from  their  labours  during 
that  year,  they  think  that  it  is  not  right  either  to  collect  the 
fruits  or  crops  which  are  produced,  nor  to  lay  up  any  thing 
which  has  not  accrued  to  them  from  their  own  labours  ;  but,  as 
if  God  provided  for  them  while  the  land  is  thus  enjoying  rest 
and  regulating  itself  according  to  its  will,  they  think  that  any 
one  who  chooses  or  who  is  in  want,  any  traveller  or  stranger, 
may  gather  the  fruit  that  year  with  impunity. 

However,  this  is  enough  to  say  to  you  on  these  matters  ;  for, 
as  to  the  fact  of  this  law  existing  among  them  with  regard  to 
the  seventh  day  and  seventh  year,  you  will  not  inquire  of  me, 
as  you  have  perhaps  heard  it  often  from  many  persons,  both 
physicians,  and  investigators  of  natural  history,  and  philo- 
sophers, who  discuss  this  law  about  the  seventh  year,  as  to 
the  effect  which  it  has  on  the  nature  of  the  universe,  and 
especially  on  the  nature  of  man. 

This  is  what  he  says  about  the  seventh  day. 

From  the  same  hook,  c.  8. 

I  shall  be  contented  with  the  testimony  of  Philo  on  the 
present  occasion,  which  he  has  given  about  the  matter  which  I 
am  here  explaining  in  many  passages  of  his  treatises.  And 
now  do  you  take  that  work  which  he  has  written  in  defence  of 
the  Jewish  nation,  and  read  the  following  sentences  in  it. 

But  our  lawgiver  trained  an  innumerable  body  of  his 
pupils  to  partake  in  those  things,  who  are  called  Essenes, 
being,  as  I  imagine,  honoured  with  this  appellation  because  of 
their  exceeding  holiness. 

And  they  dwell  in  many  cities  of  Judaea,  and  in  many 
villages,  and  in  great  and  populous  communities.  And  this 
sect  of  them  is  not  an  hereditary  or  family  connexion ;  for 
family  ties  are  not  spoken  of  with  reference  to  acts  voluntarily 
performed  ;  but  it  is  adopted  because  of  their  admiration  for 
virtue  and  love  of  gentleness  and  humanity.  At  all  events, 
there  are  no  children  among  the  Essenes,  no,  nor  any  youths  or 
persons  only  just  entering  upon  manhood;  since  the  dispositions 
of  all  such  persons  are  unstable  and  liable  to  change,  from  the 


220  PHILO   JUDi^EUS. 

imperfections  incident  to  their  age,  but  they  are  all  full-grown 
men,  and  even  already  declining  towards  old  age,  such  as  are 
no  longer  carried  away  by  the  impetuosity  of  their  bodily  pas- 
sions, and  are  not  under  the  influence  of  the  appetites,  but 
such  as  enjoy  a  genuine  freedom,  the  only  true  and  real 
liberty.  And  a  proof  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  their  life  of 
perfect  freedom  ;  no  one  among  them  ventures  at  all  to  acquire 
any  property  whatever  of  his  own,  neither  house,  nor  slave,  nor 
farm,  nor  flocks  and  herds,  nor  any  thing  of  any  sort  which 
can  be  looked  upon  as  the  fountain  or  provision  of  riches  ;  but 
they  bring  them  together  into  the  middle  as  a  common  stock, 
and  enjoy  one  common  general  benefit  from  it  all. 

And  they  all  dwell  in  the   same  place,  making  clubs,  and 
societies,  and  combinations,  and  unions  with  one  another,  and 
doing  every  thing  throughout  their  whole  lives  with  reference 
to  the  general  advantage ;  but  the  diff'erent  members  of  this 
body  have  difierent  employments  in  which  they  occupy  them- 
selves, and  labour  without  hesitation  and  without  cessation, 
making  no  mention  of  either  cold,  or  heat,  or  any  changes  of 
weather  or  temperature  as  an  excuse  for  desisting  from  their 
tasks.     But  before  the  sun   rises  they  betake  themselves  to 
their  daily  work,  and  they  do  not  quit  it  till  some  time  after  it 
has  set,  when  they  return  home  rejoicing  no  less  than  those 
W'ho  have  been  exercising  themselves  in  gymnastic  contests  ;  for 
they  imagine  that  whatever  they  devote  themselves  to  as  a 
practice  is  a  sort  of  gymnastic  exercise  of  more  advantage  to 
life,  and  more  pleasant  both  to  soul  and  body,  and  of  more 
enduring  benefit  and  equability,  than   mere   athletic  labours, 
inasmuch  as  such   toil    does   not  cease  to  be  practised  with 
delight  when  the  age  of  vigour  of  body  is  passed ;  for  there 
are  some  of  them  who  are  devoted  to  the  practice  of  agricul- 
ture, being  skilful  in  such  things  as  pertain  to  the  sowing  and 
cultivation  of  lands ;  others  again  are  shepherds,  or  cowherds, 
and  experienced  in  the  management  of  every  kind  of  animal ; 
some  are  cunning  in  what  relates  to  swarms  of  bees ;    others 
again  are  artisans  and  handicraftsmen,  in  order  to  guard  against 
suffering  from  the  want  of  anything  of  which  there  is  at  times 
an  actual  need  ;  and  these  men  omit  and  delay  nothing,  which 
is  requisite  for  the  innocent  supply  of  the  necessaries  of  life. 

Accordingly,  each  of  these  men,  who  differ  so  widely  in  their 
respective  employments,  when  they  have  received  their  wages 


FRAGMENTS.  221 

give  them  up  to  one  person  who  is  appointed  as  the  universal 
steward  and  general  manager ;  and  he,  when  he  has  received 
the  money,  immediately  goes  and  purchases  what  is  necessary 
and  furnishes  them  with  food  in  abundance,  and  all  other 
things  of  which  the  life  of  mankind  stands  in  need.  And  those 
who  hve  together  and  eat  at  the  same  table  are  day  after  day 
contented  with  the  same  things,  being  lovers  of  frugality  and 
moderation,  and  averse  to  all  sumptuousness  and  extravagance 
as  a  disease  of  both  mind  and  body.  And  not  only  are  their 
tables  in  common  but  also  their  dress ;  for  in  the  winter  there 
are  thick  cloaks  found,  and  in  the  summer  light  cheap  mantles, 
80  that  whoever  wants  one  is  at  liberty  without  restraint  to  go 
and  take  whichever  kind  he  chooses  ;  since  what  belongs  to 
one  belongs  to  all,  and  on  the  other  hand  whatever  belongs  to 
the  whole  body  belongs  to  each  individual. 

And  again,  if  any  one  of  them  is  sick  he  is  cured  from  the 
common  resources,  being  attended  to  by  the  general  care  and 
anxiety  of  the  whole  body.  Accordingly  the  old  men,  even  if 
they  happen  to  be  childless,  as  if  they  were  not  only  the  fathera 
of  many  children  but  were  even  also  particularly  happy  in  an 
affectionate  offspring,  are  accustomed  to  end  their  lives  in  a 
most  happy  and  prosperous  and  carefully  attended  old  age, 
being  looked  upon  by  such  a  number  of  people  as  worthy  of  so 
much  honour  and  provident  regard  that  they  think  themselves 
bound  to  care  for  them  even  more  from  inclination  than  from 
any  tie  of  natural  affection. 

Again,  perceiving  with  more  than  ordinary  acuteness  and 
accuracy,  what  is  alone  or  at  least  above  all  other  things  cal- 
culated to  dissolve  such  associations,  they  repudiate  marriage  ; 
and  at  the  same  time  they  practise  continence  in  an  eminent 
degree  ;  for  no  one  of  the  Essenes  ever  marries  a  wife,  because 
woman  is  a  selfish  creature  and  one  addicted  to  jealousy  in  an 
immoderate  degree,  and  terribly  calculated  to  agitate  and 
overturn  the  natural  inclinations  of  a  man,  and  to  mislead  him 
by  her  continual  tricks;  for  as  she  is  always  studying  deceitful 
speeches  and  all  other  kinds  of  hypocrisy,  like  an  actress  on 
the  stage,  when  she  is  alluring  the  eyes  and  ears  of  her 
j  husband,  she  proceeds  to  cajole  his  predominant  mind  after 
the  servants  have  been  deceived. 

And  again,  if  there  are  children  she  becomes  full  of  pride 
and  all  kinds  of  license  in  her  speech,  and  all  the  obscuro 


222  IHILO  JUD^UP. 

sayings  which  she  previously  meditated  in  irony  in  a  disguised 
manner  she  now  begins  to  utter  with  audacious  confidence ; 
and  becoming  utterly  shameless  she  proceeds  to  acts  of  vio- 
lence, and  does  numbers  of  actions  of  which  every  one  is  hostile 
to  such  associations ;  for  the  man  who  is  bound  under  the 
influence  of  the  charms  of  a  woman,  or  of  children,  by  the 
necessary  ties  of  nature,  being  overwhelmed  by  the  impulses 
of  affection,  is  no  longer  the  same  person  towards  others,  but  is 
entirely  changed,  having,  without  being  aware  of  it,  become  a 
slave  instead  of  a  free  man. 

This  now  is  the  enviable  system  of  life  of  these  Essenes, 
so  that  not  only  private  individuals  but  even  mighty  kings, 
admiring  the  men,  venerate  their  sect,  and  increase  their 
dignity  and  majesty  in  a  still  higher  degree  by  their  approba- 
tion and  by  the  honours  which  they  confer  on  them. 

From  the  same  hook,  c.  13 

These  things  then  are  what  may  be  said  on  the  subject  of 
the  world  having  been  created.  And  the  same  man  also  says  a 
great  number  of  very  novel  and  bold  things  in  his  treatise  on 
Providence,  on  the  subject  of  the  universe  being  governed  by 
prudence ;  first  of  all  putting  forward  the  propositions  of  the 
atheists,  and  then  proceeding  to  reply  to  each  of  them  iu 
regular  order.  And  I  will  now  proceed  to  extract  some  of  the 
arguments  which  he  adduces,  even  though  they  may  appear 
somewhat  prolix,  because  they  are  nevertheless  necessary  and 
important,  abridging  indeed  the  greater  portion  of  them.  Now 
he  conducts  his  argument  in  this  way ;  these  are  his  words. 

Do  you  say  then  that  there  is  providence  in  such  a  vast 
confusion  and  disorder  of  affairs  ?  For,  in  fact,  which  of  the 
circumstances  and  occurrences  of  human  life  is  regulated  by 
any  principle  of  order  ?  which  of  them  is  not  full  of  all  kinds 
of  irregularity  and  destruction  ?  Are  you  the  only  person  who 
is  ignorant  that  blessings  in  complete  abundance  are  heaped 
upon  the  most  wicked  and  worthless  of  mankind  ?  such,  for 
instance,  as  wealth,  a  high  reputation,  honour  in  the  eyes  of 
the  multitude,  authority  ?  moreover,  health,  a  good  condition  of 
the  outward  senses,  beauty,  strength,  and  unimpeded  enjoy- 
ment of  all  good  things,  by  means  of  an  abundance  of  supplies 
and  resources  and  preparations  of  every  kind,  and  in  conse- 
quence of  the  peaceful  good  fortune  and  good  condition  of  th  3 


FRAGMENTS.  223 

body?  But  all  the  lovers  and  practisers  of  wisdom  and 
prudence,  and  every  kind  of  virtue,  everyone  of  them  I  may 
almost  say,  are  poor,  unknown,  inglorious,  and  in  a  mean  con- 
dition. 

Having  said  thus  much  with  respect  to  the  outward  circum- 
stances of,  and  a  vast  number  of  other  things  affecting,  these 
men,  he  then  immediately  proceeds  to  refute  the  objections 
of  his  adversaries  by  the  following  arguments. 

God  is  not  a  tyrant  who  practises  cruelty  and  violence  and 
all  the  other  acts   of  insolent   authority  like  an  inexorable 
master,  but  he  is  rather  a  sovereign  invested  with  a  humane 
and  lawful  authority,  and  as  such  he  governs  all  the  heaven 
and  the  whole  world  in  accordance  with  justice.     And  there  is 
no  form  of  address  with  which  a  king  can  more  appropriately 
be  saluted  than  the  name  of  father ;  for  what,  in  human  rela- 
tionships, parents  are  to  their  children,  that  also  sovereigns  are 
to  their  states,  and  God  towards  the  world,  having  adapted 
these  two  most   beautiful  things  by  the  unchangeable  laws 
of  nature,  by  an  indissoluble  union,  namely  the  authority  of 
the  leader  with  the  anxious  care  of  a  relation ;  for  as  parents 
are  not  wholly  indifferent  to  even  ill-behaved  children,  but, 
having  compassion  on  their  unfortunate  dispositions,  they  are 
careful  and  anxious  for  their  welfare,  looking  upon  it  as  the 
act  of  relentless  and  irreconcileable   enemies  to  insult  and 
increase  their  misfortunes,  but  as  the  part  of  friends  and  rela- 
jtions  to  lighten  their  disasters :  and  indeed  in  the  excess  of 
their  liberality  they  even  give  more  to  such  children  than  to 
those  who  have  always  been  well  conducted,  knowing  well  that 
to  these  last  their  own  moderation  is  at  all  times  an  abundant 
resource  and  means   of  riches,  but  that  the  others  have  no 
)ther  hope  except  in  their  parents,  and  that  if  they  are  disap- 
)ointed  in  that  they  will  be  destitute  of  even  the  necessaiies 
)f  life. 

So  in  the  same  manner,  God,  who  is  the  father  of  all  ra- 
ional  understanding,  takes  care  of  all  those  beings  who  are 
'udovved  with  reason,  and  exercises  a  providential  power  for 
he  protection  even  of  those  who  are  living  in  a  blameable 
nanner,  giving  them  at  the  same  time  opportunity  of  correct- 
Qg  their  errors,  and  nevertheless  not  violating  the  dictates  of 
is  own  merciful  nature,  of  which  virtue  and  humanity  are  the 
egukir  attendants,  being  willing  to  have  their  dwelling  in  the 


224  pniLO  JUD/Eus. 

God-created  world  ;  this  one  argument  now,  do  thou,  0  my  soul, 
take  to  thyself,  and  store  up  within  thyself  as  a  sacred  deposit, 
and  this  other  also  as  consistent  with  and  in  perfect  harmony 
•with  it.  Do  not  ever  be  so  deceived  and  wander  from  the  truth 
to  such  a  degree  as  to  think  any  wicked  man  happy,  even 
though  he  may  be  richer  than  Crcesus,  and  more  sharp-sighted 
than  I>ynceus,  and  more  powerful  than  Milo  of  Crotena,  and 
more  beautiful  than  Ganymede, 

"  Whom  the  immortal  gods,  for  beauty's  sake, 
Did  raise  up  from  the  vile  earth  to  heaven, 
To  be  the  cup-bearer  of  mighty  Jove."  * 

Accordingly,  such  a  man,  having  shown  his  own  daemon,  I 
mean  to  say  his  own  mind,  to  be  the  slave  of  ten  thousand 
thousand  different  masters,  such  as  love,  appetite,  pleasure, 
fear,  pain,  folly,  intemperance,  cowardice,  injustice,  he  can 
never  possibly  be  happy,  even  if  the  multitude,  being  utterly 
misled  and  deprived  of  their  judgment,  were  to  think  him  so, 
being  corrupted  by  a  double  evil,  pride  and  vain  opinion,  by 
which  souls  without  ballast  must  infallibly  be  tossed  about 
and  driven  out  of  their  course ;  for  these  evils,  above  all  others, 
injure  the  chief  multitude  of  mankind. 

If,  then,  fixing  the  eyes  of  the  mind  steadily  upon  the  truth, 
you  should  be  inclined  to  contemplate  the  providence  of  God  as  far 
as  the  powers  of  human  reason  are  capable  of  doing  it,  then,  when 
you  have  attained  to  a  closer  conception  of  the  true  and  only  good, 
you  will  laugh  at  those  things  which  belong  to  men  which  you 
for  some  time  admired  ;  for  what  is  worse  is  always  honoured 
in  the  absence  of  what  is  better,  as  it  then  usurps  its  place; 
but  when  that  which  is  better  appears,  then  that  which  is 
worse  retires,  and  is  contented  with  the  second  prize.  There- 
fore, admiring  that  godlike  excellence  and  beauty,  you  will  by 
all  means  perceive  that  none  of  the  things  previously  men- 
tioned were  by  themselves  thought  worthy  of  the  better  portion 
by  God.  On  which  account  the  mines  of  silver  and  gold  are 
the  most  worthless  portion  of  the  earth,  which  is  altogether 
and  wholly  unfit  for  the  production  of  fruits  and  food  ;  for 
abundance  of  riches  is  not  like  food,  a  thing  without  which  one 
cannot  live.  And  the  one  great  and  manifest  test  of  all  these 
things  is  hunger,  by  which  it  is  seen  what  is  in  truth  reallv 
necessary  and  useful ;  for  a  person  when  oppressed  by  hungci 
*  Homer's  Iliad  xx.  234. 


• 


.^ 


FRAGMENTS.  225 

would  gladly  give  all  the  treasures  in  the  whole  world  in 
exchange  for  a  little  food  ;  but  when  there  is  an  abundance  of 
necessary  things  poured  out  in  a  plentiful  and  unlimited  sup- 
ply, and  flowing  over  all  the  cities  of  the  land,  then  we,  the 
citizens,  indulging  luxuriously  in  the  good  things  provided 
by  nature,  are  not  contented  to  stop  at  them  alone,  but  set  up 
satiated  insolence  as  the  guide  of  our  lives,  and  devoting 
ourselves  to  the  acquisition  of  silver  and  gold,  and  of  everything 
else  by  which  we  hope  to  acquire  gain,  proceed  in  everything 
like  blind  men,  no  longer  exciting  the  eyes  of  our  intellect  by 
reason  of  our  covetousness,  so  far  as  to  see  that  riches  are  but 
the  burden  of  the  earth,  and  are  the  cause  of  continual  and 
uninterrupted  war  instead  of  peace. 

Our  garments  are  indeed,  as  some  one  of  the  poets  says 
somewhere,  "  the  flower  of  the  sheep  ;"  but  with  reference  to 
the  art  displayed  in  their  manufacture,  they  are  the  praise  of 
the  weavers.  And  if  any  one  is  proud  of  any  glory  which  he 
may  have  acquired,  being  greatly  delighted  at  his  popularity 
among  worthless  people,  he  should  know  that  he  also  is  w^orth- 
less,  for  he  delights  in  them.  And  let  such  a  man  pray  to 
receive  purification  so  as  to  have  the  disease  of  his  ears  healed, 
as  it  is  through  his  ears  that  his  soul  is  affected  with  great 
diseases.  Again :  let  those  men  who  are  proud  of  their 
personal  strength  and  activity  learn  not  to  be  high-minded  on 
such  an  account,  looking  at  countless  kinds  of  both  domes- 
ticated and  wild  beasts,  which  are  also  endowed  with  great 
strength  and  power;  for  it  is  the  most  absurd  thing  imaginable 
for  one  who  is  a  man  to  pride  himself  on  the  good  qualities  of 
beasts,  and  that  too  when  the  beasts  themselves  are  thought  of 
no  importance  whatever  by  him. 

Again ':  why  should  any  man  in  his  senses  rejoice  at  beauty 

of  person,  which  a  short  period  must  extinguish  before  it  has 

flourished  for  any   great   length  of  time,   since   time  always 

obscures  its  deceitful  prime  ?  and  this  too,  when  he  sees  that 

even  in  lifeless  things  there  are  objects  of  sui-passing  beauty, 

jsuch  as  the  works  of  painters,  and  sculptors,  and  other  artists, 

lisplayed  in  paintings,  and  statues,  and  all  kinds  of  embroideiy, 

ind  weaving,  which  are  held  in  the  greatest  honour  in  Greece 

ind  in  the  countries  of  the  baibarians  in  every  city.     Of  these 

hings,  then,  as  J  have  said,  not  one  is  accounted  by  God  worthy 

>f  the  better  portion. 

VOL.  IV  e\ 


226  PHILO   JUD^US. 

And  why  should  we  wonder  if  they  are  not  highly  esteemed 
by  God?  for  they  are  not  even  by  those  men  who  are  very 
religious  and  devout,   among  whom  those   things  which  are 
really  good  and  virtuous  are  held  in  honour,  inasmuch  as  they 
have  a  good  and  well-disposed  nature,  and  have  improved  their 
natural  good  qualities  by  study  and  practice,  of  which  a  genuine 
true  philosophy  is  the  maker.     But  those  who  have  devoted 
themselves  to  a  bastard  kind  of  philosophy  have  not   even 
imitated  physicians  who  give  their  attention  to  the  body,  the 
slave  of  the  soul,  though  nevertheless  they  affirm  that  they  are 
healing  the  mistress,  that  is  to  say,  the  soul  itself ;  for  then, 
when  any  such  man  is  sick,  even  if  he  be  the  great  king  him- 
self, passing  over  all  the  colonnades,  and  the  men's  chambers, 
and  the  women's  chambers,  and  the  pictures,  and  the  silver  and 
the  gold,  whether  in  money  or  in  bullion,  and  the  vast  treasuresof 
cups  and  works  of  embroidery,  and  all  the  rest  of  the  celebrated 
ornaments  of  kings,  and  the  multitude  of  his  servants,  and  of  his 
friends,  or  relatives,  and  subjects,  and  the  chief  officers  who  are 
about  his  person,  and  his  body-guards,  they  come  up  to  his  bed- 
side, paying  no  attention  even  to  the  decorations  of  his  person, 
and  not  stopping  to  notice  with  admiration  that  his  bed  is  inlaid 
with  precious  stones,  or  that  his  coverlet  is  of  the  finest  work- 
manship and   the    most  exquisite   embroidery,   nor  that  the 
fashion  of  his  garments  is  of  superlative  beauty,  but  they  even 
pull  off  the  clothes  in  which  he  is  wrapped,  and  lay  hold  of  his 
hands,  and  press  his  veins,  and  feel  his  pulse,   and  note  its 
beating  accurately  to  see  if  it  is  in  a  healthy  condition ;  very 
often  too,  they  pull  up  his  tunic  and  feel  whether  his  stomach 
is  too  full,  whether  his  chest  is  feverish,  whether  his  heart 
beats  irregularly.     And  then,  when  they  have  ascertained  the 
symptoms,  they  apply  the  appropriate  remedies. 

And  in  like  manner,  it  would  become  philosophers  who  pro- 
fess to  be  versed  in  the  healing  science  as  applicable  to  the 
soul,  which  is  by  nature  the  dominant  part  of  the  man,  to 
despise  all  the  things  which  erroneous  opinion  raises  up  as 
objects  of  pride,  and  to  penetrate  within,  and  to  lay  their 
hands  upon  the  intellect  itself,  to  see  whether  through  passion 
its  pulses  are  of  an  uneven  rapidity  and  moving  in  an  irregular 
and  unnatural  manner,  and  to  touch  the  tongue,  and  see 
whether  it  is  rough  and  devoted  to  evil-speaking,  whether  it  is 
prostituted  to  evil  purposes  and  unmanageable ;  also  to  touch 


FRAGMENTS.  227 

the  belly,  and  see  whether  it  is  swollen  with  the  insatiable 
characteristics  of  desire,  and,  in  short,  of  any  other  passions, 
and  diseases,  and  infirmities,  and  to  examine  every  one  of 
those  feelings,  if  they  appear  to  be  in  a  state  of  confusion,  so 
that  they  may  not  be  ignorant  of  what  is  proper  to  be  applied 
to  the  soul  with  a  reference  to  its  cure. 

But  now  being  lightened  up  all  round  by  the  brilliancy  of 
external  things,  as  being  unable  to  see  that  light  which  is 
perceptible  only  by  the  intellect,  they  have  passed  their  whole 
existence  in  a  state  of  error,  not  being  able  to  penetrate  as  far 
us  royal  thought,  but  being  with  difficulty  able  to  reach  the 
outer  courts,  and  admiring  those  servants  who  stand  at  the 
gates  of  virtue,  wealth,  and  glory,  and  health,  and  other 
kindred  circumstances,  they  fifiU  down  in  adoration  before 
them.  But  as  it  would  be  an  extravagance  of  insanity  to  take 
blind  men  for  judges  of  colour,  or  deaf  men  as  judges  of  the 
sounds  of  music,  so  it  is  a  most  preposterous  act  to  take  wicked 
men  as  judges  of  real  good.  For  these  men  are  mutilated  in 
the  most  important  parts  of  themselves,  namely,  their  intellect, 
over  which  folly  has  shed  a  deep  darkness.  Do  we  then  now 
wonder  if  Socrates,  and  such  and  such  a  virtuous  man,  has  lived 
in  purity  ?  men  who  have  never  once  studied  any  of  the  means 
of  providing  themselves  with  pecuniary  resources,  and  who 
have  never,  even  when  it  was  in  their  power,  condescended  to 
accept  great  gifts  which  have  been  tendered  to  their  accepv 
ance  by  wealthy  friends  or  mighty  kings,  because  they  looked 
upon  the  acquisition  of  virtue  as  the  only  good,  the  only 
beautiful  thing,  and  have  therefore  laboured  at  that,  and  disre- 
[garded  all  other  good  things. 

And  \yho  is  there  who  would  not  disregard  spurious  good 
jthings  in  comparison  of  genuine  ones?     But  if  while  they 
Ireceived  a  mortal  body,  and  were  full  of  liability  to  all  kinds  of 
muman  disasters,  and  lived  among  such  a  number  of  unjust 
Uctions  and  unrighteous  men,  of  which  the  very  number  is  not 
basy  to  compute  accurately,  they  were  plotted  against  by  their 
|)nemies,  why  do  we  blame  nature  when  we  ought  rather  to 
.ccuse  the  barbarity  of  those  who  thus  set  upon  them  ?     For 
0  in  like  manner,  if  they  had  been  placed  in  a  pestilential 
llimute,  they  would  inevitably  have  become  sick  ;  and  wicked- 
jess  is  even  more,  or  at  all  events  not  less,  destructive  than  a 
|estilential  state  oi  the  atmosphere.  But  as  when  there  is  rain 

Q  2 


228  PIIILO  JUDvEUS. 

the  wise  man,  if  he  is  in  the  open  air,  must  inevitably  get  wet 
through,  and  if  the  cold  north  wind  blows  he  must  be 
oppressed  by  cold  and  shivering,  and  when  summer  is  at  its 
height  he  must  feel  the  heat,  for  it  is  a  law  of  nature  that  the 
bodies  of  men  should  be  simultaneously  affected  by  the  changes 
of  the  seasons ;  so  also  in  the  same  way  a  man  who  lives  in 
such  places, 

"  Where  slaughters  dire  and  famines  might  prevail, 
And  all  the  ills  which  thus  mankind  assail," 

must  inevitably  pay  the  penalty  which  such  evils  inflict  upon 
him. 

Since  in  the  case  of  Polycrates  at  least,  in  retaliation  for  the 
terrible  acts  of  injustice  and  impiety  which  he  committed, 
there  fell  upon  him  great  misery  in  his  subsequent  life  as  a 
terrible  requital  for  his  previous  good  fortune.  Add  to  this 
that  he  was  chastised  by  a  mighty  sovereign,  and  was  crucified 
by  him,  fulfilling  the  prediction  of  the  oracle :  "  I  knew," 
said  he,  "  long  before  I  took  it  into  my  head  to  go  to  consult 
the  oracle,  that  I  was  anointed  by  the  sun  and  washed  by 
Jupiter,"  for  these  enigmatical  assertions,  expressed  in  symbol- 
ical language  having  been  originally  couched  in  unintelligible 
language,  afterwards  receive  a  most  manifest  confirmation  by 
the  events  which  followed  them.  But  it  was  not  only  at  the 
end  of  his  existence,  but  indeed  during  the  whole  period  of  his 
life  from  its  earliest  commencement  that  he  was,  though  with- 
out being  aware  of  it,  making  his  soul  to  depend  wholly  on  his 
body ;  for  as  he  was  always  in  a  state  of  alarm  and  trepidation, 
he  feared  the  multitude  of  enemies  who  might  possibly  attack 
him,  being  well  assured  that  no  one  in  the  world  was  really 
well  affected  towards  him,  but  that  every  one  was  hostile  to 
him,  and  would  turn  out  implacable  enemies  if  he  should  be 
unfortunate. 

Again,  of  unsuccessful  and  yet  of  never-ending  precautions 
those  writers  who  have  written  the  history  of  Sicily  are  wit- 
nesses, for  they  say  that  the  tyrant  of  Sicily  suspected  even  his 
most  affectionately  loved  wife  ;  and  a  proof  of  this  is  that  he 
ordered  the  entrance  of  his  chamber  by  which  she  was  about 
to  have  access  to  him  to  be  sti-ewed  with  planks,  in  order  that 
she  might  never  come  upon  him  without  being  observed,  but 
that  the  noise  and  tumult  made  by  her  steppi^  on  these  boards 


II 


FRAGMENTS.  229 

might  indicate  her  approach  beforehand ;  and  besides  this  he 
compelled  her  to  come  not  only  without  her  robe,  but  even 
naked  in  every  part,  and  even  in  those  which  ought  not  to  be 
seen  by  men.  And  in  addition  to  this  he  ordered  the  whole 
of  the  flooring  along  the  road  to  be  cut  in  width  and  depth 
like  a  trench  made  by  farmers,  out  of  fear  lest  anything 
should  be  secretly  concealed  so  as  to  plot  against  him,  which 
would  inevitably  be  detected  by  the  leaps  and  long  steps 
which  a  person  coming  along  this  path  would  be  compelled  to 
take. 

Of  how  many  miseries,  then,  was  that  man  full  who  took  all 
these  precautions  and  practised  all  these  contrivances  against 
his  own  wife,  whom  he  ought  to  have  trusted  above  all  other 
human  beings?  But  he  was  like  those  men  who  scale  pre- 
cipices and  climb  over  abrupt  and  steep  mountains  for  the 
purpose  of  attaining  to  a  more  accurate  comprehension  of  the 
natures  of  things  in  heaven,  who  at  last  after  they  have  with 
great  difficulty  ascended  to  some  overhanging  ridge,  find  them- 
selves unable  to  advance  any  further  as  they  are  too  much 
exhausted  to  think  of  attempting  the  remaining  portion  of  the 
mountain,  and  also  want  courage  to  descend,  being  giddy  at 
the  sight  of  the  chasms  and  ravines  below  them ;  for  he,  being 
in  love  with  sovereign  power  as  a  godlike  thing  to  be  desired 
above  all  other  objects,  looked  upon  it  as  unsafe  either  to 
remain  where  he  was  or  to  retreat,  for  he  considered  that  if 
he  remained  where  he  was  innumerable  other  evils  would 
come  upon  him  in  rapid  and  uninterrupted  succession,  while  if 
he  decided  on  retracing  his  steps  his  very  life  would  be  in 
danger,  as  there  were  enemies  around,  if  not  as  to  their  bodies 
at  all  events  in  their  minds,  against  him. 

And  he  also  showed  the  truth  of  all  this  by  the  treatment  to 
which  he  exposed  a  friend  of  his  who  spoke  of  the  life  of  a 
tyrant  as  one  of  complete  and  absolute  happiness ;  for,  having 
invited  him  to  a  banquet  which  had  been  prepared  in  a  most 
brilliant  and  costly  manner,  he  ordered  a  sharp  sword  to  be 
suspended  over  his  head  by  a  very  fine  thread,  and  when  he, 
after  he  had  sat  down  to  the  banquet,  on  a  sudden  perceived 
it,  not  daring  to  rise  up  and  quit  his  place  for  fear  of  the 
tyrant,  and  not  being  able  to  enjoy  any  of  the  things  which 
were  prepared  out  of  fear,  he  disregarded  all  the  abundant  and 
superb  luxuries  by  which  he  was  surrounded,  and  keeping  his 


230  pniLO  JUDiEUS. 

neck  and  his  eyes  turned  upwards,  sat  in  the  expectation  of 
instant  death.* 

And  when  Dionysius  perceived  the  state  in  which  he  was, 
he  said  to  him,  "  Do  you  then  at  last  begin  to  understand  the 
true  cliaracter  of  that  illustrious  and  enviable  life  of  ours,  for 
this  is  what  it  really  is  if  a  man  chooses  to  speak  of  it  without 
flattery  or  disguise,  since  it  contains  indeed  a  great  abundance 
of  resources  and  supplies,  but  no  enjoyment  of  any  real  bless- 
ing ;  and  it  causes  its  possessor  incessant  fears  and  irremedi- 
able and  unavoidable  dangers,  and  a  disease  worse  than  the 
most  contagious  or  most  fatal  sickness,  which  is  continually 
threatening  inevitable  death.  But  the  inconsiderate  multitude, 
being  deceived  by  the  outward  brilliancy  and  splendour  of  the 
position,  are  like  people  who  are  attracted  by  showy  looking 
courtesans,  who,  concealing  their  real  deformity  under  fine 
clothes  and  golden  ornaments,  and  pencilling  their  eyes  from 
want  of  any  real  beauty,  manufacture  a  spurious  beauty  in  order 
to  lie  in  wait  for  and  catch  the  beholders. 

Now  men  who  are  placed  in  situations  of  great  prosperity 
are  full  of  such  unhappiness  as  this,  of  the  greatness  of  which 
they  themselves  are  fully  aware,  and  they  do  not  at  all  keep  it 
to  themselves,  but  like  men  who  under  compulsion  divulge 
secret  things,  they  often  utter  the  truest  possible  expressions, 
which  are  extorted  from  them  by  suffering,  living  in  the  con- 
tinual company  of  punishment  both  present  and  expected,  just 
like  cattle  who  are  being  fattened  up  for  sacrifice*,  for  they  too 

*  Horace  alludes  to  the  story  of  Damocles,  Od.  III.  i.  16. 
Districtus  ensis  cui  semper  impia 
Cervice  pendet,  non  Siculae  dapes 
Dulcem  elaborabunt  saporem, 
Non  avium  citharsque  cantus 
Somnum  reducent.     Somnus  agrestium 
Lenis  virorum  non  humiles  domes 
Fastidit. 

Which,  may  be  translated — 

"  Care  murders  sleep  ;  the  man  who's  learnt  to  dread 
The  sword  unsafely  trembling  o'er  his  head, 
In  vain  to  court  his  sad  distracted  taste 
The  table  groans  beneath  the  varied  feast. 
Sad  Philomel's  untutored  song  is  vain, 
And  vain  the  swelling  flute's  more  laboured  strain, 
To  close  his  eyes  in  sleep,  the  envied  lot 
Of  weary  peasant  in  his  humbler  cot." 


FRAGMENTS.  231 

are  treated  with  the  greatest  possible  attention  in  order  to  be 
tit  to  be  sacrificed  by  reason  of  their  fleshiness  and  good  con- 
dition. There  are  also  some  men  who  have  suffered  punish- 
ment, and  that  not  concealed,  but  visible,  and  notorious  for 
the  impiety  of  the  means  by  which  they  have  acquired  riches, 
the  names  and  numbers  of  whom  it  would  be  superfluous  to 
enumerate,  but  it  will  be  sufiBcient  to  bring  forward  one 
instance  as  a  specimen  of  the  whole. 

It  is  said,  then,  by  those  who  have  written  the  History  of 
the  Sacred  War  in  Phocis  that  as  there  was  a  law  established 
that  any  one  who  was  guilty  of  sacrilege  should  be  either 
thrown  down  a  precipice,  or  drowned  in  the  sea,  or  burnt  alive, 
that  those  men  who  had  pillaged  the  temple  at  Delphi,  by 
name  Philomelus,  and  Onomarchus,  and  Phayllus,  divided 
these  punishments  among  them,  for  that  the  first  fell  down  a 
rugged  and  precipitous  rock  and  was  dashed  to  pieces  on  the 
stones,  and  that  the  second,  when  the  horse  which  he  was 
riding  grew  restive  and  plunged  down  towards  the  sea,  was 
overwhelmed  by  the  waves,  and  so  fell  alive  into  a  devouring 
gulf;  and  Phayllus  was  wasted  away  by  a  consumptive  disease 
(for  the  way  in  which  the  story  is  told  about  him  is  twofold), 
or  else  perished  in  the  temple  at  Abse,  being  burnt  in  it  when 
it  was  destroyed  by  fire.  For  it  must  be  the  mere  spirit  of 
obstinacy  and  arguing  to  say  that  all  these  events  took  place 
by  mere  chance,  for  if  indeed  one  or  two  of  them  had  been 
punished  at  different  periods  or  by  some  other  mode  of  punish- 
ment, then  it  would  have  been  reasonable  to  impute  their  fate 
tx)  the  uncertainty  of  fortune,  but  when  they  all  died  together 
and  at  one  time,  and  by  no  other  punishment  but  by  that 
precise,  end  which  is  appointed  in  the  laws  for  the  punishment 
of  such  crimes  as  those  of  which  they  had  been  guilty,  it  is 
surely  fair  to  say  that  they  perished  by  the  direct  condemnation 
of  God. 

But  if  any  of  the  violent  men  who  are  unmentioned,  and 
who  have  at  different  times  risen  up  against  the  people  in  their 
several  states,  and  have  enslaved  not  only  other  nations,  but 
their  own  countries  too,  have  still  died  without  meeting  with 
punishment,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  in  the  first  place 
man  does  not  judge  as  God  judges,  because  we  investigate 
what  is  visible  to  ourselves,  but  he  descends  into  the  secret 
recesses  of  the  soul  without  making  any  noise,  and  there  con- 


232  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

templates  the  mind  in  the  clear  light,  as  if  in  the  sun ;  for 
stripping  off  from  it  8.11  the  ornaments  in  which  it  is  enveloped, 
and  seeing  its  devices  and  intentions  naked,  he  immediately 
distinguishes  between  the  bad  and  the  good. 

Let  not  us  then,  preferring  our  own  judgment  to  that  of 
God,  assert  that  it  is  more  unerring  or  more  full  of  wisdom 
than  his,  for  that  is  not  consistent  with  holiness ;  for  in  the 
one  there  are  many  things  which  deceive  it,  such  as  the 
treacherous  outward  senses,  the  insidious  character  of  the 
passions,  the  most  terrible  attacks  of  vice,  but  in  the  other 
there  is  nothing  which  can  at  all  conduce  to  deceit  or  error, 
but  justice  and  truth,  by  which  each  separate  action  is  deter- 
mined on,  and  in  this  way  is  naturally  rectified  in  the  most 
praiseworthy  manner. 

Do  not  thou,  then,  my  good  friend,  consider  tyrannical 
power,  that  most  unprofitable  of  all  things,  to  be  a  seasonable 
possession ;  for  neither  is  punishment  disadvantageous,  but  it 
is  either  more  beneficial,  or  at  all  events  not  injurious  to  the 
good  to  suffer  due  punishment,  on  which  account  it  is  expressly 
comprehended  in  all  laws  which  are  wisely  enacted,  and  those 
who  have  established  such  laws  are  praised  by  every  one ;  for 
what  a  tyrant  is  in  a  people,  that  is  punishment  in  a  law. 

When  therefore  a  want  and  temble  scarcity  of  virtue  seizes 
upon  cities,  and  when  a  great  abundance  of  folly  overwhelms 
everything,  then  God,  like  the  stream  of  an  overflowing  torrent, 
being  desirous  to  wash  away  all  the  power  and  impetuosity  of 
wickedness,  in  order  to  purify  our  race,  gives  vigour  and  power 
to  those  men  who  by  their  natures  are  fitted  to  exercise 
dominion,  for  without  a  stern  soul  wickedness  cannot  be  got 
rid  of.  And  just  as  cities  keep  executioners  for  the  punish- 
ment of  murderers,  and  traitors,  and  sacrilegious  persons,  not 
because  they  approve  of  the  dispositions  of  the  men,  but 
because  they  have  need  of  the  serviceable  part  of  their  minis- 
trations ;  in  the  same  manner  the  Ruler  of  this  mighty  city, 
the  world,  appoints  tyrants,  like  ordinary  executioners,  to  be 
over  those  cities  in  which  he  sees  that  violence,  and  injustice, 
and  impiety  prevail,  and  all  other  kinds  of  evils  in  abundance, 
that  he  may  by  these  means  put  an  end  to  their  existence. 
And  then  he  thinks  it  right  to  pursue  the  guilty,  as  men  who 
have  been  serving  these  vices  from  the  impulses  of  an  impure 
and  pitiless  soul,  with  every  punishment  imaginable,  as  the 


FRAGMENTS.  233 

ringleaders  ;  for  as  the  power  of  fire  when  it  has  consumed  the 
fuel  which  was  given  to  it,  at  last  consumes  itself  also,  so  also 
do  those  who  have  received  supreme  power  over  nations,  when 
they  have  exhausted  the  cities  and  rendered  them  destitute  of 
inhabitants,  at  last  perish  themselves  among  them,  suffering 
due  punishment  for  all  that  they  have  done. 

And  why  should  we  wonder  if  God  employs  the  agency  of 
tyrants  to  get  rid  of  wickedness  when  widely  diffused  over 
cities,  and  countries,  and  nations?  For  he  very  often  uses 
other  ministers,  and  himself  brings  about  the  same  end  by  his 
own  resources,  inflicting  upon  the  nation  famine,  or  pestilence, 
or  earthquakes,  or  any  other  heaven-sent  calamity,  by  which 
great  and  numerous  multitudes  perish  every  day,  and  by  which 
a  great  portion  of  the  habitable  world  is  made  desolate,  on 
account  of  his  care  for  the  preservation  of  virtue. 

Therefore  I  have  now,  as  I  conceive,  spoken  at  sufficient 
length  on  the  present  subject,  namely,  that  no  wicked  man  is 
happy,  by  which  fact  above  all  others  it  may  be  established 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  providence  ;  but  if  you  are  not 
thoroughly  convinced,  then  tell  me  boldly  what  is  the  doubt 
which  is  still  lurking  in  your  mind,  for  then  both  -of  us  by 
labouring  together  shall  be  able  to  see  clearly  what  the  real 
truth  is. 

And  after  some  more  arguments,  he  proceeds  thus : — 

God  causes  the  violent  storms  of  wind  and  rain  which  we 
see,  not  for  the  injury  of  those  who  traverse  the  sea,  as  you 
fancied,  or  of  those  who  till  the  earth,  but  for  the  general 
benefit  of  the  whole  of  the  human  race,  for  with  his  water  he 
cleanses  the  earth,  and  with  his  breezes  he  purifies  all  the 
regions  beneath  the  moon,  and  by  the  united  influence  of  both 
he  nourishes  and  promotes  the  growth  and  brings  to  perfection 
both  animals  and  plants.  x\nd  if  at  times  these  things  do 
injure  those  who  put  to  sea  or  who  till  the  land  at  unseason- 
able moments,  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  for  these  men  are 
but  a  small  portion  of  the  human  race,  and  the  care  of  God  is 
exerted  for  the  benefit  of  all  mankind. 

As,  therefore,  in  a  gymnastic  school  oil  is  placed  there  for 
the  common  benefit  of  every  one,  but  still  it  often  happens 
that  the  master  of  the  school,  by  reason  of  some  political 
necessity  changes  the  arrangement  of  the  usual  hours  of 
exercise,  by  which  means  some  of  those  who  wish  to  anoint 


J)34  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

themselves  come  too  late;  in  like  manner  God,  who  takes 
care  of  the  whole  world  as  if  it  were  a  city  committed  to  his 
char^^e,  does  sometimes  cause  the  summer  to  resemble  winter, 
and  winter  to  assume  the  characteristics  of  spring,  for  the 
common  benefit  of  the  universe,  even  though  some  captains  of 
ships,  or  some  cultivators  of  the  ground,  may  very  likely  be 
injured  by  this  irregularity  of  the  seasons.  Therefore  He, 
beincr  aware  that  the  occasional  interchanges  of  the  elements 
with  one  another,  out  of  which  the  world  was  made,  and  of 
which  it  consists,  are  a  work  of  the  greatest  importance  and 
necessity,  supplies  them  without  allowing  anything  to  be  an 
obstacle  to  them  ;  and  frost  and  snow-storms,  and  other  things 
of  that  kind,  follow  the  cooling  of  the  air.  And,  again,  light- 
nings and  thunders  arise  from  the  collision  and  repercussion 
of  the  clouds,  none  of  which  things  are  perhaps  effected  by  any 
immediate  exertion  of  providence,  but  the  rains  and  winds  are 
the  causes  of  existence,  and  nourishment,  and  growth  to  all 
things  which  are  upon  the  earth,  and  these  phenomena  are  the 
natural  consequences  of  those  others 

For  just  as  it  often  happens,  when  the  master  of  a  gymnas- 
tic school,  out  of  rivalry,  has  gone  to  extravagant  expense,  then 
some  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  all  that  is  becoming,  having 
been  bespattered  with  oil  instead  of  water,  let  all  the  drops 
from  them  fall  upon  the  boards,  and  then  a  most  slippery  mud 
is  the  result :  nevertheless  a  man,  whose  appreciations  were 
just  would  not  say  that  the  hard  and  the  slippery  state  of  the 
ground  was  caused  by  the  intention  of  the  master  of  the 
school,  but  that  these  things  had  resulted  accidentally,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  abundant  quantity  of  the  things  supplied. 
Again,  the  rainbow,  and  the  halo,  and  all  other  things  of  that 
kind,  are  natural  consequences  of  those  things  becoming 
mingled  with  the  clouds,  not  being  occurrences  which  lead 
and  influence  nature,  but  being  the  results  and  consequences 
of  the  operations  of  nature. 

Not  but  what  these  very  things  themselves  do  also  afford 
some  signs  of  great  importance  to  wise  men,  for,  guiding 
their  conjectures  by  them,  they  predict  calms  and  storms  of 
wind,  and  fine  weather,  and  tempests.  Do  you  not  see  the 
porticoes  which  embellish  the  cities  ?  the  greater  part  of  these 
look  towards  the  south,  in  order  that  those  who  walk  under 


FRAGMENTS.  235 

them  may  be  warm  in  the  winter,  and  may  be  cool  in  the 
summer. 

There  is  also  another  thing  which  does  not  happen  through 
the  intention  of  Him  who  made  it,  and  what  is  this  ?  the 
shadows  which  fall  from  the  feet  indicate  the  hours  to  our 
experience.  And  again,  fire  is  a  most  important  work  of 
nature,  but  the  consequence  of  fire  is  smoke,  and  nevertheless 
even  this  too  at  times  is  of  some  service.  At  all  events  in 
the  heat,  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  when  the  fire  is  rendered 
invisible  by  the  brilliancy  of  the  beams  of  the  sun,  the  ap- 
proach of  enemies  is  indicated  by  the  smoke,  and  the  principle 
which  causes  the  rainbow  is  also  the  same  which,  in  some 
degree,  regulates  eclipses. 

For  eclipses  are  a  natural  consequence  of  the  rules  which 
regulate  the  divine  natures  of  the  sun  and  moon ;  and  they 
are  indications  either  of  the  impending  death  of  some  king,  or 
of  the  destruction  of  some  city,  as  Pindar  also  has  told  us  in 
enigmatical  terms,  alluding  to  such  events  as  the  conse- 
quences of  the  omens  which   I  have  now  been  mentioning. 


• 


*  This  theory  of  the  eclipses  of  the  sun  and  other  natural  prodigies 
being  prophetic  of  events  on  earth,  is  expressed  by  Virgil  in  a  passage 
of  the  most  exquisite  beauty  in  reference  to  Caesar's  death.  Georg.  i. 
462. 

Denique,  quid  vesper  serus  vehat,  unde  serenas 

Ventus  agat  nubes,  quid  cogitet  humidus  auster, 

Sol  tibi  signa  dabit.     Solem  quis  dicere  falsum 

Audeat  ?     Ille  etiam  csecos  instare  tumultus 

Sffipe  monet,  fraudemque  et  operta  tumescere  bella. 

Ille  etiam  extincto  miseratus  Csesare  Romam, 

Quum  caput  obscura  nitidum  ferrugine  texit 

Impiaque  asternam  timuerunt  secula  uoctem. 

Tempora  quamquam  illo  tellus  quoque,  et  aequora  ponti, 

Obscajnique  canes,  importuna;que  volucres 

Sigiia  dabaut.     Quoties  Cyclopum  effervere  in  agros 

Vidimus  undantem  ruptis  fornacibus  ^tnam, 

Flammarumque  globes,  liquefactaque  volvere  saxa  ! 

Armorum  sonitum  toto  Germania  coelo 

Audiit :  insolitis  tremuerunt  motibus  Alpes. 

Vox  quoque  per  lucos  volgo  exaudita  silentis 

Ingeus  :  et  simulacra  modis  pallentia  miris 

Visa  sub  obscuiiim  noctis  :  pecudesque  locuta?, 

Infandum  !  sistunt  amues,  terra^que  dehiscunt, 

Et  mccstum  inlacrimat  templis  ebur,  araque  sudant. 

Proluit  insano  contorquens  vovtice  silvas 

Fluviorum  rex  Eridanus,  camposque  per  omnia 


236  PHILO  JUDJEUS. 

And  the  circle  of  the  Milky  Way  partakes  of  the  same 
natural  essences  with  the  other  stars  ;  but  merely  the  fact  that 
it  is  hard  to  account  for,  is  no  reason  that  those  who  are  ac- 


Cum  stabulia  armenta  tulit.     Nee  tempore  eodem 
Tristibus  aut  extis  flbrae  adparere  minaces, 
Aut  puteis  manare  cruor  cessavit  :  et  altce 
Per  noctem  resonare,  lupis  ululantibus,  urbes  : 
Non  alias  coelo  ceciderunt  plura  sereno 
Fulgura  :  nee  diri  toties  arsere  cometge. 
Ergo  iuter  sese  paribus  eoncurrere  telis 
Romanas  aeies  iterum  videre  Philippi. 

Or  as  it  is  translated  by  Dryden — 

"  The  unerring  sun  by  certain  signs  declares 
What  the  late  eve  or  early  morn  prepares, 
And  when  the  south  projects  a  stormy  day, 
And  when  the  clearing  north  will  puff  the  clouds  away. 
The  sun  reveals  the  secrets  of  the  sky, 
And  who  dares  give  the  source  of  light  the  lie  ? 
The  change  of  empires  often  he  declares, 
Fierce  tumults,  hidden  treasons,  open  wars. 
He  first  the  fate  of  Cajsar  did  foretell, 
And  pitied  Rome,  when  Rome  in  Caesar  fell, 
In  iron  clouds  concealed  the  public  light. 
And  impious  mortals  feared  eternal  night. 
Nor  was  the  fact  foretold  by  him  alone, 
Nature  herself  stood  forth  and  seconded  the  sun. 
Earth,  air,  and  seas  with  prodigies  were  signed, 
And  birds  obscene  and  howling  dogs  divined  ; 
What  rocks  did  Etna's  bellowing  mouth  expire 
From  her  torn  entrails  !  and  what  floods  of  fire. 
What  clanks  were  heard  in  German  skies  afar 
Of  arms  and  ai'mies  rushing  to  the  war. 
Dire  earthquakes  rent  the  solid  Alps  below, 
And  from  their  summits  shook  the  eternal  snow. 
Pale  spectres  in  the  close  of  night  were  seen, 
And  voices  heard  of  more  than  mortal  men. 
In  silent  groves  dumb  sheep  aijd  oxen  spoke. 
And  streams  ran  backward  and  their  beds  forsook ; 
The  yawning  earth  disclosed  the  abyss  of  hell, 
The  weeping  statues  did  the  wars  foretell, 
And  holy  sweat  from  brazen  idols  fell. 
Then  rising  in  his  might,  the  king  of  floods 
Rushed  tiirough  the  forests,  tore  the  lofty  woods, 
And  rolling  o  awards,  with  a  sweepy  sway 
Bore  houses,  lands,  and  labouring  hinds  away. 
Blood  sprang  from  wells,  wolves  howled  in  turns  by  night, 
And  boding  victims  did  the  priests  affright. 


FRAGMENTS.  237 

customed  to  investigate  the  principles  of  nature  should  shrink 
from  examining  into  it ;  for  the  discovery  of  those  things  is 
most  beneficial,  and  the  investigation  of  them  is  intrinsically 
most  delightful  for  its  own  sake,  to  those  who  are  fond  of 
learning. 

For  as  the  sun  and  moon  exist  in  consequence  of  Provi- 
dence, so  also  do  all  things  in  heaven,  even  though  we  are 
unable  to  trace  out  accurately  the  respective  natures  and  pow- 
ers of  each,  and  are,  therefore,  reduced  to  silence  about  them ; 
and  earthquakes,  and  pestilences,  and  the  fall  of  thunderbolts, 
and  things  of  that  kind,  are  said  indeed  to  be  sent  by  God, 
but,  in  reality,  they  are  not  so,  for  God  is  absolutely  not  the 
cause  of  any  evil  whatever  of  any  kind,  but  the  natural  changes 
of  the  elements  produce  these  effects,  not  as  circumstances 
which  guide  nature,  but  as  those  which  are  followed  by 
necessary  results,  and  which  do  themselves  follow  naturally 
upon  their  antecedent  causes.  And  if  some  people,  who  think 
themselves  entitled  to  immunity  meet  with  some  injury 
from  these  things,  they  are  still  not  to  find  fault  with  their 
management  and  dispensation ;  for,  in  the  first  place,  it  does 
not  follow,  that  if  some  persons  are  reckoned  virtuous  among 
men,  they  are  so  in  real  truth ;  since  the  criteria  by  which 
God  judges  are  far  more  accurate  than  any  of  the  tests  by 
which  the  human  mind  is  guided.  And,  in  the  second  place, 
prophetic  wisdom  loves  to  contemplate  those  things  in  the 
world  which  are  of  the  most  comprehensive  nature,  as  in  the 
case  of  monarchies,  and  in  the  governments  of  armies,  we  see 
that  it  is  not  any  obscure,  ignoble,  or  chance  person  who  is 
appointed  to  govern  the  cities  or  the  armies. 

And  some  persons  say  that  as  on  occasion  of  the  slaying  of 
tyrants,  it  is  lawful  that  their  relations  also  should  be  put  to 
death,  in  order  that  transgressions  may  be  checked  by  the  ter- 
rible magnitude  of  the  punishment  inflicted  :  in  like  manner 
in  pestilential  diseases,  it  is  necessary  that  some  of  those  who 
ire  not  guilty  should  be  involved  in  the  destruction,  in  order 

Such  peals  of  thunder  never  poured  from  high, 

Nor  forky  lightnings  flashed  from  such  a  sullen  sky ; 

Red  meteor-  ran  across  the  ethereal  space, 

Stars  disappeared  and  comets  took  their  place. 

For  this  the  Emathian  plains  once  more  were  strewed 

With  Roman  bodies,  and  just  heaven  thought  good 

To  fatten  twice  those  fields  with  Roman  blood." 


238  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

that  others  who  are  at  a  distance  may  learn  moderation.  Besides 
that,  it  is  inevitable  that  those  who  are  exposed  to  a  pesti- 
lential atmosphere  must  become  diseased  just  as  all  persons 
who  are  exposed  to  a  storm  on  board  a  ship  must  be  all 
exposed  to  equal  danger.  But  those  wild  beasts  which  are 
courageous  have  been  created ;  for  we  must  not  suppress  the 
truth  (as  if  one  were  to  anticipate  the  defence  likely  to  be 
made  by  a  man  of  powerful  eloquence  and  tare  it  to  pieces  be- 
forehand), in  order  that  men  may,  by  practising  against  them, 
acquire  hardihood  for  the  contests  of  war ;  for  gymnastic  exer- 
cises and  continued  hunting  train  men  and  inure  their  souls 
in  a  greater  degree  even  than  their  bodies  to  rely  upon  their 
own  courage,  and  energy,  and  strength,  so  as  to  disregard  the 
sudden  attacks  of  their  enemies. 

But  those  men  who  are  of  peaceable  character  are  at  liberty 
to  keep  themselves  not  only  within  their  walls,  but  also  even 
within  tents,  and  there  to  live  in  privacy,  safe  from  the  designs 
of  any  enemies,  having  vast  and  countless  herds  of  domestic 
animals  to  help  their  enjoyment ;  since  boars  and  lions,  and 
animals  of  that  kind,  are  by  their  own  instinct  driven  to  a  dis- 
tance from  cities,  not  being  inclined  to  expose  themselves  to 
danger  in  consequence  of  the  devices  of  men.     And  if  any 
men,  being  influenced  by  a  spirit  of  laziness  and  indolence, 
living  without  arms  and  without  preparation,  dwell  fearlessly 
among  the  haunts  of  wild  beasts,  then  if  anything  happens  to 
them  they  must   blame  not  nature  but  themselves,  because 
when  they  might  have  guarded  against  any  such   disasters, 
they  have  neglected  them.     Accordingly,  before  now,  I  have 
seen  at  the  horse-races  some  persons  acting  in  a  most  careless 
manner,  who,  when  they  ought  to  have  sat  still  and  to  have 
beheld  the  races  in  an  orderly  manner,  standing  in  the  middle 
have  been  knocked  down  by  the  horses'  feet  and  by  the  wheels, 
and  have  met  with  a  proper  reward  for  their  folly. 

We  have  now,  then,  said  enough  on  this  subject. 

But  of  reptiles,  those  which  are  venomous  have  not  been 
called  into  existence  by  an  immediate  providence,  but  by  the 
natural  consequences  of  events,  as  I  said  before ;  for  they  are 
brought  into  life  when  the  moisture  which  is  in  them  changes 
to  a  more  violent  heat ;  and  some  are  vivified  by  putrefaction, 
as,  for  instance,  the  putrefaction  of  meat  produces  maggots,  and 
that  which  is  caused  by  perspiration  produces  lice ;   but  all 


FRAGMENTS.  239 

those  which  are  produced  out  of  a  kindred  substance,  and 
which  have  their  generation  in  accordauce  with  the  usual 
spermatic  principles  which  I  have  mentioned  before,  are  very 
naturally  ascribed  to  an  immediate  providence.  And  I  have 
also  heard  two  accounts  given  of  them  as  having  been  created 
for  the  advantage  of  mankind,  which  I  should  not  think  it  well 
to  conceal.     Now  one  of  them  is  the  following. 

Some  persons  have  said  that  venomous  animals  contribute 
greatly  to  many  of  the  objects  of  physicians,  and  that  those 
who  reduce  that  science  to  a  regular  system  use  them  in  a 
proper  manner,  and,  acting  with  great  wisdom  and  prudence, 
have  discovered  antidotes,  so  as  to  be  able  to  contribute  to  the 
unexpected  safety  of  those  who  were  in  the  greatest  possible 
danger ;  and  even  at  the  present  time  one  may  see  those 
persons  who  apply  themselves  to  the  study  of  medicine,  in  a 
careful  and  diligent  manner,  using  all  these  animals  and  plants 
in  a  most  skilful  manner  in  the  composition  of  drugs. 

The  other  account  has  no  reference  to  the  practice  of  phy- 
sicians, but  only  as  it  would  seem  to  the  studies  of  philosophers. 
For  it  says  that  all  these  things  have  been  prepared  by  God  as 
engines  of  punishment  against  offenders,  .just  as  generals  and 
rulers  prepare  halters  and  chains.  On  which  account,  though 
they  are  quiet  at  other  times,  they  are  brought  out  with  great 
power  in  the  case  of  people  who  have  been  condemned,  and 
whom  nature  in  her  incorruptible  tribunal  has  sentenced  to 
deatii ;  for  that  they  lurk  in  secret  holes  and  in  houses,  is  a 
falsehood :  for  it  is  seen  that  these  creatures  flee  out  of  the 
cities  into  the  fields  and  into  desert  places,  to  avoid  man  as 
their  master.  Not  but  what,  if  this  is  true,  there  is  a  certain 
sense  and  principle  in  it ;  for  rubbish  is  heaped  up  in  recesses  : 
and  quantities  of  sweepings,  and  refuse,  and  such  things,  are 
what  venomous  reptiles  love  to  lurk  in,  besides  the  fact  that 
their  smell  has  an  attractive  power  over  them. 

Again,  if  swallows  live  among  us,  it  is  not  at  all  strange,  for 
we  abstain  from  hunting  them  ;  and  a  desire  of  safety  is  im- 
planted not  only  in  the  souls  of  rational  creatures,  but  also  in 
those  of  irrational  animals. 

But  of  those  animals  which  tend  to  our  enjoyment,  there  is 
not  one  which  lives  with  us  by  reason  of  the  designs  which  we 
form  against  them,  except  that  some  do  live  with  those  nations 
to  whom  the  use  of  them  is  forbidden  by  the  law.     There  is  a 


240  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

city  of  Syria,  on  the  sea  shore,  Ascalon  by  name  :  when  I  was 
there,  at  the  time  when  I  was  on  my  journey  towards  the 
temple  of  my  native  land  for  the  purpose  of  offering  up  prayers 
and  sacrifices  therein,  I  saw  a  most  incalculable  number  of 
pigeons  on  the  roads  and  about  every  house  ;  and  when  I 
inquired  the  cause  of  their  being  there  in  such  numbers,  they 
said  that  it  was  not  lawful  to  catch  them,  for  that  the  use  of 
them  had  been  prohibited  to  the  inhabitants  from  the  earliest 
ages  ;  and  so  the  bird  had  become  so  thoroughly  tame  through] 
fearlessness,  that  it  not  only  hovered  about  the  roofs  and  came; 
into  the  houses,  but  approached  their  tables  also,  and  grewj 
luxurious  in  the  alliance  which  it  had  thus  formed. 

And  in  Egypt  we  may  see  a  still  more  marvellous  thing  >: 
for  the  crocodile  is  the  most  odious  of  all  animals,  and  one| 
addicted  to  devour  man ;  and  it  is  born  and  brought  up  in  thei 
most  sacred  way,  and  although  residing  in  the  depths,  it  feels 
the  benefits  which  it  receives  from  mankind  ;  for  in  those  tribes,: 
among  which  it  is  honoured,  it  multiplies  in  the  greatest  de-" 
gree,  but  among  those  who  injure  it  it  never  appears  at  all: 
so  that  tliere  are  places   where  even  the  most  timid  persons 
when  sailing  by  leap  out  of  their  ships  and  swim  about  with 
their  children. 

And  in  the  country  of  the  Cyclops,  since  the  race  of  these 
men  is  a  fabulous  invention,  there  is  no  eatable  fruit  whatever 
produced  except  such  as  is  raised  from  seed  and  cultivated  by 
husbandmen,  just  as  nothing  is  produced  from  that  which  does 
not  exist;  but  we  must  not  accuse  Greece  as  being  sterile  and 
unproductive,  for  there  is  a  great  deal  of  deep  and  rich  soil  in 
it ;  and  if  the  land  of  the  barbarians  is  superior  in  fruitfulness, 
though  it  is  superior  in  the  food  which  it  produces,  it  is  inferior 
in  the  men  who  are  nourished  by  the  food,  and  for  whose  sake 
the  food  is  produced. 

For  Greece  is  the  only  country  which  really  produces  man, 
that  heavenly  plant,  that  divine  oflfshort,  producing  that  most 
accurately  refined  reason  which  is  appropriated  by  and  akin 
to  knowledge ;  and  the  cause  is  this,  it  is  the  nature  of  the 
intellect  to  be  rendered  acute  by  the  lightness  of  the  air ;  on 
which  account  Heraclitus  said  with  great  propriety,  "  Where 
the  soil  is  dry,  there  the  soul  is  most  wise  and  most  excellent;" 
and  iiiy  one  may  conjecture  this  from  the  fact,  that  men  who 
are  soler  and  contented  with  a  little  are  wise,  and  that  those 


FRAGMENTS.  241 

who  are  continually  filling  themselves  with  meat  and  drink 
are  the  least  sensible,  as  if  their  reasoning  faculties  were 
drowned  by  the  quantity  which  they  swallow. 

And  on  this  account  we  see,  in  the  countries  of  the  bar- 
barians, trees  and  plants  grow  to  the  greatest  possible  size, 
by  reason  of  the  abundance  of  nourishment  which  they  receive  ; 
and  we  see  too,  that  the  irrational  animals  which  are  found  in 
these  regions  are  the  most  prolific  of  any,  but  the  mind  is  not 
so,  or,  at  all  events,  it  is  so  in  a  very  slight  degree,  because  it 
is  elevated  and  raised  out  of  the  aether  itself,  while  the  inces- 
sant and  uninterrupted  evaporations  of  earth  and  water  have 
freely  boiled  over  it.  Again,  the  different  kinds  of  fish,  and 
birds,  and  terrestrial  animals,  are  not  grounds  for  accusing 
nature,  which  invites  us  to  pleasure  by  those  means,  but  are  a 
ten'ible  reproach  to  us  for  our  intemperate  use  of  them,  for  it 
was  necessary,  for  the  due  completion  of  the  universe,  in  order 
that  there  should  be  order  and  regularity  in  every  portion  of 
it,  that  there  should  be  produced  every  possible  species  of 
animal.  But  it  was  not  necessary  that  that  animal,  which  of 
all  others  is  most  akin  to  wisdom,  namely,  man,  should  rush 
with  such  eagerness  to  the  enjoyment  of  it,  as  to  change  his 
nature  into  something  resembling  the  ferocity  of  wild  beasts ; 
on  which  account,  even  up  to  the  present  time,  those  who  have 
any  regard  for  temperance  entirely  abstain  from  such  things, 
eating  only  vegetables,  and  herbs,  and  the  fruits  of  trees,  as 
the  most  delicious  and  wholesome  food. 

And  these  men  are  instructors  for  those  who  look  upon  the 
practice  of  eating  such  animals  to  be  in  accordance  with 
nature,  and  correct  them,  and  are  lawgivers  to  their  respective 
cities,  being  men  who  take  care  to  check  the  immoderate 
vehemence  of  the  appetites,  and  who  do  not  permit  the 
unrestrained  use  of  everything  to  everybody. 

Again,  if  roses,  and  crocuses,  and  all  the  other  beautiful 
Ivariety  of  flowers  which  we  see,  contribute  to  health,  it  would 
not  follow  that  they  all  contribute  to  pleasure ;  for  the  inde- 
scribable variety  of  them  makes  the  powers  of  some  of  them 
Tiore  conspicuous  than  those  of  othei^s,  just  as  there  is  a  com- 
ningling  of  male  and  female,  contributing  to  the  generation  of 
m  animal ;  neither  of  them  being  calculated,   by  itself,   to 
Droduce  the  effect  which  the  two  produce  in  combination. 
Ihese  things  are  said,  in  a  most  convincing  manner,  with 
VOL.  IV.  R 


'242  PHILO   JUD^US. 

reference  to  the  rest  of  the  questions  raised  by  you,  being  quite 
sufficient  to  produce  conviction  in  the  minds  of  all  who  are  not 
obstinately  contentious  on  the  subject  of  God  taking  great  care 
of  human  affairs. 


FRAGMENTS, 

EXTRACTED 

FROM  THE   PARALLELS   OF  JOHIS"  OF  DAMASCUS. 

About  the  unstable  and  changeable  condition  of  human  affairs. 

Page  326.  C.  If  one  is  to  tell  the  plain  truth,  man  is 
without  real  power  in  anything,  never  taking  a  firm  hold  of 
anything.  I  do  not  mean  merely  of  common  things,  but  not 
even  of  those  which  concern  himself;  neither  of  health,  nor  of 
a  good  condition  of  the  outward  senses,  nor  of  soundness  in 
respect  of  the  other  parts  of  his  body,  nor  of  his  voice,  nor  of 
his  presence  of  mind ;  for  as  to  wealth,  or  glory,  or  friends,  or 
power,  or  all  the  other  things  which  depend  on  fortune,  who  is 
there  who  does  not  know  how  thoroughly  unstable  they  are  ? 
So  that  we  must  of  necessity  confess  that  the  supreme  power 
over  everything  belongs  to  one  being  alone,  the  true  Lord  of 
all  existing  things. 

About  impious  men,  sinners,  <&c. 

P.  341.  D.  If  you  wish  to  be  governed  under  God  as  your 
king,  take  care  not  to  sin  ;  but  if  you  commit  sin,  how  can  you 
be  under  the  government  of  God  as  your  king  ? 

About  those  people  who  have  renounced  such  and  such  a  line  of 
conduct,  and  then  turning  back  again,  have  adopted  that  very 
line  which  they  had  renounced. 

P.  343.  D.  Some  men,  making  improvement,  have  returned 
back  to  virtue  before  coming  to  the  end,  the  ancient  principle 
of  oligarchy  having  destroyed  the  principle  of  aristocracy  lately 
engendered  in  the  soul,  which  having  been  quiet  for  a  little 
while,  has  subsequently  come  up  over  again  with  greater  power 
than  before. 

Ibid.  When  a  man  rightly  establishes  himself  in  a  virtuous 
life,  with  meditation,  and  practice,  and  good  government,  and 


FRAGMENTS.  243 

when  having  been  known  by  all  men  as  a  pious  man  and  one 
who  fears  God,  he  falls  into  sin,  that  is  a  great  fall,  for  he  has 
ascended  up  to  the  height  of  heaven,  and  fallen  down  into  the 
abyss  of  hell. 

About  resurrection  and  judgment. 

P.  349.  A.  It  is  not  possible  with  God  that  a  wicked  man 
should  lose  his  good  reward  for  a  single  good  thing  which  he 
may  have  done  among  a  great  number  of  evil  actions ;  nor,  on 
the  other  hand,  that  a  good  man  should  escape  punishment, 
and  not  suffer  it,  if  among  many  good  actions  he  has  done 
wickedly  in  anything,  for  it  is  infallibly  certain  that  God  dis- 
tributes everything  according  to  a  just  weight  and  balance. 

Ibid.  B.  The  mind  is  the  witness  to  each  individual  of  the 
things  which  they  have  planned  in  secret,  and  conscience  is  an 
incorruptible  judge,  and  the  most  unerring  of  all  judges. 

About  those  who  are  rided. 

P.  359.  A.  He  who  has  learnt  how  to  submit  to  be  ruled, 
immediately  learns  how  to  rule  others  ;  for  even  if  a  man  were 
invested  with  the  supreme  power  over  all  the  earth  and  all  the 
sea,  he  would  not  be  a  true  ruler  unless  he  had  also  learnt  and 
been  previously  taught  to  submit  to  the  rule  of  others. 

About  anarchy. 

P.  350.  D.  Alas,  how  many  and  great  evils  are  produced 
by  anarchy !  Famine,  war,  the  devastation  of  lands,  the 
deprivation  of  money,  abductions,  fears  of  slavery,  and  death. 

About  the  foolish  and  seriseless  man,  <£x. 

P.  862.  E.  No  wicked  man  is  rich,  not  even  though  he 
should  be  the  owner  of  all  the  mines  in  the  whole  world  ;  but 
all  foolish  men  are  poor.  Every  foolish  man  is  straitened, 
being  oppressed  by  covetousness,  and  ambition,  and  a  love  of 
pleasure,  and  things  of  that  sort,  which  do  not  permit  the 
mind  to  dwell  at  ease  or  to  enjoy  plenty  of  room. 

P.  363.  A.  There  is  no  greater  evil  to  a  man  than  folly, 
and  the  being  deprived  of  the  proper  use  of  his  reasoning 
powers  and  intellect. 

P.  303.  A.  Ignorance  is  the  cause  of  disease  and  destruc- 
tion. 

B  2 


244  PHILO  JUDiEtJS. 

About  deceit  affecting  the  management  of  a  household. 

P.  367.  D.  Every  stratagem  is  not  blameable,  since 
guardians  of  the  night  appear  to  act  properly  when  they  lie  in 
wait  for  robbers,  and  generals  when  they  form  ambuscades 
against  the  enemy,  whom  they  cannot  catch  without  a  strata- 
gem ;  and  the  same  principle  is  applicable  to  what  are  called 
manoeuvres,  and  to  the  artifices  practised  in  the  contests  of 
wrestlers,  for  in  such  cases  deceit  is  accounted  honourable. 

About  impossible  things. 

P.  370.  B.  It  is  as  impossible  that  the  love  of  the  world 
can  co-exist  with  the  love  of  God,  as  for  light  and  darkness  to 
co-exist  at  the  same  time  with  one  another. 

About  holy  m£n. 

P.  372.  E.  The  happy  nature  is  that  which  rejoices  on 
every  occasion,  and  which  is  not  discontented  with  anything 
whatever  which  exists  in  the  world,  but  is  pleased  with  what- 
ever happens,  as  being  good,  and  beautiful,  and  expedient. 

About  leisure  and  quiet, 

P.  376.  A.  The  wise  man  endeavours  to  secure  quiet  and 
leisure,  and  periods  of  rest  from  work,  that  he  may  devote 
himself  peacefully  to  the  meditations  on  divine  matters. 

About  evU-speakhig. 

P.  379.  D.  Foul  speakers  and  random  accusers,  who  seek 
to  make  a  display  of  their  art  with  vain  words,  being  slow  to 
learn  w4iat  is  good,  are  very  quick  and  ready  at  learning  what 
is  of  the  opposite  character. 

About  counsel. 

P.  397.  D.  Everything  which  is  not  done  with  reason  is 
discreditable,  just  as  what  is  done  with  reason  is  beautiful. 

About  old  men. 

P.  404.  C.     Old  age  is  an  unruffled  harbour. 
Ibid.     Old  age  is  the  time  when  the  vigour  of  the  body  is 
passed  by ;  the  period  when  the  passions  can  be  checked. 

About  gymnasia. 
P.  405.  D.     Continued  practice  makes  knowledge  firm,  just 


FRAGMENTS.  245 

as  want  of  practice  engenders  ignorance.     And,  again,  practice 
in  any  matter  increases  experience. 

Ibid.     Study  is  the  nurse  of  knowledge. 

About  calumny. 

P.  436.  D.  Calumniators  and  men  discarded  from  the 
divine  grace,  who  are  afflicted  with  the  same  evil  disposition 
of  calumny  with  him,  are  in  all  respects  hated  and  detested  by 
God,  and  removed  to  a  distance  from  all  happiness. 

Ibid.  What  can  be  worse  than  calumny?  for  it  seduces 
the  ears  and  perplexes  the  minds  of  those  who  listen  to  it,  and 
it  makes  them  brutal  and  always  on  a  watch  for  evil,  like  men 
engaged  in  hunting ;  but  those  who  are  well  ballasted  and 
restrained  by  prudent  reason,  hate  the  man  who  utters  calum- 
nies more  than  him  against  whom  they  are  uttered,  reproving 
and  seeking  to  check  all  desire  of  blaming  others  until  it  be 
either  proved  by  evidence  or  demonstrated  by  undeniable 
proof. 

Abcnit  justice  and  virtue. 

P.  438.  D.  If  any  one  embraces  all  the  virtues  with 
earnestness  and  sobriety,  he  is  a  king,  even  though  he  may  be 
in  a  private  station. 

About  voluntary  and  involuntary  sins. 

P.  526.  B.  As  to  sin  intentionally  is  unjust,  so  to  sin 
unintentionally  and  out  of  ignorance  is  not  at  once  justifiable, 
ibut  perhaps  it  is  something  between  the  two,  that  is  between 
I  righteousness  and  unrighteousness,  and  is  of  what  some  persons 
call  an  indifferent  character,  for  no  sin  can  be  an  act  of 
j!  righteousness. 

About  initiation  into  divine  mysteries. 

P.  533.  C,  It  is  not  lawful  to  speak  of  the  sacred  mysteries 
|:o  the  uninitiated. 

About  the  sea. 

P.  551.  D.     It  is  proper  to  marvel  at  the  sea,  by  means  of 
Which  countries  requite  one  another  for  the  good  things  which 
hey  receive  from  each  other,  and  by  which  they  receive  what 
hey  are  in  need  of,  and  export  what  they  have  a  sunertluity  of 


246  pniLo  JUDiEus. 

About  equality. 

P.  556.  D.  To  give  equal  things  to  unequal  people  is  an 
action  of  the  greatest  injustice. 

About  physicians  and  medical  science. 

A  good  physician  would  not  be  inclined  to  apply  every  kind 
of  salutary  medicine  at  once  and  on  the  same  day  to  a  patient, 
as  he  would  know  that  by  such  a  course  he  would  be  doing 
him  more  harm  than  good,  but  he  would  measure  out  the 
proper  opportunities,  and  then  give  saving  medicines  in  a 
seasonable  manner ;  and  he  would  apply  different  remedies  at 
different  times,  and  so  he  would  bring  about  the  patient's 
restoration  to  health  by  gentle  degrees. 

About  opportunity. 

P.  563.  C.     Say  what  is  right,  and  at  the  time  when  it  is 
right,  and  you  will  not  hear  what  is  not  right. 
Ibid.     It  is  well  to  economise  time. 

About  mysteries. 

P.  576.  D.  Chatterers  divulging  what  ought  to  be  kept 
buried  in  silence,  do  in  a  manner  from  a  disease  of  the  tongue 
pour  forth  into  people's  ears  things  which  are  not  worthy  of 
being  heard. 

About  people  who  are  in  a  state  of  pupillage. 

P.  613.  D.  To  inquire  and  put  questions  is  the  most  useful 
of  habits  with  a  view  to  acquiring  instruction. 

Ibid.  He  who  hungers  and  thii-sts  after  knowledge,  and 
who  is  eager  to  learn  what  he  does  not  know,  abandoning  all 
other  objects  of  care,  is  eager  to  become  a  disciple,  and  day 
and  night  watches  at  the  doors  of  the  houses  of  wise  men. 

Ibid.  For  any  one  to  know  that  he  is  ignorant  is  a  piece  of 
wisdom,  just  as  to  know  that  one  has  done  wrong  is  a  piece  of 
righteousness. 

About  reproach. 

P.  630.  C.  Never  reproach  any  one  with  misfortune,  for 
nature  is  impartial,  and  the  future  is  uncertain ;  lest  if  you 
yourself  should  fall  into  similar  misfortunes,  you  should  be 
found  to  be  convicted  and  condemned  by  your  own  conscience. 


FRAGMENTS.  247 

About  a  proper  constitution. 
V.  657.  C.     It  is  advantageous  to  submit  to  one's  betters. 

About  a  blameable  constitution. 
Fi-om  the  fifth  book  of  the  Essays  on  Genesis. 

P.  658.  E.  A  shameless  look,  and  a  high  head,  and  a  con- 
tinual rolling  of  the  eyes,  and  a  pompous  strut  in  walking,  and 
a  habit  of  blushing  at  nothing,  however  discreditable,  are  signs 
of  a  most  infamous  soul,  which  stamps  the  obscure  topics  of 
the  reproaches  which  belong  to  itself  upon  the  visible  body. 

About  familiarity  arid  habituation. 

P.  081.  D.  A  change  of  all  kinds  of  circumstances  at  once 
to  the  opposite  direction  is  very  harsh,  especially  when  the 
existing  powers  are  established  by  the  length  of  time  that  they 
have  lasted. 

About  correction. 

P.  C83.  D.  It  is  useful  to  be  warned  by  the  misfortunes  of 
others. 

Ibid.  Punishment  very  often  warns  and  corrects  those  who 
do  wrong ;  but  if  it  fails  to  do  so  to  them,  at  all  events  it 
corrects  the  bystanders,  for  the  punishments  of  others  improve 
most  people,  from  fear  lest  they  should  suffer  similar  evils. 

About  associating  with  wicked  men. 

P.  002.  A.  Associations  with  wicked  men  are  mischievous, 
and  very  often  the  soul  against  its  will  receives  the  impression 
of  tlie  insane  wickedness  of  one's  associates. 

About  wisdom. 
P.  693.  E.     Every  wise  man  is  a  friend  of  God. 

About  haughty  men. 

P.  093.  E.  Self-conceit,  as  the  proverb  of  the  ancients  has 
jt,  is  the  eradication  of  all  improvement,  for  the  man  who  is 
lull  of  self-conceit  is  incapable  of  improvement. 

Self-conceit  is  by  nature  an  unclean  thing. 

About  'natural  things. 
P.  711.  C.     As  it  is  difficult  to  inoculate  anything  in  a 


248  pniLO  JUDiEUS. 


I 


manner  contrary  to  nature,  and  to  introduce  anything  into 
nature  which  does  not  belong  to  it,  so  likewise  is  it  hard  to 
change  things  which  are  of  such  and  such  a  nature  from  that 
nature,  and  to  restrain  them ;  for  it  has  been  well  said  by 
some  one,  everything  is  vain  if  nature  sets  herself  against  it. 

About  man. 
From  the  Questions  arising  in  Genesis. 

P,  748.  A.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  *'  until"* 
thou  return  to  the  dust  from  which  thou  wast  taken  ?  For  man 
was  not  formed  of  the  dust  alone,  but  also  of  the  divine  Spirit ; 
but  since  he  did  not  continue  in  an  unchanged  condition,  he 
neglected  the  divine  command,  and  cutting  off  that  constitution 
which  imitated  the  heaven  from  his  better  part,  he  made  him- 
self over  wholly  to  the  earth ;  for  if  he  had  been  a  lover  of 
virtue,  which  is  immortal,  he  would  beyond  all  question  have 
received  heaven  for  his  inheritance,  but  since  what  he  sought 
was  pleasure,  by  means  of  which  the  death  of  the  soul  is 
brought  upon  mankind,  he  became  appropriated  to  the  earth. 

About  Adam. 
From  the  Questions  arising  in  Genesis, 

P.  748.  B.  "And  God  brought  all  the  animals  to  Adam, 
to  see  what  he  would  call  them;"t  for  God  does  not  doubt, 
but  since  he  has  given  mind  to  man,  the  first  bom  and  most 
excellent  of  his  creatures,  according  to  which  he,  being  endowed 
with  knowledge,  is  by  nature  enabled  to  reason ;  he  excites 
him,  as  an  instructor  excites  his  pupil,  to  a  display  of  his 
powers,  and  he  contemplates  the  most  excellent  offspring  of 
his  soul.  And,  again,  he  visibly  by  the  example  of  this  man 
gives  an  outline  of  all  that  is  voluntary  in  us,  looking  with 
disfavour  on  those  who  affirm  that  everything  happens  through 
necessity,  by  which  some  men  must  be  influenced,  he  on  that 
account  commanded  man  to  take  upon  himself  the  regulation 
of  these  things.  And  this  is  an  employment  peculiarly  fitting 
for  man,  as  being  endowed  with  a  very  high  degree  of  know- 
ledge and  most  surpassing  prudence,  the  giving  of  names  to 
the  animals  being  suited  to  him  not  only  as  being  wise,  but 
also  as  being  the  first  nobly  born  creature. 

For  it  was  fitting  that  he  should  be  the  founder  of  the 
*  Genesis  iii.  19.  t  Genesis  iil  19. 


FRAGMENTS.  249 

human  race,  and  also  the  king  of  everything  that  is  horn  of 
the  earth,  and  that  he  should  have  this  as  an  especial  honour 
of  his  own,  that,  as  he  was  the  first  who  had  any  acquaintance 
with  the  animals,  he  might  also  be  the  first  inventor  and 
pronouncer  of  their  names ;  for  it  would  have  been  absurd  for 
them  to  be  left  without  names,  and  subsequently  to  have  names 
given  to  them  by  some  younger  man,  to  the  honour  and  glory 
of  the  elder. 

And  when  Adam  saw  the  figure  of  his  wife,  as  the  prophet 
says,  and  that  it  had  been  produced  not  by  any  connexion,  nor 
out  of  a  woman,  as  human  beings  in  after  times  were  produced, 
but  that  she  was  as  it  were  a  nature  on  the  borders  between 
these  two  kinds,  like  a  graft  from  a  shoot  of  another  vine  taken 
off  and  grafted  into  a  second  one,  on  which  account  he  says, 
"  For  this  cause  a  man  shall  leave  his  father  and  his  mother, 
and  shall  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  two  shall  become  one 
fiesh  ;"*  in  saying  which  he  used  a  most  gentle  expression, 
which  was  at  the  same  time  most  perfectly  true,  meaning  that 
they  would  be  united  by  sympathy  in  their  griefs  and  joys. 

From  the  same  book,  or  else  from  the  last  book  of  the  Questions 
arising  in  Exodus. 

Truly  the  divine  place  is  inaccessible,  and  one  which  is  hard 

to  be  approached,  nor  is  it  given  even  to  the  purest  intellect 

to  be  able  to  ascend  to  such  a  height  as  to  touch  it.     It  is 

impossible  for  human  nature  to  behold  the  face  of  the  living 

God ;  but  the  word   "  face "  is  not  used  here  in  its  literal 

meaning,  but  it  is  a  metaphorical  expression,  here  intended  to 

manifest  the  purest  and  simplest  form  of  the  living  God,  since 

man  is  not  recognized  more   by  anything  than  by  his  face, 

according  to  his  peculiar  distinctive  qualities  and  form.     For 

I  God  does  not  say,  "  I  am  not  visible   in  my  nature."     But 

j  who,  in  fact,  is  more  visible  than  he  who  is  the  Father  of  all 

j  visible  things?     And  being  such  with  regard  to  being  seen,  I 

am,  says  he,  seen  by  no  mortal  man ;  and  the  reason  of  this 

is  the  inability  of  the  created  man  to  behold  him. 

And  that  1  may  not  become  prolix  while  weaving  in  all 
kinds  of  arguments,  it  is  inevitable  that  God  must  first  be 
created  (which  is  not  possible),  in  order  for  any  one  to  be  able 
to  comprehend  God.     But  if  any  one  dies  as  to  this  mortal 

•  Genesis  ii,  24. 


250  PHILO   JUD^US. 

life,   but    still   lives,  having   received    in  exchange  a  life  of 
immortality,  perhaps  he  will  see  what  he  never  saw  before. 

All  the  different  philosophical  sects  which  have  flourished  in 
Greece,  and  in  the  countries  of  the  barbarians,  when  investi- 
gating the  secrets  of  nature,  have  never  been  able  to  arrive  at 
a  clear  perception  of  even  the  most  trivial  circumstances  ;  and 
a  clear  proof  of  this  assertion  may  be  found  in  the  disagree- 
ments, and  dissensions,  and  contentions  of  those  of  each  sect 
who  are  seeking  to  establish  their  own  opinions,  and  to  over- 
throw those  of  their  adversaries.  And  the  households  of  those 
who  have  been  contending  for  the  predominance  of  this  and 
that  sect,  have  been  the  causes  of  universal  wars,  blinding  the 
human  mind  by  their  contradictory  quarrels,  which  might 
otherwise  have  been  able  to  see  the  tmth,  and  fighting  hard 
about  what  doctrines  ought  to  be  abandoned  and  what  ought  to 
be  preserved. 

Now  he  who  desires  to  form  to  himself  a  conception  of  the 
most  excellent  of  all  beings,  ought  in  the  first  place  to  stand 
firm  in  his  mind,  being  steadfastly  fixed  in  one  opinion,  and 
not  varying  or  wandering  in  different  directions.  And  in  the 
next  place,  he  ought  to  take  his  stand  upon  nature,  and  upon 
solid  grounds,  and  to  abandon  all  barren  and  corruptible  things, 
for  if  anything  of  a  somewhat  effeminate  character  approach 
him,  he  will  be  disappointed  of  his  object,  and  he  will  be 
unable,  even  if  he  exert  the  most  acute  faculties  of  sight 
imaginable,  to  behold  the  uncreated  God ;  so  that  he  will 
become  blind  before  he  sees  him,  on  account  of  the  brilliancy 
of  his  beams  and  the  flood  of  light  which  distils  therefrom.  Do 
you  not  see  that  the  power  of  fire  in  the  case  of  those  who 
stand  at  a  measured  distance  from  it  affords  light  to  them,  but 
it  burns  those  who  approach  too  near?  Take  care  that  you  do 
not  suffer  such  an  injury  as  this  in  your  mind,  and  lest  an 
extravagant  desire  of  an  impossible  object  destroy  you. 

About  those  who  are  governed. 
Out  of  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 
P.  749.  E.     As  pillars  support  whole  houses,  so  also  the 
power  of  God  supports  the  whole  world,  and  the  best  and  most 
God-loving  section  of  the  human  race. 

Out  of  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 
P.  750.  C.     If  any  one  is  either  in  any  house,  or  village,  or 


FRAGMENTS.  251 

city,  or  nation,  who  is  a  lover  of  wisdom,  it  is  absolutely 
inevitable  that  that  bouse  or  city  should  be  the  better  for  his 
existence  in  it,  for  a  virtuous  man  is  a  common  good  to  all 
men,  bestowing  on  them  advantages  proceeding  from  himself 
as  from  a  prepared  store. 

About  people  who  carry  news,  and  act  as  intermediate 

bearers  of  answers. 

From  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 

P.  751.  B.  The  influx  of  evils  agitates  and  disturbs  the 
soul,  enveloping  it  in  a  giddiness  which  darkens  its  perceptions, 
and  compels  it  to  suffer  that  power  of  sight  which  by  nature 
A\  as  pre-eminent,  but  which  by  habit  has  become  blinded,  to  be 
obscured. 

Ibid.  There  is  nothing  so  opposite  to  and  inconsistent  with 
the  most  holy  powers  of  God  as  injustice. 

About  the  sinner  and  offender. 
From  the  Questions  arising  in  Genesis. 

P.  751.  C.  Never  to  err  in  any  point  whatever  is  the 
greatest  blessing ;  but  when  one  has  erred,  to  repent  is  next 
akin  to  it,  as  a  younger  good,  if  one  may  say  so,  by  the  side  of 
an  elder,  for  there  are  some  persons  who  exult  in  the  offences 
which  they  have  committed  as  if  they  had  done  good  actions, 
though  they  are  in  reality  afflicted  with  a  disease  difficult  to 
be  cured,  or  I  sould  rather  say  incurable. 

About  its  being  impossible  to  escape  from,  God. 
From  the  last  book  of  Qiiestions  arising  in  Exodus, 

P.  752.  A.  He  contains  all  things,  while  yet  he  is  himself 
contained  by  nothing ;  for  as  place  is  that  which  contains 
bodies,  and  that  to  which  they  flee  for  refuge,  so  also  the 
divine  reason  contains  the  universe  and  is  that  which  has  com- 
pleted it. 

About  truth  and  faithful  evidence. 
From  the  second  book  of  the  Questions  in  Exodus. 

P.  754.  C.  By  some  lawgivers  the  practice  of  giving  hear- 
say evidence  has  been  forbidden,  on  the  ground  that  the  truth 
is  established  by  the  eye-sight,  but  falsehood  by  hearing. 


252  PHILO  JUD^US. 

About  quiet  and  ease. 
From  the  fourth  book  of  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 

The  wise  man  is  desirous  of  peace  and  leisure,  that  he  may 
have  time  for  meditation  on  heavenly  things. 

From  the  fifth  book. 

Ibid.  E.  For  thus  the  lover  of  wisdom  never  unites  with  any 
rash  person,  even  though  he  may  be  closely  united  to  him  by 
blood ;  nor  does  he  ever  consent  to  dwell  with  a  wicked  man, 
being  separated  from  the  multitude  by  his  reasoning  powers,  on 
account  of  which  he  is  said  not  to  be  a  fellow  voyager,  or  a 
fellow  citizen,  or  a  companion  of  such  men. 

Ibid.  The  wise  man  is  a  sojourner  and  a  settler,  having 
come  as  an  emigrant  from  a  life  of  confusion  and  disorder  to 
one  suitable  to  peaceful  and  happy  men. 

About  the  fearful  expulsion. 
From  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 

P.  772.  B.  But  the  essence  of  the  angels  is  spiritual,  but 
they  are  very  often  made  to  resemble  the  appearance  of  men, 
being  transformed  on  any  emergencies  which  arise. 

From  the  second  book  of  the  same  Questions. 

Ibid.  All  the  powers  of  God  are  winged,  being  always  eager 
and  striving  for  the  higher  path  which  leads  to  the  Father. 

About  heretics. 
From  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  in  Exodus. 
P.  774.  B.  All  those  who  have  stumbled,  being  unable  to 
proceed  with  upright  feet,  go  on  slowlj^,  being  fatigued  a  long 
time  before  they  come  to  their  journey's  end ;  so  also  the  soul 
is  hindered  from  proceeding  successfully  on  the  path  which 
leads  to  piety  if  it  has  previously  fallen  in  with  any  of  the  bye- 
roads  of  wickedness,  for  they  are  great  hindrances  to  it,  and 
the  causes  of  its  stumbling,  by  means  of  which  the  mind 
becoming  lame,  proceeds  too  slowly  on  the  road,  according  to 
nature ;  and  this  road,  according  to  nature,  is  that  which  ends 
at  the  Father  of  the  universe. 

From  the  same  book. 
The  contentious  investigatieiWt^ah-.fflS^^nter  into  about 


the  virtues  of  God,  improve^\t[5e  mteffecc  M^tAi-a^i  it  in  most 

;^T.     MICHAEL'S  ^    \ 


FRAGMENTS.  253 

pleasant  labours,  which  are  also  most  beneficial  to  it,  and 
especially  when  men  do  not  (as  those  of  the  present  day  do) 
disguise  themselves  under  a  false  appellation,  and  contend  for 
the  doctrines  in  appearance  only,  but  do,  in  an  honest  and 
true  heart,  seek  out  truth  in  connection  with  knowledge. 

From  the  second  book  of  the  same  treatise. 

not  being  more  anxious  to  display  melody  and 

harmony  in  their  voices  than  in  their  minds ;  the  eloquence  of 
the  wise  man  does  not  display  its  beauty  in  words  only,  but  in 
the  mattei's  which  it  proves  by  its  words. 

From  the  last  book  of  the  Questions  in  Exodus, 
Those  men  who  apply  themselves  to  the  study  of  the  holy 
scriptures  ought  not  to  cavil  and  quibble  at  syllables,  but 
ought  first  to  look  at  the  spirit  and  meaning  of  the  nouns  and 
verbs  used,  and  at  the  occasions  on  which  and  the  manners  in 
which  each  expression  is  used ;  for  it  often  happens  that  the 
same  expressions  are  applied  to  different  things  at  different 
times;  and,  on  the  contrary,  opposite  expressions  are  at  dif- 
ferent times  applied  to  the  same  thing  with  perfect  consistency. 

From  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 
Those  men  act  absurdly  who  judge  of  the  whole  from  a 
part,  instead  of,  on  the  contrary,  forming  their  estimate  of  a 
part  from  their  knowledge  of  the  whole ;  for  this  is  the  more 
proper  way  to  form  one's  opinion  of  anything,  whether  it  be  a 
body  or  a  doctrine ;  therefore  the  divine  code  of  laws  is,  in  a 
manner,  a  united  creature,  which  one  must  regard  in  all  its 
parts  and  members  at  once  with  all  one's  eyes,  and  one  must 
contemplate  the  meaning  and  sense  of  the  whole  scripture 
with  accuracy  and  clearness,  not  disturbing  its  harmony  nor 
dissevering  its  unity  ;  for  the  parts  will  have  a  very  different 
appearance  and  character  if  they  are  once  deprived  of  their 
union. 

From  the  fourth  book  of  the  same  treatise. 
Let  there  then  be  a  law  against  all  those  who  profess  to 
ook  on  what  is  venerable  and  divine,  in  any  other  than  a 
.Tspcctful   and   holy   spirit,   inflicting    punishment   on    their 
blindness. 

From  the  second  book  of  tho  Questions  in  Exodus. 
P.  775.     There  is  nothing  either  more  pleasant  or  more 


254  PHILO   JUDvEUS. 

deserving  of  respect  than  to  serve  God,  whose  power  is  su- 
perior to  that  of  the  mightiest  sovereign ;  and  it  appears  to  me 
that  the  greatest  kings  have  also  been  chief  priests,  showing, 
by  their  actions,  that  it  is  right  for  those  who  are  the  masters 
of  other  men  nevertheless  to  serve  the  servants  of  God. 

About  a  king  not  being  greatly  respected. 
From  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 

Ibid. 'E.  No  foolish  man  is  a  king  even  though  he  be 
invested  with  supreme  power  by  sea  and  land,  but  he  only  is  a 
king  who  is  a  virtuous  and  God-loving  n;an,  even  though  he 
may  be  deprived  of  those  supplies  and  revenues,  by  means  of 
which  kings  in  general  are  strengthened  in  their  sovereignty; 
for  as  a  rudder,  or  a  collection  of  drugs,  or  a  flute,  or  a  harp, 
are  all  superfluities  to  a  man  who  has  no  knowledge  of  the  art 
of  steering,  or  medicine,  or  music,  because  he  is  not  able  to 
employ  any  one  of  them  to  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  made, 
while  they  may  be  said  to  be  excellently  adapted  to  and  to  be 
very  seasonable  for  a  pilot,  or  a  physician,  or  a  musician ;  so 
also,  since  kingcraft  is  an  art,  and  the  best  of  arts,  we  must 
look  upon  him  who  does  not  know  how  to  exert  it  as  a  private 
individual ;  and  as  the  man  who  does  know  how  to  exert  it 
well  as  the  only  king. 

About  the  stable  and  unstable  man. 
From  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 
P.  776.  E.  A  facility  of  change  must  of  necessity  belong 
to  man,  by  reason  of  the  unsteadiness  of  external  circum- 
stances. Accordingly  we  thus  oftentimes,  after  we  have  chosen 
friends,  and  have  associated  with  them  for  some  time,  though 
we  have  nothing  to  accuse  them  of,  turn  away  from  them  with 
aversion  as  enemies. 

Aboitt  those  who  change  their  minds  and  blame  themselves. 

P.  776.  E.  These  are  the  words  of  Philo  :— 
Caius,  as  he  was  ignorant  of  the  greatness  of  the  cause, 
that  he  should  never  fall  into  death,  suffered  a  more  simple 
punishment;  but  his  imitator,  not  being  able  to  take  refuge 
in  the  plea  of  ignorance,  is  subjected  to  a  double  puuish 
ment ;  on  which  account  Lamech  shall  be  avenged  seventy 
and  seven  fold,  for  the  reason  above  mentioned,  according  to 


FRAGMENTS.  255 

which  he  was  the  second  offender  who  had  not  thought  fit  to 
take  warning  from  the  punishment  of  him  who  had  oftended 
before,  and  he  clearly  receives  his  punishment,  being  a  more 
simple  one ;  as  in  numbers  the  units  have  a  highly  multiplied 
power,  resembling  that  of  the  decades,  such  as  now  Lamech, 
changing  his  mind,  denounces  against  himself. 

From  the  same  book  of  the  same  author. 

P.  777.  To  be  aware  of  what  one  has  done  amiss,  and  to 
blame  one's  self,  is  the  part  of  a  righteous  man ;  but  to  be 
insensible  to  such  things  causes  still  more  grievous  evils  to  the 
soul,  and  the  conduct  of  wicked  men. 

About  the  courage  of  a  woman. 
From  Philo,  from  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 

Ibid.  B.  It  is  said  by  men  who  have  applied  themselves  to 
the  study  of  natural  philosophy,  that  the  female  is  nothing  else 
but  an  imperfect  male. 

About  the  oracles  of  God. 

The  words  of  Philo,  out  of  the  second  book  of  his  Questions 
arising  in  Genesis. 

P.  782.  A.  It  is  not  lawful  to  divulge  the  sacred  mysteries 
to  the  uninitiated  until  they  are  purified  by  a  perfect  purification ; 
for  the  man  who  is  not  initiated,  or  who  is  of  moderate  capacity, 
being  unable  either  to  hear  or  to  see  that  nature  which  is  in- 
corporeal and  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  being  deceived 
by  the  visible  sight,  will  blame  what  ought  not  to  be  blamed. 
Now,  to  divulge  sacred  mysteries  to  uninitiated  people,  is  the 
act  of  a  person  who  violates  the  laws  of  the  privileges  belong 
ing  to  the  priesthood. 

From  the  same  author. 
Ibid,  B.  It  is  absurd  that  there  should  be  a  law  in  cities 
that  it  is  not  lawful  do  divulge  sacred  mysteries  to  the  unini- 
tiated, but  that  one  may  speak  of  the  true  rites  and  ceremonies 
which  lead  to  piety  and  holiness  to  ears  full  of  folly.  All  men 
must  not  partake  of  all  things,  nor  of  all  discourses,  above  all, 
of  such  as  are  sacred  ;  for  those  that  desire  to  be  admitted  to  a 
participation  in  such  things,  ought  to  have  many  qualifications 
beforehand.  In  the  first  place,  what  is  the  greatest  and  most 
important,  they  ought  to  have  deep  feelings  of  piety  towards 


256  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

the  only  true  and  living  God,  and  correct  notions  of  holiness, 
avoiding  all  inextricable  errors  which  perplex  so  many  about 
images  and  statues,  and  in  fact  about  any  erections  whatever, 
and  about  unlawful  ceremonies,  or  illicit  mysteries. 

In  the  second  place,  they  must  be  purified  with  all  holy 
purifications,  both  in  soul  and  body,  as  far  as  it  is  allowed  by 
their  national  laws  and  customs.  In  the  third  place,  they 
must  give  credible  evidence  of  their  entering  into  the  common 
joy,  so  that  they  may  not,  after  having  partaken  of  the  sacred 
food,  like  intemperate  youths,  be  changed  by  satiety  and  over- 
abundance, becoming  like  drunken  men;  which  is  not  lawful. 

About  evil-doers. 
The  words  of  Philo,  out  of  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 
P.  782.  D.  The  man  who  lives  in  wickedness,  bears  about 
destruction  within  him,  since  he  has  living  with  him  that 
which  is  both  treacherous,  designing,  and  hostile  to  him. 
For  the  conscience  of  the  wicked  man  is  alone  a  sufficient 
punishment  to  him,  inflicting  cowardice  on  his  soul  from  its 
own  inmost  feelings,  as  it  feared  blows. 

From  the  same  author. 
Ibid.     The  life  of  the  wicked  man  is  subject  to  pain  and 
sorrow,  and  full  of  fear ;  and  in  everything  which  it  does  ac- 
cording to  the  outward  senses,  it  is  mingled  with  fear  and  grief 

About  monks  who  break  their  vows. 
The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 
P.  784.  C.  The  reasoning  of  some  persons  is  very  rapidly 
satiated,  who,  though  they  have  been  borne  upwards  on  wings 
for  a  little  while,  yet  do  presently  return  back  again  ;  not  so 
much  flying  upwards,  says  Philo,  as  being  dragged  down  again 
to  the  lowest  depths  of  hell.  But  happy  are  they  who  do  not 
draw  back. 

From  the  same  author. 
Ibid.     Before  now,  some  persons  who  have  tasted  happiness, 
being  very  speedily  satiated,  after  they  have    given  hopes  of 
their  being  in  health,  have  fallen  back  into  the  same  disease 
as  before. 

From  the  same  author,  out  of  the  Questions  arising  in  Genesis. 
P.  784.  D.    To  commit  perjury  is  impious  and  mischievous. 


FRAGMENTS.  257 

About  good  friends. 

The  words  of  Philo,  out  of  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  arising 

in  Exodus. 

P.  788.  I.  We  ought  to  look  upon  those  men  as  our  friends 
who  are  inclined  to  assist  us,  and  to  requite  our  kindnesses 
with  kindness,  even  if  they  are  destitute  of  power ;  for  friend- 
ship is  a  thing  which  is  seen  more  in  moments  of  necessity, 
than  in  a  steady  conjunction  or  union  of  dispositions.  So  that 
in  the  case  of  each  person  who  unites  with  another  in  an 
association  of  friendship,  one  may  apply  the  expression  of 
Pythagoras  to  him,  and  say,  "  A  friend  is  a  second  I." 

About  the  mercies  of  God. 

The  words  of  Philo,  out  of  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  arising 
in  Exodus. 

P.  789.  A.  When  the  fruits  of  these  crops  which  are  raised 
from  seed  are  in  a  state  of  perfection,  they  receive  the  begin- 
nings of  the  generation  of  trees  in  order  that  the  mercies  of 
God  may  last  for  ever,  and  then  that  one  continually  succeeding 
the  other,  and  connecting  ends  with  beginnings  and  beginnings 
with  ends,  they  may  be  in  reahty  never  ending. 

From  the  second  book  of  the  same  treatise. 
Ibid.     The  mercies  of  God  give  us  not  only  w"hat  is  neces- 
sary, but  also  all  such  things  as  conduce  to  a  more  excessive 
and  liberal  enjoyment  of  life. 


FRAGMENTS  FROM  A  MONKISH  MANUSCRIPT. 

About  man :  to  slww  that  God  when  he  made  him  endowed 
him  with  free  will. 

It  is  said  to  you,  0  noble  man,  who  live  in  obedience  to  the 
livine  precepts,  endeavour  with  all  thy  might  not  only  to 
)reserve  the  gifts  which  you  have  received  unimpaired  and 
malloyed,  but  also  think  them  worthy  of  all  imaginable  honour 
md  regard,  as  being  endowed  with  free  will  and  independent 
)ower,  so  that  he  who  has  committed  them  to  your  charge  may 
lave  no  reason  to  find  fault  with  you  for  having  neglected  to 
ake  proper  care  of  them ;  and  the  Creator  of  the  world  has 

VOL.  IV.  S 


258  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 


i 


entrusted  to  your  care  to  employ  them  according  to  your  own 
deliberative  purpose,  a  soul,  and  speech,  and  the  outward 
senses.  Therefore,  those  men  who  receive  these  gifts  in  a 
proper  spirit,  and  who  preserve  them  for  him  who  has  bestowed 
them  on  them,  have  kept  their  intellect  carefully  in  such  a 
way  that  it  shall  never  think  of  anything  else  than  of  God  and 
his  virtues;  and  their  speech  in  such  a  manner  that  with 
unwearied  mouth  it  shall  honour  the  Father  of  the  universe 
with  praises  and  hymns ;  and  their  outward  senses  in  such  a 
way  that  after  they  have  represented  to  themselves  the  whole 
of  the  world  which  is  perceptible  to  those  senses,  namely,  the 
heaven  and  the  earth,  and  the-  natures  which  are  between  those 
two,  they  may  relate  what  they  have  seen  in  a  pure  and  guile- 
less manner  to  the  soul. 

About  people  who  are  governed. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  fourth  book  of  his  Allegorical 
Interpretation  of  the  Sacred  Laws. 

If  you  take  away  their  resources  of  wealth  from  politicians, 
you  will  find  nothing  left  but  empty  arrogance  devoid  of  sense, 
for  as  long  as  there  is  an  abundant  supply  of  external  good 
things,  wisdom  and  presence  of  mind  appear  also  to  attend 
them,  hut  when  that  plenty  is  taken  away  all  appearance  of 
"wisdom  is  taken  away  at  the  same  time. 

About  the  best  men. 
From  the  same  author,  in  his  Treatise  on  Drunkenness. 

Good  men,  to  speak  somewhat  metaphorically,  are  of  more 
value  than  whole  nations,  since  they  support  cities  and  con- 
stitutions as  buttresses  support  large  houses. 

From  the  same  author. 

If  it  depended  on  wicked  men,  no  city  would  ever  enjoy 
tranquillity  ;  but  states  continue  free  from  seditious  troubles  on 
account  of  the  righteousness  of  one  or  two  men  who  live  in 
them,  whose  virtue  is  a  remedy  for  the  diseases  of  war,  because 
God,  who  loves  mankind,  grants  this  effect  as  a  reward  to  those 
who  are  virtuous  and  honourable,  so  that  they  should  not  only 
henefit  themselves,  but  all  who  are  near  them. 

From  the  same  author. 

There  is  no  place  upon  earth  more  sacred  than  the  mind  of 


FRAGMENTS.  259 

a  wise  man,  while  all  the  virtues  hover  around  like  so  many 
stars. 

Ahoiit  things  which  are  imcertain  and  unknown  to  its. 
The  words  of  Philo. 

The  comprehension  of  the  future  does  not  helong  to  the 
nature  of  man. 

From  the  same  author. 

All  things  are  not  known  to  the  mortal  race. 

From  the  same  author. 
God  alone  is  acquainted  with  the  ultimate  results  of  things. 

About  evil  report. 

Quiet,  which  is  free  from  danger,  is  better  than  words  the 
object  of  which  is  only  to  give  pleasure. 

About  self-satisfied  people^  (&c. 
The  words  of  Philo. 

The  lawgiver  says,  **  You  shall  not  do  all  the  things  which 
we  will  do  here  this  day,*  every  one  doing  that  which  is 
pleasant  in  his  own  sight,"  by  which  words  he  declares  as 
loudly  as  possible  that  there  is  no  evil  which  may  not  be 
produced  by  selfishness  and  self-sufficiency,  which  must  be 
eradicated  from  the  mind  as  unholy  feelings.  Let  no  one 
embrace  that  which  is  pleasing  to  himself  rather  than  that 
which  is  agreeable  to  nature,  for  the  one  is  found  to  be  the 
cause  of  mischief  and  the  other  the  cause  of  benefit. 

From  the  same  author. 

Those  who  do  everything  for  their  own  sake  alone  practise 
selfishness,  which  is  the  greatest  of  evils,  which  produces 
unsociability,  want  of  fellowship,  unfriendliness,  injustice, 
impiety,  for  nature  has  made  man  not  hke  those  beasts  which 
love  solitude,  but  like  the  gregarious  beasts  wliich  live  together 
hke  the  most  sociable  of  all  creatures,  that  he  may  live  not  to 
himself  alone,  but  also  to  his  father,  and  to  his  mother,  and  to 
lis  brethren,  and  to  his  wife,  and  to  his  children,  and  to  all 
.lis  other  relations  and   friends,   and   to  those  of  the  same 

rough  as  liimself,  and  to  those  of  the  same  tribe,  and  to 
♦  Deuteronomy  zii.  28. 
S   '2 


260  PIIILO  JUDiEUS. 

his  native  country,  and  to  his  fellow  countrymen,  and  to  all 
mankind,  and  moreover  to  the  different  parts  of  the  universe, 
and  to  the  whole  world,  and  much  more  to  the  Father  and 
Creator  of  the  world,  for  he  must  be  (if  at  least  he  is  really 
endowed  with  reason)  sociable,  loving  the  world,  and  loving 
God,  that  he  may  also  be  beloved  by  God. 

About  God  being  incomprehensible. 
From  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 

There  are  thousands  and  thousands,  I  do  not  say  only  of 
important  matters,  but  also  of  those  which  appear  to  be  most 
trivial,  which  escape  the  human  intellect. 

From  the  same  author. 
No  one  may  so  far  yield  to  unreasonable  folly  as  to  boast 
that  he  has  seen  the  invisible  God. 

About  the  doctrine  that  God  has  made  angels  to  be 
guardiayis  of  us. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  first  book  of  the  Questions  arising  in 

Genesis. 

As  pillars  support  whole  houses,  so  also  do  the  divine  powers 
support  the  whole  world,  and  that  most  excellent  and  God- 
lovincr  race  of  mankind. 


o 


About  avoiding  sin. 
From  the  treatise  on  the  Giants. 

I  think  it  absolutely  impossible  that  no  part  of  the  soul 
should  become  tainted,  not  even  the  outermost  and  lowest  parts 
of  it,  even  if  the  man  appears  to  be  perfect  among  men. 

About  slowness  of  counsel. 

Slow  counsel  is  profitless,  and  change  of  purpose  in  ex- 
tremities is  mischievous. 

About  heretical  teachers,  Sc. 
From  the  scvme  book. 
A  teacher  of  a  good  and  virtuous  disposition,  even  if  he  sees 
his  pupils  at  first  stiff-necked  by  nature,  does  not  despair  of 
producing  in  them  a  change  for  the  better ;  but,  like  a  good 
physician,  he  does  not  apply  a  remedy  at  once  at  the  first 
moment  of  the  disease  attacking  the  patient,  but  he  gives 


FllAGMENTS.  20 1 

nature  time  that  it  may  recede  a  little,  so  that  he  may  first 
make  ready  the  path  to  safety,  and  then  apply  healthful  and 
salutary  remedies.  And  in  the  same  manner  does  the  vir- 
tuous man  apply  the  arguments  and  doctrines  of  philosophy. 
If,  when  a  pupil  is  first  introduced  to  you,  and  first  comes 
to  learn  of  you,  you  hasten  to  eradicate  all  his  ignorance  at 
once,  and  attempt  to  introduce  every  kind  of  knowledge  in  a 
lump,  you  will  produce  the  contrary  effect  to  that  which  you 
desire,  for  it  will  not  be  likely  that  such  an  eradication,  having 
taken  place  all  in  a  moment,  will  continue  effectual,  nor  that 
the  pupil  will  be  able  at  once  to  contain  such  an  abundant 
influx  and  overflow  of  instruction  ;  but  being  exceedingly  per- 
plexed and  troubled,  he  will  resist  both  these  operations,  that 
of  eradicating  one  thing  and  that  of  introducing  another ;  but 
the  system  of  taking  away  his  ignorance  with  gentleness  and 
moderation,  and  of,  in  the  same  manner,  gently  instilling  wis- 
dom into  the  mind,  will  be  the  causes  of  admitted  advantage. 

About  people  who  meditate  and  design  mischief. 
The  words  of  Thilo,  from  his  treatise  on  Things  Improperly  Named. 

The  ordinary  production  of  wickedness  enslaves  the  mind, 
even  if  it  has  not  as  yet  produced  any  perfect  fruit ;  for  it  is, 
as  the  proverb  says,  washing  a  brick,  or  taking  up  water  in  a 
net,  to  try  and  eradicate  wickedness  out  of  the  soul  of  man. 
For  "  behold,"  says  Moses,  "  with  what  designs  the  minds  of 
all  men  are  impressed."*  And  he  speaks  truly,  for  he  does 
not  say,  what  designs  are  attached  to  and  adapted  to  it,  but 
that  which  has  been  considered  with  care  and  deliberation  is 
also  explained  with  accuracy,  and  this  too  not  slowly  and  with 
difiBculty,  but  from  man's  earliest  youth,  or  as  one  may  almost 
say,  from  his  very  cradle,  as  if  it  were  a  part  of  him,  kept  in 
continual  exercise. 

About  cowardly  and  wavering  people. 

Those  who  are  unmanly  from  an  innate  effeminacy,  falling 
down  of  their  own  accord  before  they  meet  with  any  oppo- 
sition, are  a  disgrace  and  ridicule  to  themselves. 

From  the  same  author. 
Wickedness  in  a  foolish  man  has  a  twin  offspring,  for  the 
*  Genesis  viii.  21. 


262  PHILO  JUD^US. 

foolish  man  is  wavering  and  hesitating,  mingling  considerations 
together  which  ought  not  to  be  mingled,  and  jumbling  and 
confusing  what  ought  to  be  kept  distinct,  having  as  many 
colours  in  his  soul  as  a  viper  has  in  his  body,  and  polluting 
even  his  sound  thoughts  with  those  which  cause  trouble  and 
death. 

From  the  same  author. 
The  thoughts  of  a  bad  man  are  one  thing,  and  his  words 
another,  and  his  actions  indeed  are  many,  but  they  are  all 
inconsistent  and  at  variance  one  with  another,  for  he  does  not 
say  what  he  thinks,  and  he  has  decided  on  the  contrary  of 
what  he  affirms,  and  he  does  things  which  are  not  consistent 
with  his  original  designs,  so  that,  to  speak  truly,  one  may  say 
that  the  life  of  the  wicked  man  is  a  life  of  enmity. 

About  distinctness. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
That  which  is  not  distinct  is  unsuited  to  a  free  man,  being 
the  most  shameful  product  of  folly  and  haughtiness ;  for  as 
distinctness  in  everything  that  is  to  be  done  is  a  mark  of 
acuteness  and  wisdom,  and  deserves  honour  and  praise,  so  also 
an  absence  of  shame  is  a  sign  of  folly  and  infamy,  on  which 
account  the  other  definition  which  you  disregard,  classifies 
a  man  who  is  afflicted  with  this  disease  thus,  saying,  he  is  im- 
pious who  does  not  know  how  to  respect  the  face  of  an  honour- 
able man,  nor  to  rise  up  in  the  presence  of  an  elder,*  nor  to 
guide  Lis  own  steps  in  the  right  way. 

About  those  who  serve  God. 

The  servants  of  virtuous  men  submit  to  voluntary  obedience 
to  God,  for  they  are  not  servants  to  human  caprices,  but  to 
wise  men ;  and  he  who  is  the  servant  of  wisdom  may  justly  be 
said  to  be  also  the  servant  of  God. 

About  just  men. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
An  irreconcileable   and  endless   war  is   carried  on  by  the 

*  Juvenal  speaks  of  this  as  a  custom  of  the  ancient  Romans — 
Credebant  hoc  grande  nefas,  et  morte  piandum, 
Si  juvenis  vetulo  non  assurrexerat ;  et  si 
Jkrbato  cuicumque  puer. 


FRAGMENTS.  263 

atheists  against  the  godlj,  so  that  they  threaten  them  even 
with  slavery. 

About  justice. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
Justice,  ahove  all  things,  conduces  to  the  safety  both  of  man- 
kind and  of  the  parts  of  the  world,  earth  and  heaven. 

About  the  judgments  of  God. 
From  the  same  author. 
It  is  good  to  begin  every  day  with  divine  and  holy  employ- 
ments, and  after  that  to  proceed  to  the  necessary  duties  of  life. 
On  this  account  God  has  commanded  us*  to  take  care  to  obey 
his  commandments,  and  especially  at  the  first  moment  of  the 
dawn,  as  soon  as  we  are  risen,  to  pay  our  adoration  to  Him, 
that  their  offerings  to  God  may  precede  every  human  occu- 
pation, having  the  recollection  of  God  for  their  prompter  and 
leader. 

From  the  same  author. 
Every  soul  which  piety  fertilises  with  its  own  mysteries  is 
necessarily  awake  for  all  holy  services,  and  eager  for  the  con- 
templation of  those  things  which  are  worth  being  seen,  for  this 
is  the  feeling  of  the  soul  at  the  great  festival,  and  this  is  the 
true  season  of  joy. 

About  the  difference  between  God  and  man. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
The  things  of  creation  are  far  removed  from  the  uncreated 
God,  even  though  they  are  brought  into  close  proximity  fol- 
lowing the  attractive  mercies  of  the  Saviour. 

About  bold  and  brave  men. 
The  words  of  Philo,  from  his  treatise  about  the  Giants. 
It  is  a  sign  of  courage  not  to  be  easily  alarmed  by  the 
terrors  of  death,  and  to]  be  full  of  cheerful  confidence  in  dan- 
gers, and  to  be  of  valiant  hardiness  amid  disasters,  and  to 
prefer  dying  with  honour  to  being  saved  disgracefully,  and  to 
wish  to  be  the  cause  of  victory  ;  and  a  happy  boldness,  and  a 
cheerfulness  of  soul,  and  fortitude,  are  the  atttendauts  on  a 
manly  spirit. 

•  Deutei'onomy  vi.  7. 


'2G'i  PHILO   JUD.EUS. 

About  equality. 

The  words  of  Philo, 

As  an  equality  of  measurement  is  the  cause  of  the  most 

perfect  blessings,  so  also  a  want  of  measure  is  the  cause  of  the 

greatest  evils,  as  it  dissolves  that  most  useful  bond  of  equality. 

About  drunkenness. 
From  the  same  author. 
Inequality  is  a  grievous  thing  and  the  cause  of  differences, 
just  as  equality  is  free  from  all  annoyances  and  contributes  to 
unite  men  for  advantageous  ends. 

From  the  same  autnor. 
Obedience  to  the  law  and  equality  are  the  seeds  of  peace, 
and  the   causes  of  safety  and  continued  durability  ;   but  in- 
equality and  covetousness  are  excitements  to  war,  and  dissolvers 
of  all  existing  things. 

About  evil-doers. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
Those  things  which  chastise  the  first,  are,  if  men  are  wise, 
preventatives  of  the  second. 

About  the  eye  and  sight. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  treatise  about  the  Creation 
of  the  World. 

The  outward  senses  resemble  windows;  for  through  them, 
as  through  windows,  the  comprehension  of  the  objects  of  the 
outward  senses  enters  into  the  mind,  and  again  through  them 
the  mind  goes  out  to  investigate  such  objects.  But  the  sight 
is  a  part  of  these  windows,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  outward 
senses,  since  above  all  others  it  is  akin  to  the  soul,  because  it 
is  nearly  connected  with  the  most  beautiful  of  all  things, 
namely  light,  and  is  a  servant  of  divine  things  ;  and,  indeed, 
that  is  the  sense  which  first  opened  the  way  to  philosophy. 
For  when  the  eye  had  beheld  the  motions  of  the  sun  and 
moon,  and  the  periodical  revolutions  of  the  stars,  and  the 
unvarying  motions  of  the  whole  host  of  heaven,  and  the  inde- 
scribable order  and  harmony  of  the  whole  universe,  and  the 
cue  unerring  Creator  of  the  world,  it  then  related  what  it  had 
seen  to  reason,  as  having  the  supreme  authority  ;  and  reason, 
having  beheld  with  a  still  more  acutely  piercing  eye  both  these 


FRAGMENTS.  265 

things,  and  things  of  a  still  more  sublime  character  in  their 
appearance  and  species,  and  the  great  cause  of  all  things,  it 
then  immediately  arrived  at  a  due  conception  of  God,  and  of 
creation,  and  of  providence ;  considering  that  the  whole 
nature  of  all  things  was  not  brought  into  existence  of  its  own 
accord,  but  that  of  necessity  it  had  a  creator,  and  a  father, 
and  a  guide,  and  a  governor,  who  also  created  it,  and  who 
also  preserves  everything  which  he  has  created. 

About  contentment. 
The  words  of  the  same  author. 
If  you  have  a  great  deal  of  wealth,  take  care  and  do  not  be 
carried  away  by  its  overflow ;  but  endeavour  to  take  hold  of 
some  dry  ground,  in  order  to  establish  your  mind  with  proper 
firmness  ;  and  this  will  be  the  proper  exertion  of  justice  and 
fairness.  And  if  you  should  have  abundant  supplies  of  all  the 
things  requisite  for  the  indulgence  of  those  passions  which  lie 
beneath  the  belly,  be  not  carried  away  by  such  plenty,  but  op- 
pose to  them  a  saving  degree  of  contentedness.  taking  in  this 
way  dry  ground  to  stand  upon  instead  of  an  absorbing  quick- 
sand. 

By  the  same  author. 

One  should  practise  being  contented  with  a  little,  for  this 
is  being  near  God ;  but  the  contrary  habit  is  being  very  far 
from  him. 

About  faith  in  and  piety  towards  God. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
What  can  be  a  real  sacrifice  except  the  piety  of  a  soul  de- 
voted to  the  love  of  God  ?  whose  grateful  "feelings  are  made 
immortal  by  God,  having  conferred  on  them  an  immortal 
duration  like  that  of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  the  whole 
world. 

About  wicked  and  impious  men. 
From  the  same  author. 
The  hopes  of  wicked  men  are  unstable,  as  they  expect  a  good 
late,  but  suffer  a  contrary  destiny  of  which  they  are  worthy. 

About  a  bad  conscience. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  his  treatise  on  Men  and  Things  which  are 
Improperly  Named. 

Who  is  there  who  does  wrongr  who  is  not  convicted  by  his 


266  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

own  conscience  as  if  he  were  in  a  court  of  justice,  even  though 
no  man  correct  him  ? 

About  advisers. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  Questions  in  Genesis. 

Since  the  mind  of  those  who  have  not  studied  philosophy  is 

bhnd  with  respect  to  many  of  the  circumstances  of  life,  one 

must  take  those  who  do  see  the  character  of  affau's  for  one's 

guides. 

About  hasty  talkers. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
He  who  has  not  shame  or  fear  for  his  companions,  has  an 
unbridled  mouth  and  a  licentious  tongue. 

About  loerfection. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
Perfection  and  an  absence  of  deficiency  are  found  in  God 
alone.  But  deficiency  and  imperfection  exist  in  every  man. 
For  man  is  taught,  even  if  he  be  the  wisest  of  his  race,  by 
some  other  man,  and  he  knows  nothing  without  being  taught 
by  his  own  nature.  And  if  one  man  has  more  knowledge  than 
another,  still  he  has  it  not  naturally,  but  because  of  instruc- 
tion which  he  has  received. 

About  those  who  think  lowlily  of  themselves. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
These  things  are  proved  to  be  most  completely  natural,  that 
the  descent  of  the  soul  is  its  elation  by  means  of  self-conceit, 
and  that  its  ascent  and  elevation  is  its  return  from  arrogance. 

From  the  same  author. 
It  is  desirable  to  eradicate  self-conceit,  which  is  the  friend 
of  endurance,  and  prudence,  and  justice,*'  and  also  to  destroy 
overbearing  pride  ;  for  it  is  no  small  proof  and  exercise  of  folly 
to  study  virtue  in  an  illegitimate  manner. 

From  the  same  author. 
If  you  are  puffed  up  by  glory  and  authority  so  as  to  desire 
great  things,  then  remember,  like  the  skilful  pilot  of  a  ship,  to 

*  It  is  evident  that  there  is  great  corruption  in  this  and  the  next 
sentence. 


FRAGMENTS.  267 

take  iu  your  sails,  that  you  may  not  be  carried  away  into 
absurd  conduct. 

About  sleep. 
TTie  words  of  Philo. 

Sleep,  according  to  the  prophet,  is  a  trance,  not  indeed  in 
accordance  with  insanity,  but  proceeding  from  a  relaxation  of 
the  outward  senses  and  the  retreat  of  reason  ;  for  at  that  time 
the  outward  senses  cease  from  attaching  themselves  to  their 
proper  objects,  and  the  mind  is  quiet,  neither  being  any  longer 
under  the  infiuence  nor  affording  any  motion  to  them,  and  they, 
being  in  consequence  cut  off  from  any  energy  because  they  are 
separated  from  the  objects  which  are  perceptible  to  them,  are 
dissolved  in  a  state  of  motionless  inactivity. 

From  the  same  author. 

Very  naturally  some  who  have  been  wise  enough  to  arrive  at 
correct  notions  of  the  truth,  have  described  sleep  as  a  thing  to 
teach  us  to  meditate  upon  death,  and  a  shadow  and  outline  of 
the  resurrection  which  is  hereafter  to  follow,  for  it  bears  in 
itself  visible  images  of  both  conditions,  for  it  removes  the  same 
man  from  his  state  of  perfection  and  brings  him  back  to  it. 

About  promises,  (&c. 
The  words  of  Philo. 

It  is  better  absolutely  never  to  make  any  promise  at  all  than 
not  to  assist  another  willingly,  for  no  blame  attaches  to  the  one, 
but  great  dislike  on  the  part  of  those  who  are  less  powerful, 
and  intense  hatred  and  long  enduring  punishment  from  tJiose 
who  are  more  powerful,  is  the  result  of  the  other  line  of  con- 
duct. 

About  haughty  men,  <£;c. 
From  the  first  book  of  the  Sacred  Allegory  of  the  Holy  Laws. 

Some  persons  say  that  the  last  thing  which  the  wise  man 
puts  off  is  the  tunic  of  vain  glory,  for  even  if  a  man  gets  the 
mastery  over  his  other  passions,  still  he  is  inclined  by  nature 
to  be  influenced  by  glory  and  the  praises  of  the  multitude. 

From  the  same  author. 
Self-conceit  is  an  impure  thing  by  nature. 


268  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

About  promises,  <&c. 
The  words  of  Philo. 

To  give  thanks  to  God  is  intrinsically  right,  but  not  to  do  so 
to  him  in  the  first  place,  and  not  to  begin  with  the  first  reasons 
for  gratitude,  is  blameahle,  for  it  is  not  right  to  give  the  chief 
honour  to  the  creation,  and  the  inferior  honour  to  God,  who  is 
the  giver  of  all  things  in  the  creation ;  and  indeed  that  is  a 
most  culpable  division,  inasmuch  as  it  is  laying  down  a  certaiu 
disorder  of  order. 

About  envy. 
The  words  of  Philo. 
Envy  naturally  attaches  itself  to  whatever  is  great. 

About  industrious  people. 
The  words  of  the  same  author. 

The  most  perfect  and  greatest  of  all  good  things  are  usually 
the  result  of  laborious  exercise  and  energetic  vigorous  labour 

From  the  same  author. 

It  is  absurd  for  a  man  who  is  in  the  pursuit  of  honours  to 
flee  from  labours  by  which  honours  are  acquired. 

About  the  soul  and  the  mind. 
From  the  same  author. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "You  shall  not  eat 
the  flesh  in  the  blood  of  the  soul?"*  God  appears  by  this 
expression  to  intend  to  show  that  the  blood  is  the  essence  of 
the  soul,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  soul  endowed  with  the  outward 
senses,  not  the  soul  spoken  of  in  the  most  excellent  sense  of 
the  word,  that  is  to  say,  as  far  as  it  is  endued  with  reason  and 
intellect ;  for  there  are  three  divisions  of  the  soul,  one  part 
being  nutritious,  a  second  being  endued  with  the  outward 
senses,  and  the  third  being  endued  with  reason.  Accordingly 
the  divine  Spirit  is  the  essence  of  the  rational  portion,  accord- 
ing to  the  sacred  historian  of  the  creation  of  the  world,  for  he 
says  that  "  God  breathed  into  his  face  the  breath  of  life."t 
But  of  that  part  which  is  endued  with  the  outward  senses,  and 
which  has  the  revivifying  power,  blood  is  the  essence,  for  he 
says  in  another  place  that  "  the  soul  of  all  flesh  is  the  blood  ;"* 
*  Genesis  ix.  4.  f  Genesis  ii.  9.  J  Deuteronomy  xii.  23. 


FRAGMENTS.  269 

but  wlmt  is  connected  with  the  flesh  is  the  outward  sense  and 
the  passions,  and  not  the  mind  and  the  intellect ;  not  but 
what  that  expression,  "  in  the  blood  of  the  soul,"  also  indicates 
that  the  soul  is  one  thing  and  the  body  another.  So  that  in 
real  truth  the  breath  is  the  essence  of  the  soul,  but  it  has  not 
any  place  of  itself  independently  of  the  blood,  but  it  resembles 
und  is  combined  with  blood. 

About  the  assistance  of  God. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  fourth  book  of  his  treatise  on  the 
Allegories  contained  in  the  Sacred  Laws. 

The  extremity  of  happiness  is  the  assistance  of  God,  for 
there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  want  when  God  gives  his  aid. 

About  the  creation  of  the  world. 

From  the  same  author,  from  the  first  book  of  the  Questions 
arising  in  Genesis. 

It  is  impossible  that  the  harmony,  and  arrangement,  and 
reason,  and  analogy,  and  that  all  the  great  accord  and  real 
happiness  which  we  see  existing  in  the  world  can  have  been 
originated  by  themselves,  for  it  follows  inevitably  that  these 
things  must  have  had  a  creator,  and  a  father,  and  a  regulator 
and  governor,  who  generated  them  in  the  first  place,  and  who 
now  preserves  what  he  has  generated. 

About  the  church  of  God. 
From  the  same  author. 
God  wishing  to  send  down  from  heaven  to  the  earth  an 
image  of  his  divine  virtue,  out  of  his  compassion  for  ouv  race, 
that  it  might  not  be  destitute  of  a  more  excellent  portion,  and 
that  he  might  thus  wash  off  the  pollutions  which  defile  our 
miserable  existence,  so  full  of  all  dishonour,  established  his 
church  among  us. 

Bbout  seeking  God. 

From  the  same  author,  from  the  last  book  of  the  Questions  arising 

in  Exodus 

The  one  most  powerful  relaxation  of  the  soul  leads  to  the 
sacred  love  of  the  one  living  God,  teaching  mankind  to  take 
God  as  its  guide  in  all  their  plans,  and  words,  and  actions. 

From  the  same  author. 
The  extremity  of  happiness  is  to   rest  uncnangeaoly  and 
immovably  on  God  alone. 


270  PHILO  JUD^US. 

About  the  last  day. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  second  book  of  the  Questions  arising 

in  Exodus. 

The  stars  are  turned  round  and  revolve  in  a  regular  circle, 
some  proceeding  on  in  the  same  manner  through  the  whole 
heaven,  and  others  have  special  eccentric  motions  of  their  own. 

About  the  detestation  of  unckedness  felt  by  God. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  second  book  of  the  Questions 
arising  in  Exodus. 

Some  men  think  that  repentance  appears  at  times  to  take 
possession  of  God  on  account  of  the  oaths  which  he  has  sworn, 
but  they  do  not  form  correct  notions  ;  for  apart  from  the  fact 
that  the  Deity  does  not  change,  neither  the  expression,  "  God 
repented,"  nor  that,  *'  And  it  grieved  him  at  the  heart,"*  is 
indicative  of  repentance,  for  the  Deity  is  unchangeable ;  but 
they  only  show  the  character  of  the  pure  intellect  which  is 
now  deeply  meditating  on  the  cause  for  which  he  created  man 
upon  the  earth. 

By  the  same  author,  from  the  same  book. 

There  is  no  hesitation  and  no  envy  in  God ;  but  he  often 
uses  expressions  indicative  of  hesitation  or  of  uncertainty  from 
a  reference  to  man,  who  is  susceptible  of  such  feelings  ;  for  as 
I  have  often  said,  there  are  altogether  two  supreme  sources; 
in  the  one  case  God  does  not  speak  as  man  speaks,  in  the 
other  he  instructs  man  as  a  man  instructs  his  son,  the  former 
being  a  sign  of  his  power,  the  second  of  the  way  in  which  he 
teaches  and  guides  man. 

About  promises. 

The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  last  book  of  the  Questions  arising 

in  Exodus. 

He  who  does  not  offer  to  God  first  fruits  of  his  own  free 
will  does  not  really  offer  first  fruits  at  all,  even  if  he  brings 
everything  which  is  great,  with  a  most  royal  abundance  of 
treasure ;  for  the  real  first  fruits  consist  not  in  the  things 
offered,  but  in  the  pious  disposition  of  him  who  offers  them. 

About  the  mildness  of  God  and  his  love  for  mankind. 
The  words  of  Philo,  from  the  Questions  arising  in  Exodus. 
The  mercies  of  God  do  always  outstrip  justice,  for  the  work 
*  Genesis  vi.  6. 


FRAGMENTS.  27 1 

which  he  has  chosen  for  himself  is  that  of  doing  good,  and  the 
task  of  punishing  follows  that ;  and  it  is  common,  when  great 
evils  are  about  to  arise,  for  an  abundance  of  great  and  nu- 
merous blessings  to  happen  first. 


FRAGMENTS  PRESERVED  BY  ANTONIUS. 

Ser.  I. 

The  virtues  alone  know  how  to  regulate  the  affairs  of  men. 

The  contemplation  of  virtue  is  exceedingly  beautiful,  and 
actions  according  to  it,  and  the  exercise  of  it,  are  desirable  above 
all  things. 

Ser.  II. 

If  you  wish  to  have  a  good  reputation  in  a  twofold  manner, 
then  honour  exceedingly  those  who  are  doing  well,  and  reprove 
those  who  are  doing  ill. 

Ser.  VIII. 

When  you  are  entreated  to  pardon  offences,  pardon  willingly 
those  who  have  offended  against  you,  because  indulgence  given 
in  requital  for  indulgence,  and  reconciliation  with  our  fellow 
servants,  is  a  means  of  averting  the  divine  anger. 

Ser.  IX. 

The  virtuous  man  is  a  lover  of  his  race,  and  he  is  merciful 
and  inclined  to  pardon,  and  never  bears  ill  will  towards  any 
man  whatever,  but  thinks  it  right  to  sui'pass  in  doing  good 
rather  than  in  injuring. 

Ibid. 

What  is  beautiful  is  then  beautiful,  when  a  man  has  no 
need  of  the  assistance  of  another,  but  when  he  contains  in 
himself  all  the  signs  of  excellence  as  his  own. 

Ser.  X. 

It  is  well  that  the  worse  should  always  follow  the  better,  on 
account  of  the  hope  of  improvement. 

Ser.  XI. 
One  ought  to  call  a  city,  and  a  country,  and  a  house,  happy, 


272  PIIILO   JUDiEUS. 

when  they  contain  a  virtuous  man ;  and  one  ought  to  call  those 
miserable,  when  they  have  no  such  man  within  them. 

Ser.  XVI. 

Those  who  are  tyrannical  in  their  natures,  but  without 
power,  make  their  designs  succeed  by  treachery. 

.Ser.  XX. 

The  friendships  of  the  wicked  are  mischievous,  and  very 
often  the  soul  of  such  men,  being  influenced  by  such  associa- 
tions, takes  the  impressions  of  downright  insanity. 

It  is  not  the  country  which  makes  men  bad,  or  the  city 
which  makes  them  good,  but  the  habits  of  living  with  such  and 
such  men. 

Ser.  XXVIII. 

One  need  not  dread  the  blow  of  a  weak  man,  nor  the  threat 
of  a  fool. 

Light-minded  men,  like  empty  vessels,  may  easily  be  taken 
and  moved  by  their  ears. 

Ser.  XXX. 

Nothing  that  is  done  can  be  beautiful  without  scientific  con- 
templation, for  knowledge  is  the  offspring  of  counsel,  but  folly 
is  the  source  of  all  evils. 

Every  argument  on  behalf  of  justice  is  superfluous,  when 
those  who  listen  are  unanimous  in  a  bad  object. 

Ser.  XXXVIII. 

The  wicked  man  disturbs  the  city,  and  is  eager  for  the  con- 
fusion and  the  disorder  of  all  men  and  all  things  within  the 
city ;  for  a  desire  of  interference,  and  covetousness,  and  the 
acts  of  a  demagogue,  and  the  influence  with  the  populace,  are 
looked  upon  as  honours  by  such  a  man,  and  quiet  he  looks 
upon  with  disdain. 

Excellence  is  a  thing  difficult  to  find,  or  rather  is  absolutely 
uudiscoverable  in  a  troubled  life.  : 

Ser.  XLIII.  ' 

There  is  nothing  so  calculated  to  cause  good  will  as  kind 
words,  on  account  of  good  actions. 

Ser.  XL VII. 
It  is  sufficient  not  to  bear  witness  one's  self,  but  that  which 


FRAGMENTS.  273 

Stands  in  need  of  the  advocacy  of  another  is  inadequate  to 
bring  conciliation  to  the  mind. 

Ser.  LII. 

Reject  with  aversion  the  deceitful  words  of  flatterers,  for 
they,  obscuring  reason,  do  not  contribute  to  the  truth  of 
things ;  for  either  they  praise  actions  which  are  deserving  of 
blame,  or  else  they  often  blame  things  beyond  all  praise. 

Ser.  LVI. 
Peace  is  the  greatest  blessing  which  no  man  is  able  to 
afford,  since  this  is  a  divine  action. 

Ser.  LVII. 

Behave  to  your  servants  in  the  same  manner  in  which  you 
desire  that  God  should  behave  to  you ;  for  as  we  hear  them 
we  shall  be  heard  by  him,  and  as  we  regard  them  we  shall  be 
regarded  by  him.  Let  us  therefore  let  our  compassion  outrun 
compassion,  that  we  may  receive  a  like  requital  from  him  for 
our  mercy  to  them. 

Ser.  LXIX. 

How  great  a  relief  of  nature  is  sleep,  it  is  the  image  of 
death,  and  the  rest  of  the  outward  senses. 

Sleep  is  one  thing  only,  but  the  desire  of  it  has  many 
reasons  and  causes ;  I  mean  from  nature,  from  food,  from  fate, 
and  perhaps  also  from  excessive  and  intense  fasting,  by  means 
of  which  the  flesh,  becoming  unnerved  and  deprived  of  strength, 
wishes  to  recover  itself  for  subsequent  actions  by  means  of 
sleep. 

As  much  drinking  is  called  a  habit,  so  is  much  sleep,  and 
t  is  difficult  to  get  rid  of  an  inveterate  habit. 

Ser.  LXXIV. 
Pardon  is  apt  to  engender  repentance. 

Ser.  LXXIX. 
Shamelessness  is  the  characteristic  of  a  worthless  man,  and 
modesty  of  a  virtuous  man,  but  never  to  feel  either  ashamed  or 
bold  is  a  mark  of  one  who  is  slow  of  comprehension,  and  who 
IS  without  the  power  of  giving  assent. 

VOL.  IV.  T 


274  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

Ser.  LXXXII. 

Since  God  penetrates  invisibly  in  the  region  of  the  soul,  let 
us  prepare  that  region  in  the  best  manner  that  we  are  able  to, 
or  rather  that  it  may  be  a  habitation  fit  for  God,  otherwise, 
without  our  being  aware  of  it,  God  will  depart  and  remove  to 
some  other  abode. 

The  mind  of  a  wise  man  is  the  house  of  God,  and  he  is 
called,  in  an  especial  manner,  the  God  of  all  mankind,  as  the 
prophet  says  when  speaking  of  the  mind  of  a  wise  man,  he 
calls  it  "  that  in  which  God  walks,"*  as  in  a  palace. 

What  is  visible  and  actually  before  us  is  comprehended  by 
the  eyes,  but  the  pure  faculty  of  reason  extends  even  to  what 
is  unseen  and  future. 

Ser.  LXXXVII. 

God  who  is  merciful  by  nature  will  never  exonerate  from 
guilt  the  man  who  swears  falsely  for  an  unrighteous  object,  as 
such  a  man  is  impure  and  defiled,  even  though  he  may  escape 
the  punishments  inflicted  by  men. 

Ser.  XCIX. 

Those  things  which  are  kept  in  the  dark  for  a  while  by 
envy,  are  at  last  released  and  brought  to  light. 

Ser.  CIV. 

In  his  essential  character  a  king  is  equal  to  every  man,  but 
in  the  power  of  his  authority  and  rank  he  is  equal  to  God 
who  ruleth  over  all  things ;  for  there  is  nothing  on  earth  that 
is  higher  than  he.  Therefore  it  becomes  him  as  being  a 
mortal  not  to  be  too  much  elated,  and  as  being  a  kind  of  God 
not  to  yield  too  much  to  passion ;  for  if  he  is  honoured  as 
being  of  the  likeness  of  God,  nevertheless  he  is  in  some  degree 
entangled  in  terrestrial  and  vile  dust,  by  means  of  which  he 
should  learn  simolicity  and  meekness  towards  all  men. 

Ser.  CXVI. 
A  severe  master  is  best  for  untractable  and  foolish  servants ; 
for  they,  fearing  his  threats  and  punishments,  though  against 
their  will,  are  made  to  do  right  by  fear. 

Ser.  CXVIII. 
It  is  the  greatest  praise  of  a  servant  to  neglect  nothing 
*  Leviticus  xxvL  12. 


FRAGMENTS.  275 

which  his  master  commands,  but  to  attempt  with  an  honest 
heart  to  perform  in  a  proper  and  successful  manner,  even  if  it 
be  beyond  his  power,  all  that  is  commanded  him  with  energy 
and  without  hesitation. 

Ser.  CXXIII. 

When  once  the  wife  of  Philo  was  asked  in  an  assembly  of 
many  women  why  she  alone  of  all  her  sex  did  not  wear  any 
golden  ornaments,  she  replied :  "  The  virtue  of  a  husband  is  a 
sufficient  ornament  for  his  wife." 

Ser.  CXXX. 

The  virtues  of  children  are  the  glory  of  their  fathers. 
Those  who  are  well  acquainted  with  what  is  honourable  and 
virtuous,  are  happy  in  their  children. 

Ser.  CXXXV. 

To  drink  poison  out  of  a  golden  goblet,  and  to  take  advice 
from  a  foolish  friend,  is  the  same  thing. 

New  vessels  are  better  than  old  ones,  but  old  friendship  is 
-.ctter  than  new. 

The  fruits  produced  by  the  earth  come  once  a  year ;  but 
those  which  we  derive  from  friendship  are  to  be  gathered  on 
every  occasion.  Many  men  select  for  their  friends  not  those 
who  ar3  the  most  virtuous,  but  those  who  are  rich. 

Many  who  appear  to  be  friends  are  not  so,  and  many  who 
lo  not  appear  to  be  such  are  so  in  reality ;  but  it  is  the  part 
)f  a  wise  man  to  discern  both  these  classes. 

Ser.  CLII. 

Youth  which  is  not  willing  to  work  is  laying  up  misfortunes 
)r  old  age. 

Ser.  CLVI. 
What  is  bad  is,  not  being  punished  here,  but  being  worthy 
r  punishment  hereafter. 

Ser.  CXXXV. 
God  has  implanted  hope  in  the  human  race  that,  having  a 
)mfort  innate  in  them,  those  who  have  committed  errors 
hich  are  not  irremediable  may  feel  their  sorrows  lightened. 

T  2 


276  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

Ser.  CLXXXII. 
Pleasure  appears  to  be  an  equable  kind  of  motion,  but  ir 
reality  it  both  is  and  is  found  to  be  rough. 


The  followirog  Fragments  are  from  an  Anonym,ous  Collection 
in  the  Bodleian  Library  at  Oxford. 

Extracts  from  Philo, 
About  friends. 

A  steadiness  towards  one's  friends  is  a  sign  of  a  general 
stability  of  disposition,  on  which  account  one  ought  not  to 
form  friendship  till  one  has  carefully  tested  the  characters  oi 
those  with  whom  he  proposes  to  form  it ;  for  not  only  is  the 
forming  of  such  friendship  pleasant,  but  so  also  is  the  feeling 
that  one  has  not  to  bear  by  one's  self  burdens  which  oppress  the 
soul,  and  not  to  depart  from  the  association ;  for  he  who  is  the 
cause  of  differences  in  friendship  is  not  known  to  the  generalitj 
of  men,  but  he  is  accustomed  to  bring  common  blame  upoc 
both  parties,  and  very  commonly  on  the  innocent  party  moK 
than  on  the  guilty  one. 

Of  secret  things,  you  may  share  with  mean  persons  thos( 
which  increase  your  virtue  ;  but  as  to  those  which  deteriorate 
your  mind,  you  must  not  pursue  them  yourself,  nor  impute 
them  to  your  friends. 

The  life  of  man  is  like  a  sea,  it  is  liable  to  every  descriptici 
of  agitation  and  change,  even  in  the  height  of  prosperity  ;  fo 
nothing  earth-born  is  firmly  established,  but  all  such  thing 
are  carried  about  to  and  fro,  like  a  vessel  which  is  drivei 
about  in  the  sea  by  contrary  winds. 

About  sin. 
Let  us  fear  not  the  diseases  w^hich   come  upon  us  froi 
without,  but  those  offences  on  which  account  diseases  comi 
diseases  of  the  soul  rather  than  of  the  body. 

About  pain. 
Every  foolish  man  is  in  a  strait,  being  oppressed  by  cov* 
tousness,  and  love  of  glory,  and  desire  of  pleasure,  and  tbin| 
of  that  sort,  which  do  not  allow  the  mind  freedom  of  motion. 


FRAGMENTS.  277 

About  gluttony. 

The  sons  of  the  physicians  have  laid  it  down  as  a  maxim 
that  regularity  is  the  parent  of  a  healthy  condition  of  the  body, 
paying  but  little  attention  to  the  health  of  the  soul ;  but  we 
lay  it  down  that  regularity  is  not  only  destructive  of  all  dis- 
eases of  the  body,  but  much  more  do  we  recognise  the  fact  that 
the  truest  health  is  that  which  destroys  the  passions  which 
injure  the  soul. 

About  custom  and  familiarity. 

An  inveterate  habit  is  more  powerful  than  nature,  and 
little  things,  if  they  are  not  hindered,  grow  up  and  increase 
and  become  of  a  large  size. 


The  following  Fragments  are  from  an  Unpublished  Manuscript 
in  the  Library  of  the  French  King. 

From  the  works  of  the  Hebrew  Philo,  on  Genesis  vi.  7. 
Why  is  it  that  God,  when  he  threatens  to  extirpate  man- 
kind, does  also  destroy  the  irrational  animals  ?  Because  the 
irrational  animals  were  not  originally  created  designedly  for 
their  own  sakes,  but  for  the  sake  of  man,  and  to  perform 
services  of  which  he  might  be  in  need  ;  and  when  man  was 
destroyed  it  followed  naturally  that  they  should  also  be 
destroyed  at  the  same  time,  when  the  beings  for  whose  sake 
they  had  been  created  were  no  longer  in  existence. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xvii.  14. 
The  law  does  not  treat  any  action  done  involuntarily  as 
:^nilty,  since  it  even  pardons  a  man  who  has  committed 
imrder  unintentionally  ;  but  if  a  child  is  not  circumcised  eight 
lays  after  its  birth,  what  evil  has  it  done  so  as  to  be  subjected 
;o  the  punishment  of  death?  Therefore  some  persons  say 
,hat  the  manner  of  the  punishment  is  to  be  referred  to  its 
mrents,  and  think  that  they  ought  to  be  punished  severely  as 
mving  neglected  the  commandments  of  the  law ;  and  others 
hink  that  it  is  by  an  excess  of  indignation  that  God  is  here 
•epresented  as  inflicting  punishment,  as  far  as  appearance 
oes,  on  the  child,  in  order  that  this  inevitable  punishment 


Q78  PHILO   JUD^US. 

may  be  inflicted  on  those  people  of  mature  age  who  have 
violated  the  law. 

Not  because  the  action  of  circumcision  is  important  in  itself, 
but  because  if  that  is  neglected  the  covenant  itself  is  treated 
with  contempt  when  the  seal  by  which  it  is  recognised  and 
ratified  is  not  made  perfect. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xix.  23. 
Why  did  the  sun  go  forth  upon  the  land  when  Lot  entered 
into  Segor  ?  And  he  says  the  very  same  place  is  a  safety  for 
those  who  are  making  progress,  and  a  punishment  to  those 
who  are  inwardly  wicked.  And  again  the  moment  that  the 
suli  rises  in  the  beginning  of  the  day  it  brings  with  it  justice  ; 
wishing  to  show  that  the  sun,  and  the  day,  and  the  light,  and 
everything  else  in  the  world  which  is  beautiful  and  honourable 
are  given  only  to  the  virtuous  and  to  no  worthless  man  wh^ 
embraces  incurable  wickedness. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvii.  24 — 27. 
Having  been  spies  rather  than  friends  under  truce,  anc 
being  prepared  for  either  alternative ;  for  war  if  they  saw  thai 
the  other  was  weak,  and  for  peace  if  they  found  him  strongei 
than  themselves. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvi.  28,  &c. 
These  are  the  covenants  which  they  made,  not  to  be  de^ 
stroyed  as  the  other  nations  had  been,  and  the  Philistines  wen 
at  a  subsequent  period  by  the  Israelites ;  whom  the  hoi; 
scriptures  call  sometimes  Canaanites,  and  sometimes  Cappa 
docians ;  but  afterwards  the  Cappadocians  emigrated. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvi.  30. 
Not  on  account  of  praise,  for  the  wise  man  is  not  attractei 
by  flattery  or  by  any  other  kind  of  subserviency,  but  becaus 
he  has  accepted  their  repentance. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvii.  6,  &c. 

When  he  had  two  sons,  the  one  good  and  the  other  guilt;; 
he  says  that  he  will  bless  the  guilty  one,  not  because  he  pr* 
ferred  him  to  the  good  one,  but  because  he  knew  that  th 
other  one  could  do  right  by  himself,  but  that  the  other  m 
convicted  by  his  own  disposition,  and  had  no  hope  whatever  < 


FRAGMENTS.  279 

salvation  except  in  the  prayers  of  his  father ;  and  if  he  did  not 
obtain  them,  then  he  would  be  the  most  miserable  of  all  men. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvii.  11,  &c. 
It  is  proper  here  to  admire  also  the  good  will  of  his  mother, 
who  confessed  herself  willing  to  take  upon  herself  the  cause 
for  his  sake,  in  order  that  her  son  might  have  the  honour  to 
v/hich  the  two  were  entitled,  for  she  is  carried  away  by  her 
affection  for  both  of  them ;  for  she  had  feared  his  father, 
lest  she  should  be  looked  upon  as  imposing  on  him,  and  to  be 
filching  away  the  honour  to  which  the  other  was  entitled  ;  and 
his  mother,  lest  he  should  be  considered  by  her  as  disobedient 
to  her  when  she  urged  him  vehemently ;  on  which  account  he 
says,  with  great  prudence  and  propriety,  Will  not  my  father 
curse  me  ?  and  I  shall  be  bringing  a  curse  on  myself.  He  had 
confidence  because  of  the  promise  of  God,  which  said,  "  The 
elder  shall  serve  the  younger."  But,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
feared  as  a  man,  lest  the  blessing  of  his  father,  as  a  just  man, 
should  overturn  the  assertion  of  God. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Genesis  xxvii.  30. 
He  is  not  so  indignant  at  his  disappointment  in  not  obtain- 
ing the  blessings,  as  at  the  fact  of  his  brother  having  been 
thought  worthy  of  them ;  for  being  of  an  envious  disposition, 
he  regarded  his  want  of  success  as  more  desirable  than  even 
his  own  advantage,  and  he  shows  this  by  his  great  and  bitter 
lamentations,  and  by  his  subsequent  exclamation^  "  Bless  me 
now  also,  0  my  father." 

From  the  same  author. 

But  if  he  obtained  it  by  fraud,  a  man  will  be  inclined  to 

say,  he  was  not  to  be  praised.   What  then  does  his  father  say  ? 

I  ■'  And  he  shall  be  blessed."     But  he  appears  by  what  he  here 

I  says  to  intimate,  in  an  enigmatical  and  obscure  manner,  that 

it  does  not  follow  that  every  stratagem  is  blameable,  since 

iTuardians  of  the  night  when  they  lie  in  wait  for  robbers,  and 

generals  when  they  form  ambuscades  for  enemies  whom  they 

.  would  not  be  able  to  subdue  by  open  force,   appear  to  act 

rightly :  and  what  are  called  stratagems  proceed  on  the  same 

principle  as  the  contests  of  wrestlers,  for  in  these  cases  too 

tricks  are  accounted  honourable;  and  those  who  by  trickery 

get  the  better  of  their  antagonists  are  thought  worthy  of  the 


280  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

prize,  and  of  the  crown  of  victory ;  so  that  it  is  not  a  charge 
against  a  man  to  say,  he  has  done  a  thing  by  trick,  but  it  is 
rather  a  panegyric,  being  equivalent  to  saying,  he  has  done  it 
skilfully,  for  the  virtuous  man  does  not  do  anything  unskilfully. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xx.  25. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  "  thy  dagger,"  and  what  comes  next  ? 
Those  who  by  their  nature  venture  to  make  improper  attempts, 
and  who  by  their  own  private  endeavours  metamorphose  the 
works  of  nature,  defile  what  ought  not  to  be  defiled,  for  all  the 
things  of  nature  are  perfect  and  complete,  and  stand  in  need 
of  no  addition. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxii.  19. 

He  shows  most  evidently  that  he  is  a  proselyte,  inasmuch  as 
he  is  not  circumcised  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin,  but  in  the 
pleasures  and  appetites,  and  all  the  other  passions  of  the  soul ; 
for  the  Hebrew  race  was  not  circumcised  in  Egypt,  but  being 
ill-treated  with  every  imaginable  circumstance  of  ill-treat- 
ment by  the  natural  cruelty  of  the  natives  of  the  country  to 
strangers,  it  nevertheless  lived  among  them  with  fortitude  and 
patience,  and  that  not  more  from  compulsion  than  voluntarily, 
because  of  the  refuge  which  it  possessed  in  God  the  saviour, 
who,  sending  down  his  beneficent  power,  delivered  his  suppli- 
ants from  their  difficult  and  apparently  inextricable  troubles. 

On  this  account  Moses  adds,  "  For  you  know  the  soul  of  a 
proselyte."*  Now  what  is  the  mind  of  a  proselyte  ?  a  forsaking  of 
the  opinions  of  the  worshippers  of  many  gods,  and  a  union 
with  those  who  honour  the  one  God,  the  Father  of  the  uni- 
verse. In  the  second  place,  some  persons  call  foreigners  also 
proselytes,  and  those  are  strangers  who  have  come  over  to  the 
truth  in  the  same  manner  with  those  who  have  been  sojourn- 
ers in  Egypt;  for  the  one  are  strangers  newly  arrived  in  the 
country,  but  the  last  are  strangers  also  to  the  customs  and 
laws,  but  the  common  name  of  proselytes  is  given  to  both. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxii.  22. 

It  is  forbidden  to  injure  a  widow  and  orphan,  for  these  are 

under  the  protection  of  the  especial  providence  of  God,  since 

they  are  deprived  of  their  natural  protectors  and  guardians,  for 

God  wills   that  those  who  enjoy  natural  associations  should 

*  Exodus  xxiii.  10. 


FRAGMENTS.  281 

make  amends  to  the  others  from  their  own  abundance  of 
resources. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  1. 
He  says  that  we  must  not  approach  folly  or  falsehood,  either 
with  the  ears  or  with  any  other  of  the  outward  senses,  for  great 
injuries  are  the  result  of  being  deceived ;  on  which  account 
some  lawgivers  have  forbidden  any  one  to  give  hearsay  evi- 
dence, since  the  truth  is  confirmed  by  eyesight,  but  falsehood 
by  hearing. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  6. 
Poverty  by  itself  claims  compassion,  in  order  to  coiTect  its 
deficiencies,  but  when  it  comes  to  judgment,  it  then  has  for 
the  arbitrator  the  law  of  equity,  for  justice  is  a  divine  and  in- 
corruptible thing,  on  which  account  it  is  expressly  affirmed  in 
another  passage  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  just.* 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  18. 

Instead  of  saying  leavened  bread  must  not  come  among  the 
things  which  are  offered,  but  all  things  which  are  brought  as  a 
sacrifice  or  an  offering  must  be  unleavened,  he  intimates  two 
most  necessary  things  by  an  obscure  and  symbolical  expression ; 
one  being  to  despise  pleasure,  for  leaven  is  the  seasoning  of 
food  and  not  food  itself;  and  the  other  being  that  it  is  not 
right  for  men  to  be  elated,  because  of  being  puffed  up  by  vain 
self-conceit ;  for  each  is  a  wicked  state,  and  pleasure  and  self- 
•onceit  are  both  the  offspring  of  one  mother,  deceit. 

The  blood  of  the  sacrifices  is  a  proof  of  a  soul  making  its 
offerings  to  God;  and  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  divine 
iaw  that  things  which  will  not  unite  should  be  mingled 
together. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  20. 

One  must  suppose  that  the  angel  mentioned  a  little  before 

indicated  the  voice  of  God  ;  for  the  prophet  is  the  messenger 

of  the  Lord,  who  is  the  real  speaker ;  for  it  is  inevitable  that 

he  who  hears  with  his  ears,  that  is  to  say  who  firmly  receives 

.  what  is  said,  must  also  accomplish  what  is  said  to  him  by  his 

,  actions  ;  for  an  action  is  the  proof  of  what  is  said  ;  and  he  who 

ji'?.  obedient  to  what  is  said,  and  who  performs  actions  corre- 

I  *  Deuteronomy  xxxii.  4. 


282  PHILO  JUD^US. 

sponding  to  his  orders,  must  of  necessity  have  him  who  has 
commanded  him  for  his  ally  and  champion,  who  in  appearance 
indeed  brings  assistance  to  his  pupil,  but  in  reality  to  his  own 

doctrines  and  commandments, which  his  enemies 

and  adversaries  seek  to  overthrow. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  24. 

Pillars  symbolically  mean  the  doctrines  which  appear  to 
stand  and  to  be  firmly  established.  Now  of  the  doctrines 
established  in  this  firm  way,  some  are  good,  which  ought  to  be 
stored  up  and  to  be  fixed  in  a  most  lasting  manner;  but 
others  are  open  to  blame,  and  such  it  is  desirable  should  be 
overthrown.  But  the  expression,  "overthrowing  you  will  over- 
throw, and  destroying  you  will  destroy,"  has  such  a  meaning  as 
the  following. 

Some  men  pull  down  some  things  as  if  they  meant  to  raise 
them  again,  and  destroy  some  things  as  if  they  meant  at  a 
future  time  to  re-establish  them.  But  God  wills  that  what 
has  been  once  destroyed  and  pulled  down  shall  never  be  raised 
or  re-established  again,  but  shall  be  utterly  destroyed  and  for 
ever,  as  being  contrary  to  what  is  good  or  beautiful. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  28. 
And  we  ought  to  consider  that  the  wasps  are  a  sign  of 
unexpected  power  coming  by  the  divine  mission ;  which, 
bringing  down  its  blows  from  high  places  so  as  to  reach  the 
extremity  of  the  ear,  takes  a  good  aim  with  all  its  strokes,  and 
regulating  them  well  will  meet  with  no  failure  whatever  itself. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiii.  31. 
These  things  God  announced  to  them,  if  they  obeyed  him 
and  kept  his  commandments.     But  when  they  were  found  to 
be  transgressing  and  disobedient  to  the  divine  law,  he  then 
contracted  his  promise  from  Dan  to  Beersheba. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiv.  9,  10. 
The  express  command  as  uttered  has  a  subsequent  pro- 
position evident,  as  all  were  preserved  in  safety.     But  the  real 
meaning  is  that  they  all  were  of  one  mind  in  respect  of  piety 
and  differed  in  no  good  thing. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiv.  10. 
When  he  speaks  of  the  seventy  men  he  means  those  with 


FRAGMENTS.  283 

Moses,  and  Aaron,  and  Nadab,  and  Abihu.  And  the  state- 
ment that  they  did  not  differ,  rather  shows  that  they  all 
equally  saw  the  place  where  God  had  stood,  than  that  nothing 
was  left. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiv.  13. 
He  is  most  manifestly  offended  with  those  who  being  near 
thought,  out  of  their  impiety  or  folly,  that  the  motions  of  the 
Deity  were  those  of  peace,  and  belonging  to  the  act  of 
changing  his  abode  ;  for  behold  he  says  expressly,  not  that  the 
God  who  exists  in  essence,  and  who  is  duly  thought  of  in 
respect  of  his  existence,  came  down,  but  that  his  glory  came 
down.  And  the  acceptation  of  the  word  glory  may  be  twofold  ; 
for  in  one  sense  it  may  signify  the  presence  of  his  powers, 
since  the  power  of  his  army  is  spoken  of  as  the  glory  of  a 
king ;  and  in  another  sense  it  may  refer  to  the  appearance  of 
him  alone,  and  to  the  apprehension  of  his  divine  glory ;  so 
that  an  idea  of  the  actual  arrival  of  God  may  have  been 
created  in  the  minds  of  those  who  were  present,  as  if  he  had 
come  in  order  to  give  a  most  undeniable  information  to  the 
^laws  which  were  about  to  be  given. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiv.  17. 
But  he  says  that  the  appearance  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is 
very  like  unto  flame,  or  rather  not  that  it  is  so,  but  that  it 
appears  like  it  to  the  beholders ;  since  God  shows  what  he 
chose  to  appear  to  be,  in  order  to  strike  the  beholders  with 
amazement  without  in  reality  being  what  he  appeared. 
Accordingly  he  brings  him  before  the  face  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  affirming  in  the  plainest  language  that  it  was  an 
appearance  as  of  flame,  but  not  a  real  flame.  But  as  flame 
consumes  every  material  which  is  exposed  to  it,  so  also  when 
the  true  conception  of  God  once  enters  into  the  soul,  it 
destroys  all  the  heterodox  reasonings  of  impiety,  and  purifies 
and  sanctifies  the  whole  mind. 

From  the  same  author,  on  Exodus  xxiv.  18. 
Because  the  generation  which  had  thus  quitted  its  former 
abode  was  about  to  be  condemned,  and  to  wander  in  a  state 
of  desolation  for  forty  years,  having  received  innumerable 
benefits,  but  having  displayed  its  ingratitude  in  still  more 
countless  instances. 


284  PHILO  JUD^US. 

A  YOLUME 

OF 

QUESTION'S,  AND  SOLUTIONS  TO  THOSE  QUESTIONS, 
WHICH  ARISE  IN  GENESIS.* 

BOOK  I. 

Why  does  Moses,  revolving  and  considering  the  creation  of 
the  world,  say :  "  This  is  the  book  of  the  generation  of  heaven 
and  earth,  when  they  were  created ?"t 

1.  The  expression,  "when  they  were  created,"  indicates  as  it 
seems  an  indeterminate  time  not  accurately  described.  But 
this  argument  will  confute  those  authors  who  calculate  a 
certain  number  of  years  reduced  to  one,  from  the  time  when  it 
is  possible  that  the  world  may  have  been  created. 

And  again,  the  expression :  "  This  is  the  book  of  tne  gene- 
ration," is  as  it  were  indicative  of  the  book  as  it  follows,  which 
contains  an  account  of  the  creation  of  the  world ;  in  which  it  is 
intimated  that  what  has  been  related  about  the  creation  of  the 
world  is  consistent  with  strict  truth. 

What  is  the  object  of  saying,  "  And  God  made  every  green" 
herb  of  the  field,  before  it  was  upon  the  earth,  and  every  grass 
before  it  had  sprung  up?" J 

2.  He  here  by  these  expressions  intimates  in  enigmatical 
language  the  incorporeal  species ;  since  the  expression,  "  be- 
fore it  was  upon  the  earth,"  indicates  the  arriving  at  perfection 
of  every  herb,  and  of  all  seeds  and  trees.  But  as  to  what  he 
says,  that  "  before  it  had  sprung  up  upon  the  earth,"  he  had 
made  every  green  herb,  and  grass,  et  csetera,  it  is  plain  that  the 
incorporeal  species,  as  being  indicative  of  the  others,  were 
created  first,  in  accordance  with  intellectual  nature,  which 
those  things  which  are  upon  the  earth  perceptible  to  the  out- 
ward senses  were  to  imitate. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  saying :  "A  fountain  went  up  from 
the  earth,  and  watered  all  the  face  of  the  earth  ?"§ 

HI,  But  here  the  question  is  how  it  could  be  that  the  whole 

*  This  work  is  translated  from  a  Latin  version  made  by  Aucher 
from  an  Armenian  version  of  the  fifth  century. 

f  Genesis  ii.  4.  j  Genesis  ii.  5.  §  Genesis  ii.  7. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  285 

I  earth  was  watered  by  one  fountain,  not  only  on  account  of  its 
■  size,  but  also  because  of  the  inequality  of  the  montainous  and 
champaign  situations?  Unless,  indeed,  just  as  the  whole 
force  of  the  king's  cavalry  is  called  "  the  horse,"  so  the  whole 
multitude  of  the  veins  of  the  earth  which  supply  drinkable 
water,  may  perhaps  be  called  the  fountain,  inasmuch  as  they  all 
bubble  up  like  a  fountain. 

And  that  expression  is  peculiarly  appropriate  which  says 
that  the  fountain  watered,  not  the  whole  earth,  but  its  face ; 
as  in  the  living  being  it  waters  the  chief  and  predominant 
part  (the  mind  or  the  countenance).  Since  that  is  the  most 
important  part  of  the  earth  which  can  be  good  and  fertile  and 
productive,  and  that  is  the  part  which  stands  in  need  of  the 
nourishment  of 'fountains. 

What  is  the  man  who  was  created  ?  And  how  is  that  man 
distinguished  who  was  made  after  the  image  of  God  ? 

4.  This  man  was  created  as  perceptible  to  the  senses,  and 
in  the  similitude  of  a  Being  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect ; 
but  he  who  in  respect  of  his  form  is  intellectual  and  incorpo- 
real, is  the  similitude  of  the  archetypal  model  as  to  appearance, 
and  he  is  the  form  of  the  principal  character ;  but  this  is  the 
word  of  God,  the  first  beginning  of  all  things,  the  original 
species  or  the  archetypal  idea,  the  first  measure  of  the 
universe. 

Moreover,  that  man  who  was  to  be  created  as  a  vessel  is 
formed  by  a  potter,  was  formed  out  of  dust  and  clay  as  far  as 
his  body  was  concerned ;  but  he  received  his  soul  by  God 
breathing  the  breath  of  life  into  his  face,  so  that  the  tempera- 
ment of  his  nature  was  combined  of  what  was  corruptible  and 
of  Mhat  was  incorruptible.  But  the  other  man,  he  who  is 
only  so  in  form,  is  found  to  be  unalloyed  without  any  mixture 
proceeding  from  an  invisible,  simple,  and  transparent  nature. 

Why  is  it  said  that  God  breathed  into  his  face  the  breath  of 
life? 

5.  In  the  first  place  because  life  is  the  principal  part  of 
the  body ;  for  the  rest  was  only  made  as  a  sort  of  foundation 
or  pedestal,  and  then  life  was  put  upon  it  as  a  statue.  Besides, 

*  Genesis  IL  7. 


280  PHILO   JUD^US. 

the  sense  is  the  fountain  of  the  animal  form,  and  sense  resides 
in  the  face. 

Secondly,  man  is  created  to  be  a  partaker  not  only  of  a  soul 
but  also  of  a  rational  soul ;  and  the  head  is  the  temple  of  the 
reason,  as  some  writers  have  called  it. 

Why  is  God  said  to  have  planted  a  Paradise  ?  And  for 
whom  ?     And  what  is  meant  by  a  paradise  ? 

6.  The  word  paradise,  if  taken  literally,  has  no  need  of  any 
particular  explanation ;  for  it  means  a  place  thickly  crowded 
with  every  kind  of  tree ;  but  symbolically  taken,  it  means 
wisdom,  intelligence  both  divine  and  human,  and  the  proper 
comprehension  of  the  causes  of  things ;  since  it  was  proper, 
after  the  creation  of  the  world,  to  establish  a  contemplative 
system  of  life,  in  order  that  man,  by  the  sight  of  the  world 
and  of  the  things  which  are  contained  in  it,  might  be  able  to 
attain  to  a  correct  notion  of  the  praise  due  to  the  Father. 

And  since  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  behold  nature  her- 
self, nor  properly  to  praise  the  Creator  of  the  universe  without 
wisdom,  therefore  the  Creator  planted  the  outline  of  it  in  the 
rational  soul  of  the  principal  guide  of  man,  namely  the  mind, 
as  he  planted  trees  in  the  paradise.  And  when  we  are  told 
that  in  the  middle  was  the  tree  of  life,  that  means  the  know- 
ledge not  only  of  the  creature,  but  also  of  the  greater  and 
supreme  cause  of  the  universe ;  for  if  any  one  is  able  to  arrive 
at  a  certain  comprehension  of  that,  he  will  be  fortunate  and 
truly  happy  and  immortal. 

Moreover,  after  the  creation  of  the  world  human  wisdom  was 
created,  as  also  after  the  creation  of  the  world  the  Paradise 
was  planted  ;  and  so  the  poets  say  that  the  chorus  of  musicians 
was  established  in  order  to  praise  the  Creator  and  his  works ; 
as  Plato  says,  that  the  Creator  was  the  first  and  greatest  of 
causes,  and  that  the  world  was  the  most  beautiful  of  all 
creatures. 

Why  in  Adin,  or  Eden,  is  God  said  to  have  planted  the 
Paradise  towards  the  east?* 

7.  This  is  said  in  the  first  place  because  tne  motion  of 
the  world  proceeds  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to  its  setting. 
And  it  first  exists  in  that  quarter  from  which  it  is  moved ; 

*  Ge?2esis  ii.  8. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  287 

secondly,  because  tnat  part  of  the  world  which  is  in  the  region 
of  the  east  is  called  the  right  side  ;  and  that  which  is  in  the 
region  of  the  west  is  called  the  left  side  of  the  world. 

Moreover  the  poet  bears  witness  to  this,  calling  the  birds 
from  the  east  dexteras  or  right,  and  those  on  the  west  sinis- 
tras  or  left ;  *  when  he  says,  whether  they  go  to  the  right  to 
the  day  and  to  the  sun,  or  whether  they  go  to  the  left  towards 
the  dusky  evening. 

But  the  name  Eden,  when  rightly  understood,  is  an  indica- 
tion of  all  kinds  of  delights,  and  joys,  and  pleasures  ;  since  all 
good  things  and  all  blessings  derive  their  beginning  from  the 
place  of  the  Lord.  Thirdly,  because  wisdom  itself  is  splendour 
and  light. 

Why  did  God  place  man  whom  he  had  created  in  the  Para- 
dise, but  not  that  man  who  is  after  his  own  image  ?t 

8.  Some  persons  have  said,  when  they  fancied  that  the 
Paradise  was  a  garden,  that  because  the  man  who  was  created 
was  endowed  with  senses,  therefore  he  naturally  and  properly 
proceeded  into  a  sensible  place ;  but  the  other  man,  who  is 
made  after  God's  own  image,  being  appreciable  only  by  the 
intellect,  and  invisible,  had  all  the  incorporeal  species  for  his 
share ;  but  I  should  rather  say  that  the  paradise  was  a  symbol 
of  wisdom,  for  that  created  man  is  a  kind  of  mixture,  as  hav- 
ing bf;en  compounded  of  soul  and  body,  having  work  to  do  by 
learning  and  discipline ;  desiring  according  to  the  law  of 
philosophy  that  he  may  become  happy ;  but  he  w^ho  is  accord- 
ing to  God's  own  image  is  in  need  of  nothing,  being  by  him- 

•  He  ia' referring  here  to  Homer — 

Twi'Tj  d'  oiuivoiai  TawTTTepvysccri  Ki\iii(iQ 
IlfiGfjUfvai,  Tiov  d'  ovTi  fxtTarpkiro)  out'  dXtyt'^w 
Eir'  IttI  ^6^1*  iioci  TTpbc  ^(ir'  'HXiovre 
Eir'  Itt'  apiOTipd  roiye  ttottI  ^o^ov  i^fpoivra. 
Eic  oiojvoQ  dpiaroQ  dfivvicOai  -Kepi  TraTprjg. 
Or  as  Pope  translates  it — 

**  Ye  vagrants  of  the  sky  !  your  wings  extend, 
I  Or  where  the  suns  arise,  or  where  descend; 

To  right,  to  left,  unheeded  take  your  way, 
j  While  I  the  dictates  of  high  Heaven  obey. 

I    t  Genesis  ii.  15. 


288  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

self  a  hearer,  and  being  taught  by  himself,  and  being  found  to 
be  his  own  master  by  reason  of  his  natural  endowments. 

Why  does  Moses  say  that  every  tree  in  the  Paradise  was 
beautiful  to  look  upon  and  good  to  eat  ?  * 

9.  He  says  this  because  the  virtue  of  trees  is  of  a  twofold 
nature,  consisting  in  bearing  leaves  and  fruit,  one  of  which 
qualities  is  referred  to  the  pleasing  of  the  sight,  the  other  to 
the  gratification  of  the  taste ;  but  the  word  beautiful  was  not 
employed  inappropriately.  Indeed  it  is  very  proper  that  the 
plants  should  be  always  green  and  flourishing  perpetually,  as 
belonging  to  a  divine  Paradise,  which  as  such  must  be  ever- 
lasting ;  and  it  is  fit  too  that  they  should  never  degenerate  so 
as  to  lose  their  leaves. 

But  of  the  fruit  he  says,  not  that  it  was  beautiful,  but  that 
it  was  good,  speaking  in  a  very  philosophical  spirit ;  since 
men  take  food,  not  only  because  of  the  pleasure  which  it 
affords,  but  also  because  of  its  use ;  and  use  is  the  flowing  forth 
and  imparting  of  some  good. 

What  is  meant  by  the  tree  of  life,  and  why  it  was  placed  in 
the  middle  of  the  Paradise? 

10.  Some  people  have  believed  that,  if  there  were  really 
plants  of  a  corporeal  and  deadly  nature,  there  are  also  some 
which  are  causes  of  life  and  immortality,  because,  they  say, 
life  and  death  are  opposed  to  one  another,  and  because  some 
plants  are  ascertained  to  be  unwholesome,  therefore  of 
necessity  there  must  be  others  from  which  health  may  be 
derived.  But  what  these  are  which  are  wholesome  they  know 
not ;  for  generation,  as  the  opinion  of  the  wise  has  it,  is  the 
beginning  of  corruption. 

But  perhaps  we  ought  to  look  on  these  things  as  spoken  iu 
an  allegorical  sense ;  for  some  say  the  tree  of  hfe  belongs  to 
the  earth,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  earth  which  produces  every- 
thing which  is  of  use  for  life,  whether  it  be  the  life  of  mankind 
or  of  any  other  animal ;  since  God  has  appointed  the  situation 
in  the  centre  for  this  plant,  and  the  centre  of  the  universe  is 
the  earth.  There  are  others  who  assert  that  what  is  meant 
by  the  tree  of  life  is  the  centre  between  the  seven  circles  o) 
heaven  ;  but  some  affirm  that  it  is  the  sun  which  is  meant,  a.' 
that  is  nearly  in  the  centre,  between  the  different  planets,  anc 

*  Genesis  ii.  9. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  289 

is  likewise  the  cause  of  the  four  seasons,  and  since  it  is  owing 
to  him  that  every  thing  which  exists  is  called  into  existence. 

Others  again  understand  hy  the  tree  of  life  the  direction  of 
the  soul,  for  this  it  is  which  renders  the  sense  nervous  and  solid, 
80  as  to  produce  actions  corresponding  to  its  nature,  and  to  the 
community  of  the  parts  of  the  body.  But  whatever  is  in  the 
middle  is  in  a  manner  the  primary  cause  and  beginning  of 
things,  like  the  leader  of  a  chorus.  But  still,  the  best  and 
wisest  authorities  have  considered  that  by  the  tree  of  life  is 
indicated  the  best  of  all  the  virtues  of  man,  piety,  by  which 
alone  the  mind  attains  to  immortality. 

What  is  meant  by  the  tree  of  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil  ?^' 

11.  This  indeed  exhibits  that  meaning  which  is  sought  for 
in  the  letter  of  the  Scriptures  more  clearly  to  the  sight,  as  it 
1  tears  a  manifest  allegory  on  the  face  of  it.     What  is  meant 

lien  under  this  figure  is  prudence,  which  is  the  comprehension 

r  science,  by  which  all  things  are  known  and  distinguished 
-iora  one  another,  whether  they  be  good  and  beautiful,  or  bad 
and  unseemly,  or  in  short  every  sort  of  contrariety  is  discerned  ; 
since  some  things  belong  to  the  better  class,  and  some  to  the 
worse. 

Therefore  the  wisdom  which  exists  in  this  world  is  not  in 
truth  God  himself,  but  the  work  of  God ;  that  it  is  which  sees 
and  thoroughly  investigates  every  thing.  But  the  wisdom 
which  exists  in  man  sees  in  an  incorrect  and  mixed  manner 
with  somewhat  darkened  eyes ;  for  it  is  found  to  be  in- 
f^ompetent  to  see  and  comprehend  clearly  and  without  alloy 

ich  particular  thing  separately.     Moreover,  there  is  a  kind  of 

ideception  mingled  with  human  wisdom  ;  since  very  often  there 

"are  some  shadows  found  which  hinder  the  eyes  from  contem- 

l>lating  a  brilhant  light;  since  what  the  eye  is  in  the  body, 

;'.ch  also  is  the  mind  and  wisdom  in  the  soul. 

What  the  river  is  which  proceeded  out  of  Ad  in  by  which  the 

I  Paradise  is  watered,  and  from  which  the  four  rivers  proceed, 
ihe  Phison,  and  the  Gihon,  and  the  Tigris,  and  the  Euphrates  ? 

12.  The  sources  of  the  Deglath  and  of  the  Arazania,  that  is 
0  say  of  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates,  are  said  to  arise  iu  the 

*  Genesis  ii.  9.  f  Genesis  ii.  11. 

VOL.  IV.  U 


290  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

mountains  of  Armenia ;  but  there  is  no  paradise  there  at 
this  day,  nor  do  both  the  sources  of  both  these  rivers  remain 
there.  Perhaps,  therefore,  we  ought  to  consider  that  the 
real  situation  of  the  Paradise  is  in  a  place  at  a  distance  from 
this  part  of  the  world  which  we  inhabit,  and  that  it  has  a 
river  running  beneath  the  earth,  which  pours  forth  many 
veins  of  the  largest  size ;  so  that  they,  rising  up  together, 
pour  themselves  forth  into  other  veins,  which  receive  them 
on  account  of  their  great  size,  and  then  those  have  been 
suppressed  by  the  gulfs  of  the  waves  ;  on  which  account, 
through  the  impulse  given  to  them  by  the  violence  which  is 
implanted  in  them,  they  burst  out  on  the  face  of  the  earth 
in  other  places,  and  also  among  others  in  the  mountains  of 
Armenia.  Therefore,  those  things  which  have  been  ac- 
counted the  sources  of  the  rivers,  are  rather  their  flowing 
course ;  or  again,  they  may  be  said  to  be  correctly  looked 
upon  as  sources,  because  by  all  means  we  must  consider  the 
holy  scriptures  infallible,  which  point  out  the  fact  of  four 
rivers  ;  for  the  river  is  the  beginning,  and  not  the  spring. 

But  perhaps  this  passage  also  contains  an  allegorical 
meaning ;  for  the  four  rivers  are  the  signs  of  four  virtues : 
Phison  being  the  sign  of  prudence,  as  deriving  its  name  from 
parsimony;*  and  Gihon  being  the  sign  of  sobriety,  as  having 
its  employment  in  the  regulation  of  meat  and  drink,  and  as 
restraining  the  appetites  of  the  belly,  and  of  those  parts  which 
are  below  the  belly,  as  being  earthly ;  the  Tigris  again  is  the 
sign  of  fortitude,  for  this  it  is  which  regulates  the  raging 
commotion  of  anger  within  us ;  and  the  Euphrates  is  the 
sign  of  justice,  since  there  is  nothing  in  which  the  thoughts 
of  men  exult  more  than  in  justice. 

Why  it  is  that  he  not  only  describes  the  situation  of  "toe 
Euphrates,  but  also  says  that  the  Phison  goes  round  all  the 
land  of  Evilat,  and  that  the  Gihon  goes  round  all  the  land  of 
Ethiopia,  and  that  the  Tigris  goes  toward  Assyria  ?t 

13.  The  Tigris  is  a  very  cruel  and  mischievous  river,  as 
the  citizens  of  Babylon  bear  "^dtness,  and  so  do  the  magi, 
who  have  found  it  to  be  of  a  cliaracter  quite  difierent  from 
the  nature  of  other  rivers ;  however  they  might  also  have 
another  reason  for  looking  on  it  with  aversion. 

♦  From  ^£i5a>,  "  parsimony."     ^  f  Genesis  ii. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  291 

But  the  Euphrates  is  a  gentler,  and  more  salubrious,  and 
more  nourishing  stream.  On  which  account,  the  wise  men 
of  the  Hebrews  and  Assyrians  speak  of  it  as  one  which 
increases  and  extends  itself;  and  on  this  account  it  is  not 
here  characterised  by  its  connection  with  other  things,  as 
the  other  three  rivers  are,  but  by  itself. 

My  own  opinion  is,  that  these  expressions  are  all  symbol- 
ical, for  prudence  is  the  virtue  of  the  rational  part  of  man ; 
and  it  is  in  this  that  wickedness  is  sometimes  found.  And 
fortitude  is  that  portion  of  the  human  character  which  is 
liable  to  degenerate  into  anger.  And  sobriety,  again,  may 
be  impaired  by  the  desires,  but  anger  and  concupiscence  are 
the  characteristics  of  beasts ;  therefore  the  sacred  historian 
has  here  described  those  three  rivers  by  the  places  which 
they  flow  round.  But  he  has  not  described  the  Euphrates 
in  that  manner,  as  being  the  symbol  of  justice,  for  there  is 
Ino  certain  and  limited  portion  of  it  allotted  to  the  soul,  but 
'a  perfect  harmony  of  the  three  parts  of  the  soul  and  of  the 

ree  virtues  is  possessed  by  it. 

Why  Grod  placed  man  in  the  Paradise  with  a  twofold 
Dbject,  namely,  that  he  might  both  till  it  and  keep  it,  when 
:he  Paradise  was  in  reality  in  need  of  no  cultivation,  because 
t  was  perfect  in  everything,  as  having  been  planted  by 
jl^od ;  nor,  again,  did  it  require  a  keeper,  for  who  was  there 

0  ravage  it  ?  * 

14.  These  are  the  two  objects  which  a  cultivation  of  the  land 
nust  attain  to  and  take  care  of,  the  cultivation  of  the  land 
nd  the  safe  keeping  of  the  things  which  are  in  it,  otherwise 
b  will  be  spoiled  by  laziness  or  else  by  devastation.     But 

1  though  the  Paradise  did  not  stand  in  need  of  these 
xertious,  nevertheless  it  was  proper  that  he  who  had  the 
egulation  and  care  of  it  committed  to  him,  namely,  the  first 

;in,  should  be  as  it  were  a  sort  of  pattern  and  law  to  all 
orkmen  in  future  of  everything  which  ought  to  be  done  by 
icm. 

]\roreover  it  was  suitable  that,  though  all  the  Paradise  was 

ill  of  everj-thing,  it  should  still  leave  the  cultivator  some 

;  rounds  for  care,  and  some  means  of  displaying  his  industry  ; 

'  i'  instance,  by  digging  around  it,  and  tending  it,  and  soften- 

1  *  Genesis  ii.  15. 

i  u  2 


292  .  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

ing  it,  and  digging  trenches,  and  irngating  it  by  water ;  and 
it  was  needful  to  attend  to  its  safety,  although  there  was 
no  one  to  lay  it  waste,  because  of  the  wild  beasts,  also  more 
especially  in  respect  of  the  air  and  water ;  as,  for  instance, 
when  a  drought  prevailed,  to  irrigate  it  with  a  plenteous 
supply  of  water,  and  in  moister  weather  to  check  the  super- 
abundance of  moisture  by  directing  the  course  of  the  streams 
in  other  directions. 

Why,  when  God  commanded  the  man  to  eat  of  every  tree 
within  the  Paradise,  he  speaks  in  the  singular  number,  and 
says,  "  Thou  shalt  eat ;"  but  when  he  commands  that  he 
shall  abstain  from  the  tree  which  would  give  him  the  know- 
ledge of  good  and  evil,  he  speaks  in  the  plural  number,  and 
says,  "  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  for  in  the  day  in  which  ye  ea: 
of  it  ye  shall  surely  die  ?"  * 

15.  In  the  first  place  he  uses  this  language  because  one 
good  was  derived  from  many;  and  that  also  is  not  unim- 
portant in  these  principles,  since  he  who  has  done  anything 
which  is  of  utility  is  one,  and  he  who  attains  to  anything 
useful  is  also  one ;  but  when  I  say  one,  I  am  speaking  not 
of  that  which  in  point  of  number  comes  before  duality,  bui 
of  that  one  creative  virtue  by  which  many  beiugs  righth 
coalesce,  and  by  their  concord  imitate  singularity,  as  a  flock 
a  herd,  a  troop,  a  chorus,  an  army,  a  nation,  a  tribe,  a  family 
a  state ;  for  all  these  things  being  many  members  form  on( 
community,  being  united  by  affection  as  by  a  kiss ;  whei 
things  which  are  not  combined,  and  which  have  no  principl 
of  union  by  reason  of  their  duality  and  multitude,  fall  int 
different  divisions,  for  duality  is  the  beginning  of  discord. 

But  two  men  living  as  if  they  were  one,  by  the  sam 
philosophy,  practise  an  unalloyed  and  brilliant  virtue,  whic 
is  free  from  all  taint  of  wickedness ;  but  where  good  an 
evil  are  mingled  together  the  combination  contains  tb 
principle  of  death. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Ye  shall  sure! 
die?"t 

16.  The  death  of  the  good  is  the  beginning  of  anoth 
life ;  for  life  is  a  twofold  thing,  one  life  beiug  in  the  bod 

*  Genesis  ii.  16.  t  Genesis  ii.  17. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  293 

iTuptible ;    the    other   without   the   body,   incorruptible. 

lierefbre  one  wicked  man  surely  dies  the  death,  who  while 

ill  breathing  and  among  the  living  is  in  reality  long  since 

ijiiried,  so  as  to  retain  in  himself  no  single  spark  of  real  life, 

which  is  perfect  virtue.     But  a  good  man,  who  deserves  so 

i  high  a  title,  does  not  surely  die,  but  has  his  life  prolonged, 

and  so  attains  to  an  eternal  end. 

Why  God  says,  "  It  is  not  good  for  man  to  be  alone  ;  let 
us  make  him  a  help  meet  for  him  ?"* 

17.  By  these  words  God  intimates  that  there  is  to  be  a 

communion,  not  with   all   men,  but   with   those   who   are 

willing  to  be  assisted  and  in  their  turn  to  assist  others,  even 

though  they  may  scarcely  have  any  power  to  do  so ;  since 

love  consists  not  more  in  utility  than  in  the  harmonious 

concord   of  trustworthy   and   steadfast  manners ;    so   that 

every^  one  who  joins  in  a  communion  of  love  may  be  entitled 

to  utter  the  expression  of  Pythagoras,  "  A  friend  is  another 
r  '» 

.     Why,  when  God  had  already  said,  "  Let  us  make  a  help 
[for  man,"  he  creates  beasts  and  cattle  ?t 

18.  Perhaps  some  gluttons  and  insatiably  greedy  persons 
ly  say  that  God  did  this  because  beasts  and  flying  things 
re,  as  it  were,  necessary  food  for  man,  and  his  meetest 

ii'lper ;  for  that  the  eating  of  meat  assists  the  belly  so  as  to 
induce  to  the  health  and  vigour  of  the  body.  But  I  should 
ink  that  by  reason  of  the  evil  implanted  in  them  by 
ature  animals  of  all  kinds,  whether  terrestrial  or  flying  in 
'e  air,  were  in  this  age  hostile  to  and  contrary  to  man ;  but 
at  in  the  case  of  the  flrst  man,  as  one  adorned  with  everj^ 
maginable  virtue,  they  were,  as  it  were,  allies,  and  a  rein- 
brcement  in  war,  and  farriliar  friends,  as  being  tame  and 
lomcstic  by  nature,  and  this  was  the  sole  principle  of  their 
amiliarity  with  man,  for  this  it  was  fit  that  servants  should 
Iwell  with  their  lord. 

Why  the  creation  of  animals  and  flying  creatures  is  men- 
:oned  a  second  time,  when  the  account  of  their  creation  had 
Iready  been  given  in  the  history  of  the  six  days  ? 

19.  Perhaps  those  things  which  were  created  in  the  six 
•  Genesis  ii.  18.  f  Genesis  ii.  19. 


294  PHILO  JUD^US. 

(lays  were  incorporeal  angela,  indicated  under  these  symbol- 
ical expressions,  being  the  appearances  of  terrestrial  and 
flying  animals,  but  now  they  were  produced  in  reality,  being 
the  copies  of  what  had  been  created  before,  images  per- 
ceptible by  the  outward  senses  of  invisible  models. 

Why  did  God  bring  every  animal  to  man,  that  he  might 
give  them  their  names  ?* 

20.  He  has  here  explained  a  great  source  of  perplexity  to 
the  students  of  philosophy,  admonishing  them  that  names 
proceed  from  having  been  given,  and  not  from  nature ;  for  a 
natural  nomenclature  is  with  peculiar  fitness  assigned  to 
each  creature  when  a  man  of  wisdom  and  pre-eminent 
knowledge  appears ;  and,  in  fact,  the  office  of  assigning  the 
names  to  animals  is  one  which  particularly  belongs  to  the 
mind  of  the  wise  man  alone,  and  indeed  to  the  first  man 
born  out  of  the  earth,  since  it  was  fitting  that  the  first  of 
the  human  race,  and  the  sovereign  of  all  the  animals  bom 
out  of  the  earth,  should  have  the  dignity  assigned  to  him. 

For  inasmuch  as  he  was  the  first  person  to  see  the  animals, 
and  as  he  was  the  first  person  who  deserved  to  govern  them 
all  as  their  chief,  so  also  it  was  fitting  that  he  should  be 
their  first  namer  and  the  inventor  of  their  names,  since  it 
would  have  been  inconsistent  and  mad  to  leave  them  with- 
out any  names,  or  to  allow  them  to  receive  names  from  any 
one  born  at  a  later  period,  which  would  have  been  an  insult 
to  and  a  derogation  from  the  honour  and  glory  due  to  the 
first  born. 

But  we  may  also  adopt  this  idea,  that  the  giving  of  names 
to  the  difierent  animals  was  so  easily  arranged  that  the  very 
moment  that  Adam  gave  the  name  the  animal  itself  also 
heard  it ;  being  influenced  by  the  name  thus  given  to  it  as 
by  a  familiar  indication  closely  connected  with  it. 

Why  Moses  says,  "He  brought  the  animals  to  Adara, 
that  he  might  see  what  he  would  call  them,"  when  Grod  can 
never  entertain  a  doubt  ?t 

21.  It  is  in  truth  inconsistent  with  the  nature  of  God  to 
doubt ;  therefore  it  does  not  appear  that  he  was  in  doubt  on 
this  occasion,  but  that  since  he  had  given  intellect  to  man 

*  Genesis  ii.  19.  f  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  295 

as  being  the  first  man  born  out  of  the  earth  and  endowed 
with  a  great  desire  for  virtue,  by  which  he  was  made 
thoroughly  wise  as  if  he  had  been  endowed  with  wisdom  by 
nature,  so  as  to  consider  all  things  like  the  proper  Euler 
and  Lord  of  all,  God  now  caused  him  to  be  influenced  to 
display  the  proper  performance  of  his  task,  and  saw  what 
was  really  the  most  excellent  point  of  his  mind. 

Besides  this,  by  this  statement  he  evidently  indicates  the 
perfect  free-will  existing  in  us,  refuting  those  who  affirm 
that  everything  exists  by  a  certain  necessity. 

Or  else  because  it  belonged  to  man  to  employ  the  animals, 
therefore  he  also  gave  him  authority  to  give  them  names. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  whatever 
he  called  each  living  thing,  that  was  the  name  thereof?" 

22.  We  must  consider  that  Adam  gave  names  not  only  to 
all  living  creatures,  but  also  to  plants,  and  to  everything 
else  which  is  inanimate,  beginning  with  the  more  excellent 
class ;  for  the  living  creature  is  superior  to  that  which  has 
not  life.  Therefore  the  scripture  considers  the  mention  of 
the  better  part  sufficient,  indicating  by  this  mention  to  all 
who  are  not  utterly  devoid  of  sense,  that  he  in  fact  gave 
names  to  everything,  since  it  was  easy  to  fix  names  to  things 
without  life,  which  were  never  likely  to  change  their  place, 
and  which  had  no  passions  of  the  soul  to  exercise,  but  the 
giving  of  proper  appellations  to  living  creatures  was  a  more 
difficult  task  on  account  of  the  motions  of  their  bodies  and 
the  various  impulses  of  their  souls,  in  accordance  with 
imagination  and  the  variety  of  the  outward  senses,  and  the 
different  agitations  of  the  mind  from  which  the  eflfects  of 
their  works  proceed.  Therefore  the  mind  could  give  names  to 
the  more  difficult  classes  of  living  creatures.  And  on  this 
account  it  was  a  very  proper  expression  to  employ,  that  he 
gave  them  names  as  being  easy  to  name,  because  they  were 
near. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression :  "  But  for  Adam 
there  was  not  found  a  helper  like  to  him  ?"* 

23.  Every  thing  was  helping  and  assisting  the  prince  of 
the  human  race:  the  earth,  the  rivers,  the  seo,  the  air,  the 

*  Genesis  ii.  "0. 


296  PHILO   JUD.EUS. 

light,  the  heaven.  Moreover,  every  species  of  fruit  and 
plant  co-operated  with  him,  and  every  herd  of  cattle,  and 
every  beast  which  was  not  savage.  Nevertheless,  of  all 
these  things  which  were  assisting  him,  there  was  nothing 
like  himself,  inasmuch  as  they  were  none  of  them  human 
beings.  Therefore,  God  gave  a  certain  indication  that  he 
might  show  that  man  ought  to  be  an  assistant  to  and  co- 
operator  with  man,  being  endowed  with  perfect  similarity  to 
one  another  in  both  body  and  soul. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  And  G-od  sent 
a  trance  upon  Adam,  and  caused  him  to  sleep  ?"* 

24.  How  it  is  that  man  sleeps  is  a  question  which  has 
caused  an  extraordinary  amount  of  perplexity  to  philo- 
sophers. But  yet  our  prophet  has  distinctly  explained  this 
question ;  for  sleep  is  in  itself  properly  a  trance,  not  of  that 
kind  which  is  more  nearly  allied  to  insanity,  but  of  that 
whicb  is  in  accordance  with  the  dissolution  of  the  senses 
and  the  absence  of  counsel ;  for  then  the  senses  withdraw 
from  those  things  which  are  their  proper  object,  and  the 
intellect  withdraws  from  the  senses,  not  strengthening  their 
nerves,  nor  giving  any  motion  to  those  parts  which  have 
received  the  power  of  action,  inasmuch  as  they  are  with- 
drawn from  the  objects  perceptible  by  the  outward  senses. 

What  the  rib  is  whicb  God  took  from  the  man  whom  he 
had  formed  out  of  the  earth,  and  which  he  made  into  a 
woman  ? 

25.  The  letter  of  this  statement  is  plain  enough ;  for  it  is 
expressed  according  to  a  symbol  of  the  part,  a  half  of  the 
whole,  each  party,  the  man  and  the  woman,  being  as  sections 
of  nature  co-equal  for  the  production  of  that  genus  which  is 
called  man.  But  with  respect  to  the  mind,  man  is  under- 
stood in  a  symbolical  manner,  and  his  one  rib  is  virtue, 
proceeding  from  the  senses;  but  woman,  who  is  the  sensation 
of  counsel,  will  be  more  variable. 

But  some  think  that  the  rib  means  valour  and  vigour,  on 
which  account  men  call  a  boxer  who  has  strong  loins 
eminently  strong. 

Therefore,  the  lawgiver  relates  that  the  woman  was 
*  Genesis  ii.  21. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  297 

formed  out  of  the  rib  of  the  man,  indicating  by  that  expres- 
sion, that  one  half  of  the  body  of  the  man  is  woman.  And 
this  is  testified  to  by  the  formation  of  the  body,  by  the  way 
in  which  it  is  put  together,  by  its  motions  and  vigour,  by 
the  force  of  the  soul,  and  its  strength ;  for  all  things  are 
regarded  as  in  a  twofold  light ;  since,  as  the  formation  of  the 
man  is  more  perfect,  and,  if  one  may  so  say,  more  double 
than  the  formation  of  the  woman,  so  also  it  required  half  the 
time,  that  is  to  say  forty  days  ;  when,  for  the  imperfect,  and, 
if  I  may  so  call  it,  half  section  of  the  man,  that  is  to  say  the 
woman,  there  was  need  of  a  double  allowance,  that  is  to  say, 
of  eighty  days,  so  that  the  doubling  of  the  time  required  for 
the  nature  of  the  man  might  be  changed,  in  order  to  the 
formation  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  the  woman ;  for  that 
body,  and  that  soul,  the  nature  of  which  is  in  a  twofold  ratio, 
the  body  and  soul,  that  is,  of  the  man,  require  but  half  of 
the  delineation  and  formation :  but  that  body  of  which  the 
nature  and  construction  is  in  the  ratio  of  one  half,  namely, 
that  of  the  woman,  her  formation  and  delineation  is  in  a 
twofold  ratio. 

Why  Moses  calls  the  form  of  the  woman  a  building  ?* 

26.  The  union  and  plenitude  of  concord  formed  hy  the 
man  and  woman  is  symbolically  called  a  house ;  but  every 
thing  is  altogether  imperfect  and  destitute  of  a  home,  which 
is  deserted  by  a  woman ;  for  to  the  man  the  public  affairs  of 
the  state  are  committed,  but  the  particular  affairs  of  the 
house  belong  to  the  woman ;  and  a  want  of  the  woman  will 
be  the  destruction  of  the  house ;  but  the  actual  presence  of 
th^^voman  shows  the  regulation  of  the  house. 

"Why,  as  other  animals  and  as  man  also  was  made,  the 
woman  was  not  also  made  out  of  the  earth,  but  out  of  the 
rib  of  the  man  ? 

27.  This  was  so  ordained  in  the  first  place,  in  order  that 
t  he  woman  might  not  be  of  equal  dignity  with  the  man.  In 
the  second  place,  that  she  might  not  be  of  equal  age  with 
him,  but  younger ;  since  those  who  marry  wives  more 
advanced  in  years  than  themselves  deserve  blame,  as  having 

*  Genesis  ii.  22.  The  margin  of  our  bible  points  out  that  the 
Hebrew  word  translated  "  made,"  means  strictly  "  builded." 


298  PHILO   JUD^US. 

overturned  the  law  of  nature.  Thirdly,  the  design  of  God 
was,  that  the  husband  should  take  care  of  his  wife,  as  of  a 
necessary  part  of  himself;  but  that  the  woman  should 
requite  him  in  turn  with  service,  as  a  portion  of  the 
universe.  In  the  fourth  place,  he  admonishes  man  by  this 
enigmatical  intimation,  that  he  should  take  care  of  his  wife 
as  of  his  daughter ;  and  he  admonishes  the  woman  that  she 
should  honour  her  husband  as  her  father.  And  very  rightly, 
since  the  woman  changes  her  habitation,  passing  from  her 
own  offspring  to  her  husband.  On  which  account,  it  is 
altogether  right  and  proper  that  he  who  has  received  should 
take  upon  himself  the  liability  in  respect  of  what  has  been 
given ;  and  that  she  who  has  been  removed  should  worthily 
give  the  same  honour  to  her  husband  which  she  has  pre- 
viously given  to  her  parents ;  for  the  husband  receives  his 
wife  from  her  parents,  as  a  deposit  which  is  entrusted  to 
him ;  and  the  woman  receives  her  husband  from  the  law. 

"Why,  when  the  man  saw  the  woman  who  had  been  formed 
inthismanner,  he  proceeded  to  say:  "She"  (or  "this,"  rovro} 
"  is  now  bone  of  my  bone  and  flesh  of  my  flesh :  she  shall 
be  called  woman,  because  she  has  been  taken  out  of  man?"* 

28.  He  might  have  been  amazed  at  what  he  had  seen,  and 
have  said  in  a  negative  manner :  How  can  this  exquisite 
and  desirable  beauty  have  been  derived  from  bones  and  from 
flesh  which  are  endowed  with  neither  beauty  nor  elegance, 
being  of  a  form  so  far  more  beautiful,  and  endowed  vrith 
such  excessive  life  and  grace  ?  The  matter  is  incredible 
because  she  is  like  ;  and  yet  it  is  credible,  because  Grod  him- 
self has  been  her  creator  and  painter. 

Again,  he  might  have  said  affirmatively :  Truly  she  is  a 
living  beiug,  my  bone  and  my  flesh,  for  she  exists  by  having 
been  taken  from  that  bone  and  flesh  of  mine.  But  he 
makes  mention  of  his  bone  and  flesh  in  a  very  natural 
manner ;  for  the  human  or  corporeal  tabernacle  is  the  com- 
bination of  bones,  and  flesh,  and  entrails,  and  veins,  and 
nerves,  and  ligaments,  and  blood-vessels,  and  breathing 
tubes,  and  blood.  And  she  is  called  woman  (in  Greek 
yvv^)   with  great  correctness,  as  the  power  of  producing 

*  Genesis  ii.  23.     Woman,  virgo,  or  virago,  is  here  looked  upon  as 
derived  from  vi?',  "  man  ;"  he  also  derives  yvvq  from  ytwdto. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  299 

with  fertility,  either  because  she  becomes  pregnant  through 
the  reception  of  the  seed,  and  so  brings  forth ;  or,  as  the 
prophet  says,  because  she  was  made  out  of  man,  not  out 
of  the  earth,  as  he  was ;  nor  from  seed,  as  all  mankind  after 
them ;  but  of  a  certain  intermediate  nature ;  and  like  a 
branch,  brought  out  of  one  vine  to  produce  another  vine. 

Why  he  says,  "  Therefore  shall  a  man  leave  his  father 
and  his  mother,  and  cleave  to  his  wife,  and  they  shall  be  two 
in  one  flesh  ?"* 

29.  He  here  orders  man  to  behave  himself  towards  his 
wife  with  such  excess  of  affection  in  their  intercourse,  that" 
he  is  willing  to  leave  his  parents,  not  in  order  that  by  that 
means  it  may  be  more  suitable,  but  as  they  would  scarcely 
be  a  motive  for  his  fidelity  to  his  wife.  And  we  must 
remark,  that  it  is  very  excellent  and  prudently  done,  that  he 
has  avoided  saying  that  the  woman  is  to  leave  her  parents 
and  cleave  to  her  husband,  since  the  character  of  the  man  is 
bolder  than  the  nature  of  the  woman ;  but  he  says  that  the 
man  ought  to  do  this  for  the  sake  of  the  woman ;  for  he  is 
borne  on  by  a  cheerful  and  willing  impulse  to  the  concord 
of  knowledge,  to  which,  becoming  wholly  devoted,  he  re- 
strains and  regulates  his  desires,  and  clings  to  his  wife  alone 
like  bird-lime.  Especially  because  he  himself,  delighting  in 
his  master-like  authority,  is  to  be  respected  for  his  pride : 
but  the  woman,  being  in  the  rank  of  a  servant,  is  praised, 
for  assenting  to  a  life  of  communion. 

And  when  it  is  said  that  the  two  are  one  flesh,  that  indi- 
cates that  the  flesh  is  very  tangible  and  fully  endowed  with 
outward  senses,  on  which  it  depends  to  be  afllicted  with 
pain  and  deUghted  with  pleasure,  so  that  both  the  man  and 
woman  may  derive  pleasure  and  pain  from  the  same  sources, 
and  may  feel  the  same ;  aye,  and  may  still  more  thijik  the 
same. 

Why  both  of  them,  the  man  and  the  woman,  are  said  to 
have  been  naked,  and  not  to  have  been  ashamed  ?t 

30.  They  were  not  ashamed,  in  the  first  place,  because 
they  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  world,  and  the 
different  parts  of  the  world  are  all  naked,  each  of  them 

*  Genesis  ii.  24.  f  Genesis  ii.  25. 


300  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

indicating  some  peculiar  qualities,  and  having  peculiar 
coverings  of  their  own.  In  the  second  place,  on  account  of 
the  sincerity  and  simplicity  of  their  manners  and  of  their 
natural  disposition,  which  had  no  taint  of  pride  about  it. 
For  ambition  had  as  yet  no  existence.  Thirdly,  because  the 
climate  and  the  mildness  of  the  atmosphere  was  a  sufficient 
covering  for  them,  so  as  to  prevent  either  cold  or  heat  from 
hurting  them.  In  the  fourth  place,  because  they,  by  reason 
of  the  relationship  existing  between  themselves  and  the 
world,  could  not  receive  injury  from  any  part  of  it  whatever, 
as  being  related  to  them. 

Why  does  Moses  say  that  the  serpent  was  more  cunning 
than  all  the  beasts  of  the  field  ?* 

31.  One  may  probably  affirm  with  truth  that  the  ser- 
pent in  reality  is  more  cunning  than  any  beast  whatever. 
But  the  reason  why  he  appears  to  me  to  be  spoken  of  in 
these  terms  here  is  on  account  of  the  natural  proneness  of 
mankind  to  vice,  of  which  he  is  the  symbol.  Aiid  by  vice  I 
mean  concupiscence,  inasmuch  as  those  who  are  devoted  to 
pleasure  are  more  cunning,  and  are  the  inventors  of  stra- 
tagems and  means  by  which  to  indulge  their  passions.  Being, 
forsooth,  very  crafty  in  devising  plans,  both  such  as  favour 
pleasure  and  also  such  as  procure  means  of  enjoying  it. 
But  it  appears  to  me  that  since  that  animal,  so  superior  in 
msdom,  was  about  to  seduce  man,  it  is  not  the  whole  race 
that  is  here  meant  to  bo  spoken  of  as  so  exceedingly  wise, 
but  only  that  single  serpent,  for  the  reason  above  mentioned. 

Did  the  serpent  speak  with  a  human  voice  ?t 

32.  In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  the  fact  that  at  the 
beginning  of  the  world  even  the  other  animals  besides  man 
were  not  entirely  destitute  of  the  power  of  articulate  speech, 
but  only  that  man  excelled  them  in  a  greater  fluency  and 
perspicuity  of  speech  and  language.  In  the  second  place, 
when  anything  very  marvellous  requires  to  be  done,  God 
changes  the  subject  natures  by  which  he  means  to  operate. 
Thirdly,  because  our  soul  is  entirely  filled  with  many  errors, 
and  rendered  deaf  to  all  words  except  in  one  or  two  lan- 
guages to  which  it  is  accustomed ;  but  the  souls  of  those  who 

*  Genesis  iii.  1.  f  Genesis  iii.  2. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  301 

were  first  created  were  rendered  acute  to  thoroughij  under- 
stand every  voice  of  every  kind,  in  order  that  they  might  be 
pure  from  evil  and  wholly  unpolluted.  Since  we  indeed  are 
not  endowed  with  senses  in  such  perfection,  for  those  which 
we  have  received  are  in  some  degree  depraved,  just  as  the 
construction  of  our  bodies  too  is  small ;  but  the  first  created 
men,  as  they  received  bodies  of  vast  size  reaching  to  a 
gigantic  height,  must  also  of  necessity  have  received  more 
accurate  senses,  and,  what  is  more  excellent  still,  a  power  of 
examining  into  and  hearing  things  in  a  philosophical  manner. 
Tor  some  people  think,  and  perhaps  with  some  reason,  that 
they  were  endowed  with  such  eyes  as  enabled  them  to 
behold  even  those  natures,  and  essences,  and  operations, 
which  exist  in  heaven,  as  also  ears  by  which  they  could 
comprehend  every  kind  of  voice  and  language. 

Why  did  the  serpent  accost  the  woman,  and  not  the  man  ?* 

33.  The  serpent,  having  formed  his  estimate  of  virtue, 
devised  a  treacherous  stratagem  against  them,  for  the  sake 
of  bringing  mortality  on  them.  But  the  woman  was  more 
accustomed  to  be  deceived  than  the  man.  For  his  counsels 
as  well  as  his  body  are  of  a  masculine  sort,  and  competent 
to  disentangle  the  notions  of  seduction ;  but  the  mind  of 
the  woman  is  more  effeminate,  so  that  through  her  softness 
she  easily  yields  and  is  easily  caught  by  the  persuasions  of 
falsehood,  which  imitate  the  resemblance  of  truth. 

Since  therefore,  in  his  old  age,  the  serpentf  strips  himself 
of  his  scales  from  the  top  of  his  head  to  his  tail,  he,  by  his 
nakedness,  reproaches  man  because  he  has^  exchanged  death 
for  immortality.  His  nature  is  renewed  by  the  beast,  and 
made  to  resemble  every  time.  The  w^oman,  when  she  sees 
this,  is  deceived;  v/hen  she  ought  rather  to  have  looked 
upon  him  as  an  example,  who,  while  showing  his  ingenuity 
towards  her,  was  full  of  devices,  but  she  was  led  to  desire 
to  acquire  a  life  which  should  be  free  from  old  age,  and 
from  all  decay. 

*  Genesis  iii.  2. 

t  The  ancients  believed  that  the  serpent  became  young  again  by 
casting  hia  skin.     Ovid  says — 

Auguibus  exuitur  tenui  cum  polle  vetustaa. 


302  pniLO  JUD^us. 

Why  the  serpent  tells  the  woman  lies,  saying,  "  God  has 
said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  in  the  Paradise,"  when, 
on  the  contrary,  what  God  really  had  said  was,  "  Ye  shall 
eat  of  every  tree  in  the  Paradise,  except  one  ?  "* 

34.  It  is  the  custom  for  contending  arguers  to  speak 
falsely  in  an  artful  manner,  in  order  to  produce  ignorance  of 
the  real  facts,  as  was  done  in  this  case,  since  the  man  and 
woman  had  been  commanded  to  eat  of  all  the  trees  but  one. 
But  this  insidious  prompter  of  wickedness  coming  in,  says 
that  the  order  which  they  had  received  was  that  they  should 
not  eat  of  them  all.  He  brought  forward  an  ambiguous 
statement  as  a  slippery  stumbling-block  to  cause  the  soul  to 
trip.  Por  this  expression,  "  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree," 
means  in  the  first  place  either,  not  even  of  one,  which  is 
false ;  or,  secondly,  not  of  every  one,  as  if  he  intended  to 
say,  there  are  some  of  which  you  may  not  eat,  which  is 
true.    Therefore  he  asserts  such  a  falsehood  more  explicitly. 

Why,  when  it  was  commanded  them  to  avoid  eating  of 
one  plant  alone,  the  woman  made  also  a  further  addition  to 
this  injunction,  saying,  "  He  said,  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  it, 
neither  shall  ye  touch  it  ?  "f 

35.  In  the  first  place  she  says  this,  because  taste  and 
every  other  sense  after  its  kind  consists  in  the  touch  appro- 
priate to  it.  In  the  second  place  she  says  it  that  it  may 
seem  to  condemn  them  themselves,  who  did  what  they  had 
been  forbidden.  Por  if  even  the  mere  act  of  touching  it 
was  prohibited,  how  could  they  who,  besides  touching  the 
tree,  presumed  tp  eat  of  the  fruit,  and  so  added  a  greater 
transgression  to  the  lesser  one,  be  anything  but  condemners 
and  punishers  of  themselves  ? 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Ye  shall  be  as 
gods,  knowing  good  and  evil  ?  "  J 

36.  Whence  was  it  that  the  serpent  found  the  plural 
word  "gods,"  when  there  is  only  one  true  God,  and  when 
this  is  the  first  time  that  he  names  him  ?  But  perhaps 
this  arises  from  there  having  been  in  him  a  certain  prescient 
wisdom,  by  which  he  now  declared  the  notion  of  the  multi- 
tude of  gods  which  was  at  a  future  time  to  prevail  amongst 

*  Genesis  iii.  4.  f  Genesis  iii.  3.  i  Genesis  iil  5 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  303 

men ;  and,  perhaps,  history  now  relates  this  correctly  at  its 
first  being  advanced  not  by  any  rational  being,  nor  by  any 
creature  of  the  higher  class,  but  as  having  derived  its  origin 
from  the  most  virulent  and  vile  of  beasts  and  serpents, 
since  other  similar  creatures  lie  hid  under  the  earth,  and 
their  lurking  places  are  in  the  holes  and  fissures  of  the 
earth. 

Moreover,  it  is  the  inseparable  sign  of  a  being  endowed 
with  reason  to  look  upon  God  as  essentially  one  being,  but 
it  is  the  mark  of  a  beast  to  imagine  that  there  are  many 
gods,  and  these  too  devoid  of  reason,  and  who  can  scarcely 
be  said  with  propriety  to  have  any  existence  at  all. 

Moreover,  the  devil  proceeds  with  great  art,  speaking  by 
the  mouth  of  the  serpent.  For  not  only  is  there  in  the 
Divinity  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  but  there  is  also  an 
approval  of  what  is  good  and  a  repudiation  of  what  is  evil ; 
hut  he  does  not  speak  of  either  of  these  feelings  because 
they  were  useful,  but  only  suggested  the  mere  knowledge  of 
the  two  contrary  things,  namely,  of  good  and  evil.  In  the 
second  place,  the  expression,  "  as  gods,"  in  the  plural 
number,  is  in  this  place  not  used  inconsiderately,  but  in 
order  to  give  the  idea  of  there  being  both  a  bad  and  a  good 
God.  And  these  are  of  a  twofold  quality.  Therefore  it  is 
suitable  to  the  notion  of  particular  gods  to  have  a  know- 
ledge of  contrary  things ;  but  the  Supreme  Cause  is  above 
all  others. 

Why  the  woman  first  touched  the  tree  and  ate  of  its 
fruit,  and  the  man  afterwards,  receiving  it  from  her  ?* 

37.  The  words  used  first  of  all,  by  their  own  intrinsic 
force,  assert  that  it  was  suitable  that  immortality  and  every 
good  thing  should  be  represented  as  under  the  power  of  the 
man,  and  death  and  every  evil  under  that  of  the  woman. 
But  with  reference  to  the  mind,  the  woman,  when  under- 
stood symbolically,  is  sense,  and  the  man  is  intellect.  More- 
over, the  outward  senses  do  of  necessity  touch  those  things 
which  are  perceptible  by  them  ;  but  it  is  through  the  medium 
of  the  outward  senses'  that  things  are  transmitted  to  the 
mmd.     For  the  outward  senses  are  influenced  by  the  objects 

*  Genesis  ill.  6, 


804  PHILO  JUD^DS. 

which  are  presented  to  them ;  and  the  intellect  by  the  out- 
ward senses. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  she  gave 
it  to  her  husband  to  eat  with  her  ?  "* 

38.  "What  has  been  just  said  bears  on  this  point  also, 
since  the  time  is  nearly  one  and  the  same  in  which  the  out- 
ward senses  are  influenced  by  the  object  which  is  presented 
to  them,  and  the  intellect  has  an  impression  made  on  it  by 
the  outward  senses. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  the  eyes 
of  both  of  them  were  opened  ?  "f 

39.  That  they  were  not  created  blind  is  manifest  even 
from  this  fact  that  as  all  other  things,  both  animals  and 
plants,  were  created  in  perfection,  so  also  man  must  have 
been  adorned  with  the  things  which  are  his  most  excellent 
parts,  namely,  eyes.  And  we  may  especially  prove  this, 
because  a  little  while  before  the  earth-born  Adam  was  giving 
names  to  all  the  animals  on  the  earth.  Therefore  it  is  per- 
fectly plain  that  he  saw  them  before  doing  so.  Unless, 
indeed,  Moses  used  the  expression  "  eyes  "  in  a  figurative 
sense  for  the  vision  of  the  soul,  by  which  alone  the  percep- 
tion of  good  aifd  evil,  of  what  is  elegant  or  unsightly,  and,  in 
fact,  of  all  contrary  natures,  arise.  But,  if  the  eye  is  to  be 
taken  separately  as  counsel,  which  is  called  the  warning  of 
the  understanding,  then  again  there  is  a  separate  eye,  which 
is  a  certain  something  devoid  of  sound  reason,  which  is 
called  opinion. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Because  they 
knew  that  they  were  naked  ?  "J 

40.  They  first  arrived  at  the  knowledge  of  this  fact,  that 
is  to  say,  of  their  nakedness,  after  they  had  eaten  of  the 
forbidden  fruit.  Therefore,  opinion  was  like  the  beginning 
of  wickedness,  when  they  perceived  that  they  had  not  as  yet 
used  any  covering,  inasmuch  as  all  parts  of  the  universe  are 
immortal  and  incorruptible ;  but  they  themselves  imme- 
diately found  themselves  in  need  of  some  corruptible  cover- 
ings made  with  hands.     But  this  knowledge  was  in  the 

•  Genesis  iii.  6.  +  Genesis  iii.  7.  Z  ^^^^ 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  305 

nakedness  itself,  not  as  having  been  in  itself  the  cause  of 
an  J  change,  but  because  their  mind  now  conceived  a  novelty 
unlike  the  rest  of  the  universal  world. 

Why  they  sew6d  fig-leaves  into  girdles  ?* 

41.  They  did  this  in  the  first  place,  because  the  fruit  of 
the  fig  is  very  pleasant  and  agreeable  to  the  taste.  There- 
fore the  sacred  historian  here,  by  a  symbolical  expression, 
indicates  those  who  sew  together  and  join  pleasures  to  plea- 
sures by  every  means  and  contrivance  imaginable.  Therefore 
they  bind  them  around  the  place  where  the  parts  of  generation 
are  seated,  as  that  is  the  instrument  of  important  transactions. 

And  they  do  this,  secondly,  because  although  the  fruit  of 
the  fig-tree  is,  as  I  have  already  said,  sweeter  than  any 
other,  yet  its  leaves  are  harder.  And,  therefore,  Moses  here 
wishes  by  this  symbol  to  intimate  that  the  motions  of  plea- 
sure are  slippery  and  smooth  in  appearance,  but  that  they, 
nevertheless,  are  in  reality  hard,  so  that  it  is  impossible  that 
he  who  feels  them  should  be  delighted,  unless  he  was  pre- 
viously sorrowful,  and  he  will  again  become  sorrowful.  For 
to  be  always  sorrowing  is  a  melancholy  thing  between  a 
double  grief,  the  one  being  at  its  beginning,  and  the  other 
coming  before  the  first  is  ended. 

"What  is  meant  by  the  statement  that  the  sound  was 
heard  of  God  walking  in  the  Paradise  ?  was  it  the  sound 
of  his  voice,  or  of  his  feet  ?  and  can  Grod  be  said  to  walk  ?t 

42.  Those  gods  who  are  in  heaven,  perceptible  to  our 
outward  senses,  walk  in  a  ring,  proceeding  onwards  by  a 
circuitous  track ;  but  the  Supreme  Cause  is  steadfast  and 
immoveable,  as  the  ancients  have  decided.  But  the  true 
Grod  gives  some  indication  also,  as  if  he  wished  to  give  a 
sense  of  motion.  For  in  truth  even  without  his  uttering 
any  words,  the  prophets  hear  him,  by  a  certain  virtue  of 
some  diviner  voice  sounding  in  their  ears,  or  perhaps  being 
even  articulately  uttered. 

As  therefore  God  is  heard  without  uttering  any  sound, 
BO  also  he  gives  an  idea  of  walking  when  he  is  not  walking, 
nay,  though  he  is  altogether  immoveable.  But  do  you  not 
see  that  before  they  had  tasted  of  wickedness,  as  they  were 

*  Genesis  iii.  8.  +  Ibid. 

VOL.  IT.  X 


306  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

stable  and  constant,  and  immoveable  and  tranquil,  and 
uniform,  so  also  in  an  equal  manner  must  they  have  looked 
upon  the  Deity  as  immoveable,  as  in  fact  he  is.  But  they 
once  had  become  endued  with  cunning,  they,  by  judging  from 
themselves,  began  to  strip  him  of  his  attributes  of  immo- 
bility and  unchangeableness,  and  conjectured  that  he  too 
was  subject  to  variation  and  change. 

Why  while  they  are  hiding  themselves  from  the  face  o 
God,  the  woman  is  not  mentioned  first,  since  she  was  the 
first  to  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit :    but  why  the  man  is 
spoken  of  in  the  first  place ;  for    the  sacred    historian's 
words  are,  "And  Adam  and  his  wife  hid  themselves  ?"* 

43.  The  woman,  being  imperfect  and  depraved  by  nature, 
made  the  beginning  of  sinning  and  prevaricating ;  but  the 
man,  as  being  the  more  excellent  and  perfect  creature,  was 
the  first  to  set  the  example  of  blushing  and  of  being 
ashamed,  and  indeed,  of  every  good  feeling  and  action. 

Why  they  did  not  hide  themselves  in  some  other  place, 
but  in  the  middle  of  the  trees  of  the  Paradise  ?  t 

44.  Every  thing  is  not  done  by  sinners  with  wisdom  and 
sagacity,  but  it  often  happens  that  while  thieves  are  watch- 
ing for  an  opportunity  of  plunder,  having  no  thoughts  of 
the  Deity  who  presides  over  the  world,  the  booty  which  is 
close  to  them  and  lying  at  their  feet  is  by  some  admirable 
management  wrested  from  them  without  delay  :  and  some- 
thing of  this  kind  took  place  on  the  present  occasion.  For 
when  they  ought  rather  to  have  fled  to  a  distance  from  the 
garden  in  which  their  offence  had  taken  place,  they  still  were 
arrested  in  the  middle  of  the  Paradise  itself,  in  order  that 
they  might  be  convicted  of  their  sin  too  clearly  to  find  any 
refuge  even  in  flight  itself.  And  this  statement  indicates 
in  a  figurative  manner  that  every  wicked  man  takes  refuge 
in  wickedness,  and  that  every  man  who  is  wholly  devoted  to 
his  passions  flies  to  those  passions  as  to  an  asylum. 

Why  God  asks  Adam,  "Where  art  thou?"  when  he 
knows  everything  :  and  why  he  does  not  also  put  the  same 
question  to  the  woman  ?  X 

45.  The  expression,  "Where  art  thou  ?"  does  not  here 
*  Genesis  iii,  9.  1  Ibid.  J  Genesis  iii.  10. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTION'S.  307 

seem  to  be  a  mere  interrogatory,  but  ratber  a  tbreat  and  a 
conviction  :  "  Where  art  thou  now,  0  man  ?  from  how  many- 
good  things  art  thou  changed  ?  haviog  forsaken  immortality 
and  a  life  of  the  most  perfect  happiness,  you  have  become 
changed  to  death  and  misery  in  which  you  are  buried." 

But  God  did  not  condescend  to  put  any  question  to  the 
woman  at  all,  looking  upon  her  as  the  cause  of  the  evil 
which  had  occurred,  and  as  the  guide  to  her  husband  to  a 
life  of  shame. 

But  there  is  an  allegorical  meaning  in  this  passage, 
because  the  principal  part  is  the  man,  his  guide,  the  mind, 
having  in  itself  the  masculine  principle,  when  it  gives  ear  to 
any  one  introduces  also  the  defect  of  the  female  part, 
namely  that  of  the  outward  sense. 

"Why  the  man  says,  "  The  woman  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and 
I  did  eat;"*  but  the  woman  does  not  say,  "The  serpent 
gave  to  me,  but,  "  The  serpent  beguiled  me  and  I  did  eat  ? 

46.  The  literal  expression  here  affords  grounds  for  that 
probable  opinion  that  woman  is  accustomed  rather  to  be 
deceived  than  to  devise  anything  of  importance  out  of  her 
own  head  ;  but  with  the  man  the  case  is  just  the  contrary. 
But  as  regards  the  intellect,  everything  which  is  the  object 
of  the  outward  senses  beguiles  and  seduces  each  particular 
sense  of  every  imperfect  being  to  which  it  is  adapted.  And 
the  sense  then,  being  vitiated  by  the  object,  infects  the 
dominant  and  principal  part,  the  mind,  with  its  own  taint. 
Therefore  the  mind  receives  the  impression  from  the  outward 
sense,  giving  it  that  which  it  has  received  itself.  For  the 
outward  sense  is  deceived  and  beguiled  by  the  sensible 
object  submitted  to  it,  but  the  senses  of  the  wise  man  are 
inl'allible,  as  are  also  the  cogitations  of  his  mind. 

Why  God  curses  the  serpent  first,  then  the  woman,  and 
the  man  last  of  all  ?"t 

47.  The  reason  is  that  the  order  of  the  curses  followed 
the  order  in  which  the  offences  were  committed.  The  first 
offence  was  the  deceit  practised  by  the  serpent ;  the  second 
was  the  sin  of  the  woman  which  was  owing  to  him  when 
t  he  abandoned  herself  to  his  seduction ;   the  third   thing 

*  Genesis  iii.  12,  f  Genesis  iil  H. 

X  2 


308  PHILO   JUD.^tJS. 

was  the  guilt  of  the  man  in  yielding  rather  to  the  inclination 
of  the  woman  than  to  the  commandment  of  God.  But 
this  order  is  very  admirable,  containing  -within  itself  a 
perfect  allegory ;  inasmuch  as  the  serpent  is  the  emblem  of 
desire,  as  is  proved,  and  the  woman  of  the  outward  sense ; 
but  the  man  is  the  symbol  of  intellect.  Therefore  the 
infamous  author  of  the  sin  is  desire ;  and  that  first  deceives 
the  outward  sense,  and  then  the  outward  sense  captivates 
the  mind. 

Why  the  curse  is  pronounced  on  the  serpent  in  this 
manner,  that  he  shall  go  on  his  breast  and  on  his  belly,  and 
eat  dust,  and  be  at  enmity  with  the  woman  ?* 

48.  The  words  in  themselves  are  plain  enough,  and  we 
have  evidence  of  them  in  what  we  have  seen.  But  the  real 
meaning  contains  an  allegory  concealed  beneath  it ;  since 
the  serpent  is  the  emblem  of  desire,  representing  under  a 
figure  a  man  devoted  to  pleasure.  For  he  creeps  upon  his 
breast  and  upon  his  belly,  being  filled  with  meat  and  drink 
like  cormorants,  being  inflamed  by  an  insatiable  cupidity, 
and  being  incontinent  in  their  voracity  and  devouring  of 
flesh,  so  that  whatever  relates  to  food  is  in  every  article  some- 
thing earthly,  on  which  account  he  is  said  to  eat  the  dust. 

But  desire  has  naturally  a  quarrel  with  the  outward  sense, 
which  Moses  here  symbolically  calls  the  woman  ;  but  where 
the  passions  appear  to  be  as  it  were  guardians  and  champions 
in  behalf  of  the  senses,  nevertheless  they  are  beyond  aU 
question  still  more  clearly  flatterers  forming  devices  against 
them  like  so  many  enemies  ;  and  it  is  the  custom  of  those 
who  are  contending  with  one  another  to  perpetrate  greater 
evils  by  means  of  those  things  which  they  concede.  Forsooth 
they  turn  the  eyes  to  the  ruin  of  the  sight,  the  ears  to 
hearing  what  is  unwelcome ;  and  the  rest  of  the  outward 
senses  to  insensibility.  Moreover  they  cause  dissolution  and 
paralysis  to  the  entire  body,  taking  away  from  it  all  sound- 
ness, and  foolishly  building  up  instead  a  great  number  of 
most  mischievous  diseases. 

"Why  the   curse  pronounced   against   the  woman  is  the 
multiplication  of  her  sadness  and  groans,  that  she  shall  bring 
forth  children  in  sorrow,  and  that  her  desire  shall  be  to  her 
husband,  and  that  she  shall  be  ruled  over  by  him  ?t 
*  Genesis  iii.  16.  t  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  309 

49.  Every  woman  who  is  the  companion  for  life  of  a  hus- 
band suffers  all  those  things,  not  indeed  as  a  curse  but  as 
necessary  evils.  But  speaking  figuratively,  the  human  sense 
is  wholly  subjected  to  severe  labour  and  pain,  being  stricken 
and  wounded  by  domestic  agitations.  Now  the  following 
are  the  train  in  the  service  of  the  outward  senses  :  the 
sight  is  the  servant  of  the  eyes,  hearing  of  the  ears,  smelling 
of  the  nostrils,  taste  of  the  mouth,  feeling  of  the  touch. 

Since  the  life  of  the  worthless  and  wicked  man  is  full  of  paii\ 
and  want,  it  arises  of  necessity  from  these  facts  that  every 
thing  which  is  done  in  accordance  with  the  outward  sense 
must  be  mingled  with  pain  and  fear.  In  respect  of  the 
mind  a  conversion  of  the  outward  sense  takes  place  towards 
the  man  not  as  to  a  companion,  for  it,  like  the  woman,  is 
subject  to  authority  as  being  depraved,  but  as  to  a  master, 
because  it  has  chosen  violence  rather  than  justice. 

Why  God,  as  he  had  pronounced  a  curse  on  the  serpent 
and  on  the  woman  which  bore  a  relation  to  themselves  and 
to  one  another,  "he  did  not  pronounce  a  similar  one  upon  the 
man,  but  connected  the  earth  with  him,  saying,"  Cursed  is 
the  earth  for  thy  sake ;  in  sorrow  shalt  thou  eat  of  it,  thorns 
and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth  unto  thee,  and  thou  shalt 
eat  the  grass  of  the  field:  in  the  sweat  of  thy  brow  shalt 
thou  eat  thy  bread.?"* 

50.  Since  all  intellect  is  a  divine  inspiration,  God  did  not 
judge  it  right  to  curse  him  in  the  manner  deserved  by  his 
offence ;  but  converted  his  curse  so  as  to  fall  upon  the  earth 
and  his  cultivation  of  it.  But  man,  as  a  body  of  co-equal 
nature  and  similar  character  to  that  of  the  earth  and  under- 
standing, is  its  cultivator.  When  the  cultivator  is  endowed 
with  virtue  and  diligence,  then  the  body  produces  its 
proper  fruit,  namely  sanity,  an  excellent  state  of  the  outward 
senses,  strength,  and  beauty.  But  if  the  cultivator  be  a 
savage,  then  every  thing  is  different.  For  the  body  becomes 
liable  to  a  curse,  since  it  has  for  its  husbandman  an  intellect 
unchastised  and  unsound.  And  its  jfruit  is  nothing  useful, 
but  only  thorns  and  thistles,  sorrow  and  fear,  and  other  vices 
which  every  thought  strikes  down,  and  as  it  were  pierces  the 
mtellect  with  its  darts. 

*  Genesis  iii.  17. 


310  THILO   JUDJEUS. 

But  grass  here  is  symbolically  used  for  food ;  since  man 
has  chsuged  himself  from  a  rational  animal  into  a  hrute 
bcact,  having  neglected  all  divine  food,  which  is  given  by 
philosophy,  by  means  of  distinct  words  and  laws  to  regulate 
the  will. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Until  thou  re- 
turnest  to  the  earth  from  which  thou  wast  taken ;"  for  man 
was  not  created  out  of  the  earth  alone,  but  also  of  the  divine 
Spirit  ?* 

5i.  In  the  first  place  it  is  clear,  that  the  first  man  who 
was  formed  out  of  the  earth  was  made  up  both  of  earth  and 
heaven ;  but  because  he  did  not  continue  uncorrupt,  but 
despised  the  commandment  of  Grod,  fleeing  from  the  most 
excellent  part,  namely,  from  heaven,  he  gave  himself  up 
wholly  as  a  slave  to- the  earth,  the  denser  and  heavier 
element. 

In  the  second  place,  if  any  one  burns  with  a  desire  of 
■vdrtue,  which  makes  the  soul  immortal,  he,  beyond  all  ques- 
tion, attains  to  a  heavenly  inheritance ;  but  because  he  was 
covetous  of  pleasure,  by  which  spiritual  death  is  engendered, 
he  again  gives  himself  over  a  second  time  to  the  earth,  on 
which  account  it  is  said  to  him,  "  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto 
dust  shalt  thou  return;"  therefore  the  earth,  as  it  is  the 
beginning  of  a  wicked  and  depraved  man,  so  also  it  is  his 
end ;  but  heaven  is  the  beginning  and  end  of  him  who  is 
endowed  with  virtue. 

Why  Adam  called  his  wife  Life,  and  affirmed  to  her, 
"  Thou  art  the  mother  of  all  living  ?"t 

52.  In  the  first  place,  Adam  gave  to  the  first  created 
woman  that  familiar  name  of  Life,  inasmuch  as  she  was  des- 
tined to  be  the  fountain  of  all  the  generations  which  should 
ever  arise  upon  the  earth  after  their  time. 

In  the  second  place,  he  called  her  by  this  name  because 
she  did  not  derive  the  existence  of  her  substance  out  of  the 
earth,  but  out  of  a  living  creature,  namely,  out  of  one  part 
of  the  man,  that  is  to  say,  out  of  his  rib,  which  was  formed 
into  a  woman,  and  on  that  account  she  was  called  "life," 
because  she  was  first  made  out  of  a  living  creature,  and 
*  Genesis  iii.  18.  f  Genesis  iii  20. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  311 

because  the  first  beings  who  were  endowed  with  reason  were 
to  be  generated  from  her.  Nevertheless,  it  is  possible  that 
this  may  have  been  a  metaphorical  expression  ;  for  is  not  the 
outward  sense,  which  is  a  figurative  emblem  of  the  woman, 
called  with  peculiar  propriety  "  life  r"  because  it  is  by  the 
possession  of  these  senses  that  the  living  being  is  above  all 
other  means  distinguished  from  that  which  is  not  alive,  as  it 
is  by  that  that  the  imaginations  and  impulses  of  the  soul 
are  set  in  motion,  for  the  senses  are  the  causes  of  each  ;  and, 
in  real  truth  the  outward  sense  is  the  mother  of  all  living 
creatures,  for  as  there  could  be  no  generation  "without  a 
mother,  so  also  there  could  be  no  living  creature  without 
sense. 

Why  Grod  made  garments  of  skins  for  Adam  and  his  wife, 
and  clothed  them  ?* 

53.  Perhaps  some  one  may  laugh  at  the  expressions  here 
used,  considering  the  small  value  of  the  garments  thus 
made,  as  if  they  were  not  at  all  worthy  of  the  labour  of  a 
Creator  of  such  dignity  and  greatness ;  but  a  man  who  has 
a  proper  appreciation  of  wisdom  and  virtue  will  rightly  and 
deservedly  look  upon  this  work  as  one  very  suitable  for  a 
God,  that,  namely,  of  teaching  wisdom  U)  those  who  were 
before  labouring  to  no  purpose ;  and  who,  having  but  little 
anxiety  about  procuring  useful  things,  being  seized  with  an 
insane  desire  for  miserable  honours,  have  given  themselves 
up  as  slaves  to  convenience,  looking  upon  the  study  of  wis- 
dom and  virtue  with  detestation,  and  being  in  love  Vith 
splendour  of  life  and  skill  in  mean  and  handicraft  arts, 
which  is  in  no  way  connected  Avith  a  virtuous  man. 

And  these  unhappy  men  do  not  know  that  a  frugality, 
which  is  in  need  of  nothing,  becomes,  as  it  were,  a  relation  and 
neighbour  to  man,  but  that  luxurious  splendour  is  banished 
to  a  distance  as  an  enemy ;  therefore  the  garment  made  of 
skins,  if  one  should  come  to  a  correct  judgment,  deserves  to 
be  looked  upon  as  a  more  noble  possession  than  a  purple 
robe  embroidered  with  various  colours. 

Therefore  this  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  text ;  but  if 
we  look  to  the  real  meaning,  then  the  garment  of  skins  is  a 
figurative  expression  for  the  natural  skin,  that  is  to  say,  our 

*  Goncsis  iii.  21. 


312  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

body ;  for  God,  when  first  of  all  lie  made  the  intellect,  called 
it  Adam  ;  after  that  he  created  the  outward  sense,  to  which 
he  gave  the  name  of  Life.  In  the  third  place,  he  of  necessity 
also  made  a  body,  calling  that  by  a  figurative  expression,  a 
garment  of  skins ;  for  it  was  fitting  that  the  intellect  and 
the  outward  sense  should  be  clothed  in  a  body  as  in  a  gar- 
ment of  skins ;  that  the  creature  itself  might  first  of  all 
appear  worthy  of  divine  virtue ;  since  by  what  power  can 
the  formation  of  the  human  body  be  put  together  more  ex- 
cellently, and  in  a  more  becoming  manner,  than  by  God? 
on  which  account  he  did  put  it  together,  and  at  the  same 
time  he  clothed  it;  when  some  prepare  articles  of  human 
clothing  and  others  put  them  on ;  but  this  natural  clothing, 
contemporary  with  the  man  himself,  namely,  the  body,  be- 
longed to  the  same  Being  both  to  make  and  to  clothe  the 
man  in  after  it  was  made. 

AVTio  those  beings  are  to  whom  God  says,  "  Behold,  Adam 
has  become  as  one  of  us,  to  know  good  and  evil?"^' 

54.  The  expression,  "  one  of  us,"  indicates  a  plurality  of 
beings ;  unless  indeed  we  are  to  suppose,  that  God  is  con- 
versing with  his  ovra.  virtues,  which  he  employed  as  instru- 
ments, as  it  were,  to  create  the  universe  and  all  that  is  in 
it;  but  that  expression  "as,"  resembles  an  enigma,  and  a 
similitude,  and  a  comparison,  but  is  not  declaratory  of  any 
dissimilarity ;  for  that  which  is  intelligible  and  sensibly 
good,  and  likewise  that  which  is  of  a  contrary  character,  is 
known  to  God  in  a  different  manner  from  that  in  which  it  is 
known  to  man ;  since,  in  the  same  way  in  which  the  natures 
of  those  who  inquire  and  those  who  comprehend,  and  the 
things  themselves  too  which  are  inquired  into,  and  per- 
ceived, and  comprehended,  are  distinguished,  virtue  itself  is 
also  capable  of  comprehending  them.  But  all  these  things 
are  similitudes,  and  forms,  and  images,  among  men;  but 
among  the  gods  they  are  prototypes,  models,  indications, 
and  more  manifest  examples  of  things  which,  are  somewhat 
obscure ;  but  the  unborn  and  uncreated  Eather  joins  himself 
to  no  one,  except  with  the  intention  of  extending  the  honour 
of  his  virtues. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  Lest  perchance  he 
*  Genesis  iii.  22. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  313 

put  forth  his  hand  and  take  of  the  tree  of  life,  and  eat  and 
live  for  ever;"*  for  there  is  no  uncertainty  and  no  envy 
in  God? 

55.  It  is  quite  true  that  God  never  feels  either  uncer- 
tainty or  envy ;  nevertheless  he  often  employs  ambiguous 
things  and  expressions,  assenting  to  them  as  a  man  might 
do ;  for,  as  I  have  said  Ijefore,  the  supreme  providence  is  of 
a  twofold  nature,  sometimes  being  God,  and  not  acting  in 
any  respect  as  a  man ;  but,  on  some  occasions,  as  a  man 
instructs  his  son,  so  likewise  should  the  Lord  God  give 
warning  to  you. 

Tlierefore  the  first  of  these  circumstances  belongs  to  his 
sovereign  power,  and  the  second  to  his  disciplinary,  and  to 
the  first  introduction  to  instruction,  so  as  to  insinuate  into 
man's  heart  a  voluntary  inclination,  since  that  expression, 
"  lest  perchance,"  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  proof  of  any  hesi- 
tation on  the  part  of  God,  but  in  relation  to  man,  who,  b}^ 
his  nature,  is  prone  to  hesitation,  and  is  a  denunciation  of 
the  inclinations  which  exist  in  him. 

For  when  any  appearance  of  anything  whatever  occurs  to 
any  man,  immediately  there  arises  within  him  an  impulse 
towards  that  which  appears,  being  caused  by  that  very  thing 
which  appears.  And  from  this  arises  the  second  hesitating 
kind  of  uncertainty,  distracting  the  mind  in  various  direc- 
tions, as  to  whether  the  thing  is  fit  to  be  accepted,  or 
acquired,  or  not.  And  very  likely  present  circumstances 
have  a  respect  to  that  second  feeling;  for,  in  truth,  the 
Divinity  is  incapable  of  any  cunning,  or  malevolence,  or 
wickedness :  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that  God  should 
either  envy  the  immortality  or  any  other  good  fortune  be- 
longing to  any  being.  And  we  can  bring  the  most  unde- 
niable proof  of  this ;  for  it  was  not  in  consequence  of  any 
one's  entreaties  that  he  created  the  world ;  but,  being  a 
merciful  benefactor,  rendering  an  essence  previously  un- 
tamed and  unregulated,  and  liable  to  suffering,  gentle  and 
pleasant,  he  did  so  by  a  vast  harmony  of  blessings,  and  a 
regulated  arrangement  of  them,  like  a  chorus ;  and  he  being 
himself  the  only  sure 'being,  planted  the  tree  of  life  by  his 
mn  luminous  character. 

*  Genesis  iii.  23. 


314  PHILO   JUD^US. 


^ 


Moreover,  he  was  not  influenced  bj  the  mediation  or 
exhortation  of  any  other  being  in  communicating  incor- 
ruptibility to  man.  But  while  man  existed  as  the  purest 
intellect,  displaying  no  appearance  either  of  work  or  of  any 
evil  discourse,  he  was  certain  to  have  a  fitting  guide,  to  lead 
him  in  the  paths  of  piety,  which  is  undoubted  and  genuine 
immortality.  But  from  the  time  when  he  began  to  be 
converted  to  depravity,  wishing  for  the  things  which  belong 
to  mortal  life,  he  wandered  from  immortality ;  for  it  is  not 
fitting  that  craft  and  wickedness  should  be  rendered  im- 
mortal, and  moreover  it  would  be  useless  to  the  subject; 
since  the  longer  the  life  is  which  is  granted  to  the  wicked 
and  depraved  man,  the  more  miserable  is  he  than  others,  so 
that  his  immortality  becomes  a  grave  misfortune  to  him. 

Why  now  he  calls  the  Paradise  "pleasure,"  when  he  is 
sending  man  forth  out  of  it  to  till  the  ground  from  which 
ne  was  taken.* 

56.  The  distinction  of  agriculture  is  conspicuous,  when 
man  in  the  state  of  paradise,  practising  the  cultivation  of 
wisdom  as  if  he  were  employed  in  the  cultivation  of  trees, 
and  enjoying  the  food  of  imperishable  and  most  useful 
fruits,  was  himself  endowed  with  immortality  likewise. 
After  that,  being  expelled  from  the  place  of  wisdom,  he 
experienced  the  opposite  effects  of  ignorance,  by  which  the 
body  is  polluted,  and  at  the  same  time  the  intellect  is 
blinded,  and,  being  exposed  to  a  want  of  proper  food,  he 
wastes  away,  and  yields  to  a  miserable  death. 

On  which  account,  now,  in  contempt  of  the  foolish  man, 
God  calls  the  Paradise  "pleasure,"  in  order  to  put  it  in 
opposition  to  a  life  of  pain,  and  misery,  and  savageness.  In 
truth,  the  life  which  is  passed  in  wisdom  is  a  pleasure,  full 
of  liberal  joy,  and  is  the  constant  enjoyment  of  a  rational 
soul ;  but  that  life  which  is  destitute  of  wisdom  is  found  to 
be  both  savage  and  miserable,  although  it  is  excessively 
deceived  by  the  appetites,  which  pain  both  precedes  and 
follows. 

Why  Grod  places  a  cherubim  in  front  of  the  Paradise,  and 
a  flaming  sword,  which  turned  every  way,  to  keep  the  way 
of  the  tree  of  life  Pf 

*  Genesis  iii.  23  t  Genesis  iii.  24. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  315 

57.  The  name  cTicrubira  designates  the  two  original  vir- 
tues which  belong  to  the  Deity,  namely,  his  creative  and 
his  royal  virtues.  The  one  of  which  has  the  title  of  God, 
the  other,  or  the  royal  virtue,  that  of  Lord.  Now  the  form 
of  the  creative  power  is  a  peaceable,  and  gentle,  and  benefi- 
cent virtue ;  but  the  royal  power  is  a  legislative,  and 
chastising,  and  correcting  virtue.  Moreover,  by  the 
flaming  sword  he  here  symbolically  intimates  the  heaven : 
for  the  air  is  of  a  flaming  colour,  and  turns  itself  round, 
revolving  about  the  universe. 

Therefore,  all  these  things  assumed  to  themselves  the 
guardianship  of  the  Paradise,  because  they  are  the  presi- 
dents over  wisdom,  like  a  mirror ;  since,  to  illustrate  my 
meaning  by  an  example,  the  wisdom  of  the  world  is  a  sort  of 
mirror  of  the  divine  virtues,  in  the  similitude  of  which  it 
was  perfected,  and  by  which  the  universe  and  all  the  things 
in  it  are  regulated  and  arranged.  Eut  the  way  to  wisdom  is 
called  philosophy  (a  word  which  means  the  love  or  the 
pursuit  of  philosophy).  And  since  the  creative  virtue  is 
endued  with  philosophy,  being  both  philosophical  and  royal, 
so  also  the  world  itself  is  philosophical. 

Some  persons  however  have  fancied  that  it  is  the  sun 
which  is  indicated  by  the  flaming  sword;  because,  by  its 
constant  revolutions  and  turnings  every  way,  it  marks  out 
the  seasons  of  the  year,  as  being  the  guardian  of  human  life 
and  of  every  thing  which  serves  to  the  life  of  all  men. 

Whether  it  was  properly  said  with  respect  to  Cain :  "  I 
have  gotten  a  man  from  the  Lord  ?"  * 

58.  Here  there  is  a  distinction  made,  as  to — from  some  one, 
nnd  out  of  some  one,  and  by  some  thing.  Out  of  some  one, 
'>s  out  of  materials  ;  from  some  one,  as  from  a  cause  ;  and  by 
^.omc  thing,  as  by  an  instrument.  But  the  Father  and 
Creator  of  aU  the  world  is  not  an  instrument,  but  a  cause. 
Therefore  he  wanders  from  right  wisdom  who  says,  "  That 
what  has  been  made  has  been  made,  not  from  God,  but  by 
God." 

AVl\y  the  sacred  historian  first  describes  the  employment 
oC  the  younger  brother,  Abel,  saying :  "  He  was  a  keeper  of 
^lieep  ;  but  Cain  was  a  cultivator  of  the  earth  ?"t 

•  Genesis  iv.  1.  -j-  Genesis  iv.  2. 


316  PEILO   JUD.EUS. 

59.  Since,  although  the  virtuous  son  was  in  point  of  time 
younger  than  the  wicked  son,  yet  in  point  of  virtue  he  was 
older.  On  which  account,  on  the  present  occasion,  when 
their  actions  are  to  be  compared  together,  he  is  placed  first. 
Therefore  one  of  them  exercises  a  business,  and  takes  care 
of  living  creatures,  although  they  are  devoid  of  reason,  gladly 
taking  upon  himself  the  employment  of  a  shepherd,  which 
is  a  princely  ofSce,  and  as  it  were  a  sort  of  rehearsal  of  royal 
power ;  but  the  other  devotes  his  attention  to  earthly  and 
inanimate  objects. 

"Why  Cain  after  some  days  offers  up  the  first-fruits  of  his 
fruits,  but  when  it  is  said  that  "Abel  offered  up  first-fruits  of 
the  first-born  of  his  flock  and  of  the  fat,"  *  "after  some  days" 
is  not  added  ? 

60.  Moses  here  intimates  the  difference  between  a  lover 
of  himself,  and  one  who  is  thoroughly  devoted  to  God ;  for 
the  one  took  to  himself  the  first-fruits  of  his  fruits,  and  very 
impiously  looked  upon  God  as  worthy  only  of  the  secondary 
and  inferior  offerings ;  for  the  expression,  "after  some  days," 
implies  that  he  did  not  do  so  immediately ;  and  when  it  is 
said  that  he  offered  of  the  fruits,  that  intimates  that  he  did 
not  offer  of  the  best  fruits  which  he  had,  and  herein  displays 
liis  iniquity. 

But  the  other,  without  any  delay,  offered  up  the  first-bom 
and  eldest  of  all  his  flocks,  in  order  that  in  this  the  Father 
might  not  be  treated  unworthily. 

"Why,  when  he  had  begun  with  Cain,  he  still  mentions 
him  here  in  the  second  place,  when  he  says :  "  And  God 
had  respect  unto  Abel  and  unto  his  offerings ;  but  unto 
Cain  and  unto  his  sacrifices  he  paid  no  attention  ?"t 

61.  In  the  first  place,  because  the  good  man,  who  is  by 
nature  first,  is  not  at  first  perceived  by  the  outward  senses 
of  any  man  except  in  his  own  turn,  and  by  people  of  virtuous 
conduct.  Secondly,  because  the  good  and  the  wicked  man 
are  two  distinct  characters  ;  he  accepts  the  good  man,  seeing 
that  he  is  a  lover  of  what  is  good,  and  an  eager  student  of 
virtue  ;  but  he  rejects  and  regards  with  aversion  the  wicked 
man,  presuming  that  he  will  be  prone  to  that  side  by  the 

•  Genesis  iv.  3.  t  Genesis  iv.  5. 


QUESTIONS  AND  SOLUTIONS.  317 

order  of  nature.  Therefore  he  says  here  with  exceeding 
fitness,  that  Grod  had  regard,  not  to  the  offerings,  but  to 
those  who  offered  them,  rather  than  to  the  gifts  themselves ; 
for  men  have  regard  to  and  regulate  their  approbation  by 
the  abundance  and  richness  of  offerings,  but  God  looks  at 
the  sincerity  of  the  soul,  having  no  regard  to  ambition  or 
illusion  of  any  kind. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  distinction  here  made  be- 
tween a  gift  and  a  sacrifice  ?  * 

62.  The  man  who  slays  a  sacrifice,  after  having  made  a 
division,  pours  the  blood  around  the  altar  and  takes  the  flesh 
home ;  but  he  who  offers  it  as  a  gift,  offers  as  it  should  seem 
the  whole  to  him  who  accepts  it.  Therefore,  the  man  who 
is  a  lover  of  self  is  a  distributor,  like  Cain ;  but  he  who  is  a 
lover  of  God  is  the  giver  of  a  free  gift,  as  was  Abel. 

How  it  was  that  Cain  became  aware  that  his  offering  had 
not  pleased  GodPf 

63.  Perhaps  he  resolved  his  doubts,  an  additional  cause 
being  added,  for  sorrow  seized  upon  him  and  his  counte- 
nance fell.  Therefore,  he  took  the  sorrow  which  he  felt  as 
an  indication  that  he  had  been  sacrificing  what  was  not 
pleasing  or  approved  of,  when  joy  and  happiness  would  have 
been  suited  to  one  who  was  sacrificing  with  purity  of  heart 
and  spirit. 

Why  is  it  that  the  expression  used  is  not,  because  you  do 
not  offer  rightly ;  but,  because  (or  unless)  you  do  not  divide 
rightly  ?  + 

64.  In  the  first  place,  we  must  understand  that  right 
division  and  improper  division  are  nothing  else  but  order 
nnd  the  want  of  it.  And  it  is  by  order  that  the  universal 
world  and  its  parts  were  made ;  since  the  Creator  of  the 
world,  when  he  began  to  arrange  and  regulate  the  pre- 
viously untamed  and  unarranged  power  wliich  was  liable  to 
'differing,  employed  section  and  division.     For  he  placed  the 

leayy  elements  which  were  prone  to  descend  downwards  by 
j:heir  own  nature,  namely,  the  earth  and  the  water,  in  the 
'^entre  of  the  universe ;  but  he  placed  the  air  and  the  fire  at 

•  Genesis  iv.  4.  f  Genesis  iv,  5.  J  Genesis  iv.  7. 


318  PIIILO   JUDiEDS. 

a  greater  altitude,  as  tliej  were  raised  on  higli  by  reason  of 
their  lightness. 

But  separating  and  dividing  the  pure  nature,  namely 
heaven,  he  carried  it  round  and  diffused  it  over  the  universe, 
so  that  it  should  be  completely  invisible  to  all  men ;  con- 
taining within  itself  the  whole  universe  in  all  its  parts. 

Again,  the  statement  that  animals  and  plants  are  pro- 
duced out  of  seeds,  some  moist  and  some  dry,  what  else 
does  it  mean  but  the  inevitable  dissection  and  separation  of 
distinction  ?  Therefore  it  follows  inevitably,  that  this  order 
and  arrangement  of  the  universe  must  be  imitated  in  all 
things,  especially  in  feeliug  and  acknowledging  gratitude ; 
by  which  we  are  invited  to  requite  in  some  degree  and 
manner  the  kindnesses  of  those  who  have  showered  greater 
benefits  liberally  on  us.  Moreover,  to  pay  one's  thanks  to 
Grod  is  an  action  which  is  intrinsically  right  in  itself:  and 
it  is  not  to  be  disapproved  of  that  he  should  receive  the 
ofierings  due  to  him  at  the  earliest  moment,  and  fresh  gifts 
from  the  first-fruits  of  every  thing,  not  being  dishonoured  by 
any  negligence  on  our  part.  Since  it  is  not  fitting  that  man 
should  reserve  for  himself  the  first  and  most  excellent  things 
Avhich  are  created,  and  should  offer  what  is  only  second  beat 
to  the  all- wise  Grod  and  Creator ;  for  that  division  would  be 
faulty  and  blameworthy,  showing  a  most  preposterous  and 
unnatural  arrangement. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression :  "  You  have  done 
wrongly ;  now  rest  ?" * 

65.  He  is  here  giving  very  useful  advice ;  since,  to  do  no 
wrong  at  all  is  the  greatest  of  all  good  things  :  but  he  who 
sins,  and  who  thus  blushes  and  is  overwhelmed  with  shame, 
is  near  akin  to  him,  being,  if  I  may  use  such  a  phrase,  as  the 
younger  brother  to  the  elder ;  for  those  persons  who  pride 
themselves  on  their  errors  as  if  they  had  not  done  wrong,  are 
afl3[icted  with  a  disease  which  is  difB.cult  to  cure,  or  rather 
which  is  altogether  incurable. 

Why  he  seems  to  be  giving  what  is  good  into  the  hand  of 
pw  wicked  man,  when  he  says,  "  And  unto  thee  shall  be  his 
desire  ?"t 

*  Genesis  iv,  8.  f  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  319 

66.  He  does  not  deliver  good  into  his  hand ;  but  the 
expression  is  heard  with  different  feelings ;  since  he  is 
speaking,  not  of  a  pious  man,  but  after  the  action  is  accom- 
plished, saying  of  him :  The  desire  and  respect  of  the 
impiety  of  this  man's  wickedness  will  be  towards  you.     Do 

>  not  therefore  talk  about  necessity,  but  about  your  own 
;  habits,  in  order  that  thus  he  may  represent  the  voluntary 
I  action. 

And  again,  the  sentence,  "And  you  shall  be  his  ruler 
I  over  him,"   has  a  reference  to  the  operation.     In  the  first 

place,  you  begin  to  act  with  wickedness ;  and  now  behold, 
ji  another  iniquity  follows  that  great  and  injurious  iniquity. 
j  Therefore,  he   both   thinks   and   affirms   that   this   is   the 

principal  part  of  all  voluntary  injury. 

'      Why  he  slew  his  brother  in  the  field  ?  * 

67.  That  as  all  infecundity  and  sterility  arises  from  a 
neglect  of  sowing  and  planting  land  a  second  time,  he  may 
be  kept  continually  in  mind  of  his  wicked  murder,  and  self- 
blamed  for  it ;  since  the  ground  was  not  to  be  the  same  for 
the  future,  after  it  was  compelled,  contrary  to  its  nature,  to 
drink  of  human  blood,  to  bring  forth  food  to  that  man  who 
imbued  it  with  the  polluted  stain  of  blood. 

Why  he  who  knows  all  things  asks  the  fratricide :  "  Where 
is  tby  brother  Abel?" t 

68.  He  puts  this  question  to  him  because  he  wishes  the 
man  to  confess  voluntarily  and  spontaneously,  of  his  own 
accord,  so  that  he  may  not  imagine  that  every  thing  is  done 
out  of  necessity ;  for  he  who  had  slain  another  through 
necessity,  would  have  confessed  unwillingly,  as  having  done 
the  deed  unwillingly ;  since  that  which  does  not  depend 
jpon  ourselves  does  not  deserve  accusation ;  but  the  man 
kvho  has  done  wrong  intentionally  denies  it ;  for  those  who 
lo  wrong  are  liable  to  repentance.  Therefore,  he  has  inter- 
voven  this  principle  in  all  parts  of  his  legislation,  because 
;he  Deity  himself  is  never  the  cause  of  evil. 

Why  he  who  had  slain  his  brother  makes  answer  as  if  he 
vere  replying  to  a  man ;  and  says,  "  I  do  not  know :  am  I 
ny  brother's  keeper  ?"| 

*  Genesis  iv.  9.  f  Genesis  iv.  10.  t  Geneaif*  iv.  9. 


3*20  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

69.  It  is  tlie  opinion  of  an  atheist  to  tliink  that  the  eye  of 
G-od  does  not  penetrate  through  every  thing,  and  behold  all 
things  at  the  same  time ;  piercing  not  only  through  what  is 
visible,  but  also  through  every  thing  which  lurks  in  the 
deepest  and  bottomless  unfathomable  abysses. 

Suppose  a  person  said  to  him,  "  How  can  you  be  ignorant 
where  your  brother  is,  and  how  is  it  that  you  do  not  know 
that,  when  as  yet  he  is  one  out  of  the  only  four  human  beings 
which  exist  in  the  world?  He  being  one  with  both  his  parents, 
and  you  his  only  brother."  To  this  question  the  reply  made 
is  :  "I  am  not  my  brother's  keeper."  0  what  a  beautiful 
apology !  And  whose  keeper  and  protector  ought  you  to  have 
been,  rather  than  your  brother's  ?  But  if  you  have  excited 
your  diligence  to  give  effect  to  violence,  and  injury,  and  fraud, 
and  homicide,  which  are  the  foulest  and  most  abominable  of 
actions,  why  did  you  consider  the  safety  of  your  brother  a 
secondary  object  ?  " 

What  is  the  meaning  of  ttie  expresssion,  "  The  voice  of  thy 
brother's  blood  cries  to  me  out  of  the  earth  ?  "  * 

70.  This  is  especially  an  example  by  which  to  take  warning; 
for  the  Deity  listens  to  those  who  are  worthy,  although  they 
be  dead,  knowing  that  they  are  alive  as  to  an  incorporeal  life. 
But  he  averts  his  countenance  from  the  prayers  of  the 
wicked,  although  they  are  living  a  flourishing  life,  inasmuch 
as  he  looks  upon  them  as  dead  to  any  real  life,  carrying 
about  their  bodies  like  a  sepulchre ;  and  having  buried  their 
miserable  souls  in  it. 

"Why  he  is  said  to  be  cursed  upon  the  earth  ?  f 

71.  The  earth  is  the  last  portion  of  the  world,  therefore  if 
that  utters  curses,  we  must  consider  that  the  other  elements 
do  likewise  pour  forth  adequate  maledictions  ;  for  instance, 
the  fountains,  and  rivers,  and  sea,  and  the  air,  and  the  land, 
and  the  fire,  and  the  light,  and  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars, 
and  in  short  the  whole  heaven.  For  if  inanimate  and 
earthly  nature,  throwing  off"  the  yoke,  wars  against  injury, 
why  may  not  still  rather  those  natures  do  so  which  are  of  a 
purer  character  ?     But  as  for  him,  against  whom  the  parts 

*  Genesis  iv.  10.  f  Genesis  iv.  11 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  35J1 

of  the  world  carry  on  war,  what  hope  of  safety  lie  can  have 
for  the  future,  I  know  not, 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  curse,  "  You  shall  be  groaning 
and  trembling  upon  the  earth?"  * 

72.  This  also  is  a  general  principle  ;  for  in  all  evils  there 
are  some  things  which  are  perceived  immediately,  and  some 
which  are  felt  at  a  later  period  ;  for  those  which  are  future 
cause  fear,  and  those  which  are  felt  at  once  bring  sorrow. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  Cain  saying,  "  My  punishment  is 
too  great  for  you  to  dismiss  me  ?  f 

73.  In  truth  there  is  no  misery  greater  than  to  be  deserted 
and  despised  by  God  ;  for  the  anarchy  of  fools  is  cruel  and 
very  intolerable  ;  but  to  be  despised  by  the  great  King,  and 
to  fall  down  as  an  abject  person  cast  down  from  the  govern- 
ment of  the  Supreme  Power  is  an  indescribable  affliction. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  Cain,  when  he  says,  "  Everyone 
who  shall  find  me  will  kill  me:"  when  there  was  scarcely 
another  human  being  in  the  world  except  his  parents  ?]; 

74.  In  the  first  place  he  might  have  received  injury  from 
the  parts  of  the  world  which  indeed  were  made  for  the 
advantage  of  the  good  and  that  they  might  partake  of  them, 
but  which  nevertheless,  derived  from  the  wicked  no  slight 
degree  of  revenge.  In  the  second  place  it  may  be  that  he 
said  this,  because  he  was  apprehensive  of  injury  from  beasts, 
and  reptiles ;  for  nature  has  brought  forth  these  animals  with 
the  express  object  of  their  being  instruments  of  vengeance 
in  the  wicked. 

In  the  third  place,  some  people  may  imagine  that  he  is 
speaking  with  reference  to  his  parents,  on  whom  he   hr.d 
iiflicted  an  unprecedented  sorrow,  and  the  first  evil  which 
>:id  happened  to  them,  before  they  knew  what  death  was. 

Why  whoever  should  slay  Cain  should  bo  liable  to  bear  a 
jevenfold  punishment  ?§ 

75.  As  our  soul  consists  of  eight  portions,  being  accns^ 
omed  to  be  divided  in  its  rational  and  irrational  individuality 

\  •  Genesis  iv.  13.     Our  translation  is,  "My  punishment  is  greater 
lan  I  can  bear.'* 


8T.   ^'^^^  /   C 


323  PHILO  JUDyEUS. 

into  seven  subordinate  parts,  namely  into  the  five  outward 
senses,  and  the  instrument  of  vice,  and  the  faculty  of  gene- 
ration ;  those  seven  parts  exist  among  the  causes  of  wicked- 
ness and  evil,  on  which  account  they  likewise  fall  under 
judgment ;  but  the  death  of  ths  principal  and  dominant 
portion  of  man,  namely  of  the  mind,  is  principally  the 
wickedness  which  exists  in  it.  Whoever  therefore  slays  the 
mind,  mingling  in  it  folly,  and  insensibility,  instead  of  sense, 
will  cause  dissolution  also  of  the  seven  irrational  parts  ;  since, 
just  as  the  principal  and  leading  part  had  a  portion  from 
virtue,  in  the  s.  me  manner  likewise  are  its  subject  divisions 
coniposed. 

Why  a  sign  is  put  on  him  who  had  slain  his  brother,  that 
no  one  should  kill  him  who  found  him  ;  when  it  would  have 
been  natural  to  do  the  contrary,  namely,  to  give  him  over  to 
the  hands  of  an  executioner  to  be  put  to  death  ?* 

76.  This  is  said  because,  in  the  first  place,  the  change  of 
the  nature  of  living  is  one  kind  of  death ;  but  continual 
sorrow  and  unmixed  fear  are  destitute  of  joy  and  devoid  of  all 
good  hope,  and  so  they  bring  on  many  terrible  and  various 
evils  which  are  so  many  sensible  deaths. 

In  the  second  place,  the  sacred  historian  designs  at  the 
verv  beginning  of  his  work  to  enunciate  the  law  about  the 
incorruptibility  of  the  soul,  and  to  confute  as  deceitful  those 
who  look  upon  the  life  which  is  contained  in  this  body  as  the 
only  happy  life  ;  for  behold  one  of  the  two  brothers  is  guilty 
of  those  enormous  crimes  which  have  already  been  men- 
tioned, namel3%  impiety  and  fratricide  ;  and  he  is  still  alive, 
and  begetting  offspring,  and  building  cities.  But  the  other 
who  was  praised  in  respect  of  his  piety  is  treacherously  put 
to  death ;  while  the  voice  of  the  Lord  not  only  clearly  cries 
out  that  that  existence  which  is  perceptible  by  the  outward 
senses  is  not  good,  and  that  such  a  death  is  not  evil,  but 
also  that  that  life  which  is  in  the  flesh  is  not  life,  but  that 
there  is  another  given  to  man  free  from  old  ajre,  and  more 
immortal,  which  the  incorporeal  souls  have  received  j  for  tnatf 
expression  of  the  poet  about  Scylla,  ' 

"  That  is  not  mortal  but  an  endless  woe,'*f 

*  Genesis  iv,  16. 

f  The  line  occurs,  Homer,  Odyss.  xii.  118. 

t)  oi  rot  ov  iiprjTiij  dAX'  dUdi'aTov  Kanov  tariv. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  323 

is  asserted  in  the  same  familiarity  about  a  person  who  lives 
ill  and  passes  a  long  life  for  many  years  in  the  practice  of 
wickedness. 

In  the  third  place,  since  Cain  had  perpetrated  this  fra- 
tricide of  enortnous  guilt  above  all  other  crimes,  he  presents 
himself  to  him,  quite  forgetful  of  the  injury  that  he  has  done, 
imposing  on  all  judges  a  most  peaceful  law  for  the  first  crime; 
not  that  they  are  not  to  destroy  malefactors,  but  that  resting 
for  a  while  M^th  great  patience  and  long  sufieriug,  they  shall 
study  compassion  rather  than  severity. 

But  God  himself,  with  the  most  perfect  wisdom,  has  laid 
down  the  rule  of  familiarity  and  intelligence  with  reference 
to  the  first  sinner:  not  slaying  the  homicide,  but  destroying 
him  in  another  manner ;  since  he  scarcely  permitted  him  to 
be  enumerated  among  the  generations  of  his  father,  but  shows 
him  proscribed  not  only  by  his  parents  but  by  the  whole 
race  of  mankind,  allotting  him  a  state  separate  from  that  of 
others,  and  secluded  from  the  class  of  rational  animals,  as 
one  who  had  been  expelled,  and  banished,  and  turned  into 
the  nature  of  beasts. 

Why  Lamech,  after  the  fifth  generation,  blames  himself 
for  the  fratricide  of  his  elder  Cain  ;  saying,  as  the  scripture 
reports,  to  his  wives,  Adah  and  Zillah  ;  "  I  have  slain  a  man 
to  my  injury  and  a  young  man  to  my  hurt ;  since  if  vengeance 
is  taken  upon  Cain  sevenfold,  it  shall  certainly  be  taken  on 
Lamech  seventy  and  sevenfold  ?  "  * 

77.  In  numerals  one  is  before  ten,  both  in  order  and  in 
nrtue,  for  it  is  the  first  beginning  and  element  and  measure 
)f  all  things.  But  the  number  ten  is  subsequent,  and  is 
neasured  by  the  other,  being  inferior  to  it,  both  in  order 
md  virtue  ;  therefore,  also,  the  number  seven  is  antecedent 
Q  its  origin  to  and  more  ancient  than  the  number  seventy, 
lut  the  number  seventy  is  younger  than  the  number  seven, 
nd  contains  the  calculation  of  generations. 

These  premises  being  laid  down,  he  who  first  committed 
m,  as  if  he  had  been  really  always  ignorant  of  evil,  like 
le  first  odd  number,  namely,  the  unit,  is  chastised  more 
inply  ;  but  the  second  offender,  because  he  had  the  first 
)r  an  example,  so  that  there  cannot  possibly  be  any  excuse 
*  Genesis  iy.  23. 

y  2 


32  4  PIIILO   JUDJ::US. 

made  for  him,  is  guilty  of  a  voluntary  crime,  and  because 
ho  did  not  receive  honourable  wisdom  from  that  more  sim- 
ple punishment,  the  consequence  will  be  that  he  will  both 
suffer  all  that  first  punishment,  and  will,  moreover,  receive 
this  second  one,  which  is  contained  in  the  number  ten. 

For  as  in  the  horse-races  they  pay  the  groom  who  has 
trained  the  horse  twice  as  great  a  reward  as  they  give  to  the 
driver,  so  some  Avicked  men,  inclined  to  acts  of  injustice, 
gain  the  miserable  triumph  of  victory  and  then  are  punished 
with  a  double  punishment,  both  by  the  first  one  which  is 
contained   in  the   unit,  and  also  by  the  second  which  is 
contained   in  the   number   ten ;   besides,    Cain   being   the 
author  of  a  homicide,  when  he  was  ignorant  of  the  great- 
ness of  the  pollution  which  he  was  incurring,  because  no 
death  had  hitherto  taken  place  in  the  world,  suffered  a  more 
simple  punishment,  namely,  only  a  sevenfold  penalty  in  the 
order  of  the  unit ;  but  as  his  imitator  could  not  take  refuge 
in  the  same  plea  of  ignorance,  he  ought  to  be  subjected  to 
a  twofold  punishment,  7iot  only  to  one  equal  and  similar  to 
that  which  had  been  inflicted  on  the  first  offender,  but  also 
another,  which  should  be  the  seventh  among  the  decades. 
In  truth,  according  to  the  law,  the  trial  which  is  before  the 
tribunal  is  a  sevenfold  one ;  first  of  all,  the  eyes  are  put 
on  their  trial,  because  they  beheld  what  was  not  lawful; 
secondly,  the  ears  are  impeached,  because  they  heard  what 
they  ought  not  to  have  heard  ;  thirdly,  the  smell  is  brought 
into  question,  as  having  been  reduced  by  smoke  and  vapour; 
fourthly,  the  taste  is  accused,  as  being  subservient  to  the 
pleasures  of  the  belly  ;  fifthly,  a  oharge  is  brought  against 
the  taste,  by  means  of  which,  besides  the  operations  of  the 
senses  above-mentioned,  in  respect  of  those  things  which 
prevail  over  the  spirit,  other  things,  also,  are  superadded 
separately,  such  as  the  takings  of  cities,  the  captivities  of 
men.  the  destructions  of  those  citadels  of  cities  in  which 
wisdom  dwells  ;  sixthly,  an  accusation  is  urged  against  the 
tongue  and  other  instruments  of   speech,  for  being  silent 
as  to  what  should  be  spoken  of,  and  speaking  of  what 
should  be  buried  in  silence  ;  and,  in  the  seventh  place,  the 
lower  part  of  the   belly  is   impeached  for  inflaming  and 
exciting  the  passions  by  immoderate  lust. 

This  is  the  meaning  of  that  expression,  according  to  wticl 
a  sevenfold  vengeance  was  taken  upon  Cain,  but  a  seventy 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  325 

and  sevenfold  vengeance  upon  Lamecli  for  the  causes  above 
mentioned,  because  he  was  the  second  offender,  not  having 
been  taught  by  the  punishment  of  the  first  delinquent,  and 
therefore  he  is  altogether  worthy  to  receive  his  punishment, 
which  is  the  more  simple  one,  lil^e  the  unit  in  numerals, 
and,  also,  a  manifold  punishment  too  equal  to  the  number  ten. 

"Wliy  Adam,  when  he  begat  Seth,  introduces  him  saying, 
"God  has  raised  up  for  me  another  seed  in  the  place  of 
Abel  whom  Cain  slew  ?  "* 

78.  In  real  truth  Seth  is  another  seed  and  the  beginning 
of  a  second  nativity  of  Abel,  in  accordance  with  a  certain 
natural  principle ;  for  Abel  is  like  to  one  who  comes  down 
below  from  above,  on  which  account  it  was  that  he  perished 
injuriously  ;  but  Seth  resembles  one  who  is  proceeding  up- 
wards from  below,  on  which  account  he  also  increases. 
And  in  proof  of  this  argument  Abel  is  explained  as  having 
been  brought  back  and  offered  upwards  to  Grod.  But  it 
is  not  proper  that  everything  should  be  raised  and  borne 
upwards,  but  only  that  which  is  good,  for  God  is  in  no 
respect  whatever  the  cause  of  evil. 

Therefore,  whatever  is  indistinct  and  uncertain,  and 
mingled,  and  in  confusion  and  disorder,  has  also,  very 
properly,  blame  and  praise  mingled  together :  praise,  be- 
cause it  honours  the  cause,  and  blame,  since  as  the  occurrence 
happened  fortuitously,  so  it  is  without  any  plans  having  been 
formed  or  any  gratitude  expressed.  Moreover,  nature  also 
separated  the  two  sons  from  him ;  it  rendered  the  good  one 
worthy  of  immortality,  resolving  him  into  a  voice  inter- 
ceding with  God ;  but  the  wicked  one  it  gave  over  to 
corruption. 

But  the  name  Seth  is  interpreted  "  watered,"  according 
to  the  variation  of  plants  which  grow  by  being  watered, 
and  put  forth  shoots  and  bear  fruit.  But  these  things  a-e 
the  symbols  of  the  soul,  so  that  it  is  not  lawful  to  assert 
that  the  Divinity  is  the  cause  of  all  things  equally,  of  the 
jbad  as  well  as  of  the  good,  but  only  of  the  good,  and  that 
I  alone  ought  to  be  planted  alive. 

Why  Enos,  the  son  of  Seth,  hoped  to  call  upon  the  name 
Df  the  Lord  God  ?t 

*  Ccneais  iv.  '25.  f  Genesis  iv.  26. 


325  PIIILO  JUD^EUS. 

79.  Tlie  name  Enos  is  interpreted  "man;"  and  it  is 
received  as  meaning,  not  the  whole  of  the  combined  man, 
but  as  the  rational  part  of  the  soul,  namely,  the  intellect, 
to  which  it  is  peculiarly  becoming  to  hope,  for  irrational 
animals  are  devoid  of  hope  ;  but  hope  is  a  sort  of  presage 
of  joy,  and  before  joy  there  is  an  expectation  of  good 
things. 

Why,  after  the  mention  of  hope,  Moses  says,  "  This  is 
the  book  of  the  generations  of  men  ?  "* 

80.  It  is  by  this  that  he  made  what  has  been  said  before 
worthy  of  belief.  What  is  man  ?  Man  is  a  being  which, 
beyond  all  other  races  of  animals,  has  received  a  copious 
and  wonderful  portion  of  hope  ;  and  this  is  as  it  were 
inscribed  on  his  very  nature,  and  celebrated  there ;  for  the 
human  intellect  hopes  by  its  own  nature. 

Why,  in  the  genealogy  of  Adam,  Moses  no  longer  men- 
tions Cain,  but  only  Seth,  who,  he  says,  was  according  to 
his  appearance  and  form  ;  on  which  account  he  proceeds 
to  retain  the  generations  which  descend  from  him  in  his 
genealogy  ?t 

81.  It  can  neither  be  lawful  to  enumerate  a  wicked  and 
sinful  murderer  either  in  the  list  of  reason  or  in  that  of 
number ;  for  he  must  be  cast  out  like  dung,  as  some  one 
said,  looking  upon  him  as  one  of  such  a  character ;  and  on 
this  account  the  sacred  historian  neither  points  him  out  as 
the  successor  of  his  father  who  had  been  formed  out  of  the 
dust,  nor  as  the  head  of  succeeding  generations  ;  but  he 
distributes  both  these  characteristics  to  him  who  was  with- 
out pollution,  and  names  Seth,  who  is  a  drinker  of  water, 
as  having  been  watered  by  his  father,  and  as  begetting  hope 
in  his  own  increase  and  progress ;  on  which  account  it  is  not 
inconsiderately  and  foolishly  that  he  says  that  he  was  boro 
according  to  the  form  and  appearance  of  his  father,  to  the 
reproof  of  his  elder  brother,  who,  on  account  of  the  foulness 
of  the  murder  which  he  had  committed,  has  nothing  in  him 
resembling  his  father,  either  in  body  or  soul. 

And  on  this  account  Moses  has  separated  him  from  the 

*  Genesis  v.  I .  +  Genesis  v.  3. 


QUESTIONS  AND  SOLUTIONS.  327 

family,  and  has  given  his  share  to  his  brother,  being  the 
noble  privilege  of  the  birthright  of  the  first-born. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  verse,  Enoch  pleased  God 
after  he  begat  Methuselah,  two  hundred  years  ?* 

82.  God  appointed  by  the  law  the  fountains  of  all  good 
things  to  be  uuder  the  principles  of  generation  itself.  And 
what  I  mean  is  something  of  this  sort.  A  little  while  before 
he  appointed  mercy  and  pardon  to  exist,  now  again  he  de- 
crees that  penitence  shall  exist,  not  in  any  degree  mocking 
or  reproaching  these  men,  who  are  believed  to  have  offended, 
and  at  the  same  time  giving  the  soul  an  opportunity  to  mount 
up  from  wickedness  to  virtue,  like  the  conversion  of  those 
who  are  proceeding  towards  a  snare.  For  behold,  the  man 
being  made  a  husband  and  a  father  together  with  his  birth, 
makes  a  beginning  of  honesty. 

And  he  is  said  to  please  God,  for  although  he  does  not 
persevere  in  piety  from  the  moment  that  he  is  born,  never- 
theless, all  that  remaining  period  is  counted  to  him  as  having 
been  spent  in  a  praiseworthy  mode  of  life,  because  he  pleased 
God  for  so  many  years.  And  these  things  are  said,  not  be- 
cause it  perhaps  was,  but  it  might  perhaps  have  seemed 
diflferent ;  but  he  approves  of  the  order  of  things,  for 
indulgence  having  been  exemplified,  in  this  case  of  Cain, 
after  no  long  interval  of  time,  he  introduces  this  statement, 
that  Enoch  practised  repentance,  warning  us  by  it  that 
repentance  alone  can  procure  indulgence. 

Why  Enoch,  who  cultivated  repentance,  is  said  to  have 
lived  before  his  repentance  a  hundred  and  sixty-five  years, 
'but  two  hundred  after  his  repentance  ?t 

83.  This  number  of  a  hundred  and  sixty-five  is  combined 
j^f  the  singular  addition  of  ten  numbers  from  the  unit  to 

;en ;  as  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine, 
;en,  the  total  of  which  is  fifty-five.  And  again,  from  that 
)y  the  addition  of  ten  numbers,  which,  removing  the  unit 
)roceed  upwards  by  twos,  as  two,  four,  six,  eight,  ten, 
welve,  fourteen,  sixteen,  eighteen,  twenty,  which  make  a 

•  Genesis  v.  22. 

t  Ibid,  This  is  at  variance  with  the  statement  in  the  Bible,  which 
lya   lie  lived  sixty-five  years  before  the  birth  of  Methuselah,  and 

:ilked  with  God  three  hundred  years. 


o28  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

hundred  and  ten ;  the  combination  of  ^vhich,  with  the  num- 
bers first  mentioned,  produces  a  hundred  and  sixty-five ; 
and  in  this  addition  the  even  numbers  amount  to  twice  as 
much  as  the  odd  numbers ;  for  the  woman  is  more  violent 
than  the  man,  in  the  preposterous  manner  in  which  the 
wicked  man  rules  over  the  virtuous  man,  the  outward  sense 
over  the  mind,  the  body  over  the  outward  sense,  and  matter 
over  its  cause. 

But  the  number  two  hundred,  in  which  repentance  was 
practised,  is  combined  of  two  numbers  of  one  hundred,  the 
first  hundred  of  which  intimates  a  purification  from  injustice, 
but  the  other  indicates  the  plenitude  of  perfect  virtue.  In 
truth,  before  anything  else  is  done,  the  first  thing  is  to  cut  off 
from  a  sick  body  every  diseased  part,  and  after  that  means  of 
cure  are  to  be  applied  to  it,  for  this  is  the  first  step,  and 
the  other  the  second.  Moreover,  the  number  two  hundred 
consists  of  fours,  for  it  is  produced  as  from  seed,  from  four 
triangular  numbers,  and  from  four  tetragons,  and  from  four 
pentagons,  and  from  four  hexagons,  and  from  four  heptagons ; 
and,  as  one  may  say,  it  fixes  its  step  on  the  number  seven. 
Now  the  four  triangles  are  these,  one,  three,  six,  ten,  which 
make  twenty ;  the  four  tetragons  are  one,  four,  nine,  six- 
teen, which  make  thirty ;  from  the  four  pentagons,  one,  five, 
twelve,  twenty-two,  is  made  the  number  forty.  Moreover,  the 
four  hexagons,  one,  six,  fifteen,  twenty-eight,  make  fifty ;  and 
the  four  heptagons,  one,  seven,  eighteen,  thirty-four,  make 
sixty  ;  and  all  these  numbers  put  together  make  two  hundred. 

Why  the  man  who  lives  a  life  of  repentance  is  said  to  have 
lived  three  hundred  and  sixty-five  years?* 

84.  In  the  first  place,  the  year  contains  three  hundred  and 
sixty-five  days ;  therefore,  by  the  symbol  of  the  solar  orbit,  the 
sacred  historian  here  indicates  the  life  of  the  repentant  man. 
In  the  second  place,  as  the  sun  is  the  cause  of  day  and  night, 
performing  his  revolutions  by  day  above  the  hemisphere  of  the 
earth,  and  his  course  by  night  under  the  earth,  so  also  the  life 
of  the  man  of  repentance  consists  of  alternations  of  light  and 
darkness  ;  of  darkness,  that  is,  of  times  of  agitation  and  cir- 
cumstances of  injury;  and  of  light,  when  the  light  of  virtue 
and  its  radiant  brilliancy  arises. 

*  Genesis  v.  23. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  329 

In  the  third  place,  he  has  assigned  to  him  a  complete  num- 
ber, as  the  sun  is  ordained  to  be  the  chief  of  the  stars  of 
heaven,  under  an  appointed  number,  in  the  time  which  came 
before  the  period  of  his  repentance,  to  lead  to  the  oblivion  of 
the  sins  previously  committed ;  since,  as  God  is  good,  he  be- 
stows the  greatest  favours  most  abundantly,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  he  effaces  the  former  offences  of  those  who  devote  them- 
selves to  him,  and  which  might  deserve  chastisement,  by  a 
recollection  of  their  virtues. 

Why,  when  Enoch  died,  the  sacred  historian  adds  the 
assertion,  "  He  pleased  God?"* 

85.  In  the  first  place,  he  says  this  because,  by  such  a 
statement,  he  implies  that  the  soul  is  immortal,  inasmuch  as 
after  it  is  stripped  of  the  body,  it  still  pleases  a  second  time. 

In  the  second  place,  he  honours  the  repentant  man  with 
praise,  because  he  has  persevered  in  the  same  alteration  of 
manners,  and  has  never  receded  till  he  has  arrived  at  com- 
plete perfection  of  life ;  for  behold,  some  men  appear  to  be 
readily  sated  after  they  have  only  tasted  of  excellence ;  and 
after  a  hope  of  recovery  has  been  given  to  them,  they  relapse 
again  into  the  same  disease. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  He  was  not  found 
because  God  translated  him  ?"t 

86.  In  the  first  place,  the  end  of  virtuous  and  holy  men  is 
not  death  but  a  translation  and  migration,  and  an  approach  to 
some  other  place  of  abode. 

In  the  second  place,  in  this  instance  something  marvellous 
did  take,  place ;  for  he  was  supposed  to  be  carried  off  in  such  a 
way  as  to  be  invisible,  for  then  he  was  not  found :  and  a  proof 
of  this  is,  that  he  was  sought  for  as  being  invisible,  not  only 
as  having  been  carried  away  from  their  sight,  since  translation 
into  another  place  is  nothing  else  than  a  ])lacing  of  a  person 
in  another  situation ;  but  it  is  here  suggested,  that  he  was 
translated  from  a  visible  place,  perceptible  by  the  outward 
senses,  into  an  incorporeal  idea,  appreciable  only  by  the  intel- 
lect. This  mercy  also  was  bestowed  on  the  great  prophet,  for 
his  sepulchre  also  was  known  to  no  one. 

And  besides  these  two  there  was  another,  Elijah,  who 
*  Qeucsis  V.  24.  t  Ibid. 


330  pmLO  JUDiEUS. 

ascended  from  the  things  of  earth  into  heaven,  according  to 
the  divine  appearance  which  was  then  presented  to  hiin,  and 
who  thus  followed  higher  things,  or,  to  speak  with  more  exact 
propriety,  was  raised  up  to  heaven. 

How  it  was  tliat  immediately  upon  the  nativity  of  Noah  hig 
father  says,  "  He  will  make  us  rest  from  labours  and  sorrov.s, 
and  from  the  earth,  which  the  Lord  God  has  cursed  ?''* 

87.  The  fathers  of  the  saints  did  not  prophesy  except  for 
grave  reasons  and  on  important  occasions;  for  although  those 
who  were  rendered  worthy  of  prophetical  panegyric  did  not 
prophecy  at  all  times  or  on  all  subjects,  they  did  so  at  all 
events  on  one  occasion  and  on  one  subject,  with  which  they 
were  acquainted.  Nor  is  this  of  no  importance,  but  it  is  an 
emblem  and  an  example,  since  Noah  is  a  kind  of  surname  of 
righteousness,  of  which,  when  the  intellect  is  made  a  partaker, 
it  causes  us  to  rest  from  all  wicked  works,  and  releases  us  from 
sorrows  and  from  fears,  and  renders  us  secure  and  joyful. 

It  also  causes  us  to  rest  from  that  earthly  nature  which  has 
been  previously  laid  under  a  curse,  which  this  body,  when 
affected  by  pain,  is  connected  with,  especially  in  those  persons 
who  give  cause  for  it,  and  who  wear  out  their  lives  with 
pleasure.  Nevertheless,  if  we  examine  attentively  the  events 
and  circumstances,  and  compare  them  with  the  letter  of  the 
scriptures,  the  prophecy  which  has  been  already  produced  is 
deceived,  because,  in  the  time  of  this  man,  there  did  not  arise 
any  putting  down  of  evils,  but  a  more  vehement  obstinacy  in 
sin  and  great  afflictions,  and  the  unprecedented  event  of  the 
deluge.  But  you  must  note  carefully,  that  Noah  is  the  tenth 
in  generation  from  the  earth-born  Adam. 

What  is  meant  by  the  three  sons  of  Noah  being  named 
Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet  ?* 

88.  These  names  are  the  symbols  of  three  human  things, 
what  is  good,  what  is  bad,  and  what  is  indifferent ;  Shem 
is  the  symbol  of  what  is  good,  Ham  of  what  is  bad,  and 
Japhet  of  what  is  indifferent. 

Why  from  the  time  that  the  deluge  drew  near,  the  human 
race  is  said  to  have  increased  so  as  to  become  a  multitude  ?| 

89.  Divine  mercies  do  always  precede   judgment ;   since 
♦  Genesis  v.  29.  f  Genesis  v.  32.  J  Geneais  vi.  1 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  ;131 

the  first  work  of  God  is  to  do  good,  and  to  destroy 
follows  afterwards  ;  but  he  himself  (when  terrible  evils  are 
about  to  happen)  loves  to  provide  and  is  accustomed  to 
provide  that  previously  an  abundance  of  many  and  great 
blessings  shall  be  produced.  On  this  principle  also  Egypt, 
when  there  was  about  to  be  a  barrenness  and  famine  for  seven 
years  as  the  prophet  himself  says,*  was  for  an  equal  number 
of  years  continuously  made  exceedingly  fertile  by  the  benefi- 
cent and  saving  power  of  the  Creator  of  the  universe. 

And  in  the  same  way  in  which  he  showers  benefits  upon 
men,  he  also  teaches  them  to  depart  and  to  abstain  from  sin  ; 
that  these  blessings  may  not  be  turned  into  the  contrary. 
And  on  this  account  now,  by  the  freedom  of  their  institutions, 
the  cities  of  the  world  have  increased  in  generous  virtue,  so 
that  if  any  corruption  supervenes  subsequently  they  may  dis- 
approve of  their  own  acts  of  wickedness  as  extraordinary  and 
irremediable  ;  not  at  all  looking  upon  the  divinity  as  the  cause 
of  them,  for  that  has  no  connection  with  wickedness  or  misery, 
for  the  task  of  the  Deity  is  only  to  bestow  blessings. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "My  spirit  shall 
not  always  strive  with  man,  because  he  is  but  flesh?  "  t 

90.  An  oracle  is  here  promulgated  as  if  it  were  a  law ;  for 
the  divine  spirit  is  not  a  motion  of  the  air,  but  intellect  and 
wisdom ;  just  as  it  also  flows  over  the  man  who  with  great 
skill  constructed  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord,  namely  upon 
Bezaleel,  when  the  scripture  says,  "And  he  filled  him  with 
the  divine  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding."  Therefore 
that  spirit  comes  upon  men,  but  does  not  abide  or  persevere 
in  them.;  and  the  Lord  himself  adds  the  reason,  w^hen  he  says, 
"  Because  they  are  flesh."  For  the  disposition  of  the  flesh  is 
inconsistent  with  wisdom,  inasmuch  as  it  makes  a  bond  of 
alliance  with  desire  ;  on  which  account  it  is  evident  that 
nothing  important  can  be  in  the  way  of  incorporeal  and  light 
souls,  or  can  be  any  hindrance  to  their  discerning  and  com- 
prehending the  condition  of  nature,  because  a  pure  disposition 
is  acquired  together  with  constancy. 

Why  it  is  said  that  the  days  of  man  shall  be  a  hundred  and 
twenty  years  ?  J 

9L  God  appears  here  to  fix  the  limit  of  human   life   by 
♦  Genesis  xli.  28.  f  Genesis  vi.  3.  X  Genesis  vi.  4. 


332  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

this  number,  indicating  by  it  the  manifold  prerogative  of 
honour ;  for  in  the  first  place  this  number  proceeds  from  the 
units,  according  to  combination,  from  the  number  fifteen  ; 
but  the  principle  of  the  number  fifteen  is  that  of  a  more 
transparent  appearance,  since  it  is  on  the  fifteenth  day  that 
the  moon  is  rendered  full  of  light,  borrowing  its  light  of  the 
sun  at  the  approach  of  evening,  and  restoring  it  to  him  again 
in  the  morning ;  so  that  during  the  night  of  the  full  moon  the 
darkness  is  scarcely  visible,  but  it  is  all  light. 

In  the  second  place,  the  number  a  hundred  and  twenty  ig  a 
triangular  number,  and  is  the  fifteenth  number  consisting  of 
triangles. 

Thirdly,  it  is  so  because  it  consists  of  a  combination  of  odd 
and  even  numbers,  being  contained  by  the  power  of  the  faculty 
of  the  concurring  numbers,  sixty-four  and  fifty-six ;  for  the 
equal  number  of  sixty-four  is  compounded  of  the  uniting  of 
these  eight  odd  numbers,  one,  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  eleven, 
thirteen,  fifteen ;  the  reduction  of  which,  by  their  parts  into 
squares,  makes  a  sum  total  of  sixty-four,  and  that  is  a  cube, 
and  at  the  same  time  a  square  number. 

But  again  from  the  seven  double  units  there  arises  the 
unequal  number  of  fifty-six,  being  compounded  of  seven  double 
pairs,  which  generate  other  productions  of  them,  two,  four,  six, 
eight,  ten,  twelve,  fourteen ;  the  sum  total  of  which  is  fifty-six. 

In  the  fourth  place,  it  is  compounded  of  four  numbers,  of 
one  triangle,  namely  fifteen ;  and  of  another  square,  namely 
twenty-five  ;  and  of  a  third  quinquangular  figure,  thirty-five ; 
and  of  a  fourth  a  sexangular  figure  forty-five,  by  the  same 
analogy :  for  the  fifth  is  always  received  according  to  each 
appearance ;  for  from  the  unity  of  the  triangles  the  fifth  num- 
ber becomes  fifteen ;  again  the  fifth  of  the  quadrangular 
number  from  the  unit  makes  twenty-five ;  and  the  fifth  of 
the  quinquangular  number  from  the  unit  makes  thirty-five ; 
and  the  fifth  of  the  sexangular  number  from  the  unit  maket 
forty-five. 

But  every  one  of  these  numbers  is  a  divine  and  sacred 
number,  consisting  of  fifteens  as  has  been  already  shown  ;  and 
the  number  twenty-five  belongs  to  the  tribe  of  Levi.*  And 
the  number  thirty-five  comes  from  the  double  diagram  of 
arithmetic,  geometry,  and  harmony ;  but  sixteen,  and  eighteea, 
*  See  Numbers  viii.  24. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  333 

and  nineteen,  and  twenty-one,  the  combination  of  which 
numbers  amounts  to  seventy-four,  is  that  according  to  which 
seven  months'  children  are  born.  And  forty-five  consists  of  a 
triple  diagram  ;  but  to  this  number,  sixteen,  nineteen,  twenty- 
two,  and  twenty- eight,  belong  :  the  combination  of  which 
makes  eighty-five,  according  to  which  nine  months'  children 
are  produced. 

Fifthly,  this  diagram  has  fifteen  parts,  and  a  twofold  compo- 
sition, peculiarly  belonging  to  itself;  forsooth  when  divided 
by  two  it  gives  sixty,  the  measure  of  the  age  of  all  mankind  ; 
when  divided  by  three  it  gives  forty,  the  idea  of  prophecy ; 
when  divided  by  four  it  gives  thirty,  a  nation ;  when  divided 
by  five,  it  makes  twenty-four,  the  measure  Of  day  and  night ; 
when  divided  by  six,  it  gives  twenty,  a  beginning  ;  when 
divided  by  eight,  we  have  fifteen,  the  moon  in  the  fulness  of 
brilliancy ;  when  divided  by  ten,  it  makes  twelve,  the 
zodiac  embellished  with  living  animals ;  when  divided  by 
twelve,  it  makes  ten,  holy ;  when  divided  by  fifteen,  it  gives 
eight,  the  first  ark  ;  when  divided  by  twenty,  it  leaves  six,  the 
number  of  creation ;  when  divided  by  twenty-four,  it  makes 
five,  the  emblem  of  the  outward  sense  ;  when  divided  by 
thirty  it  makes  four,  the  beginning  of  solid  measure ;  when 
divided  by  forty,  it  gives  three,  the  symbol  of  fulness,  the 
beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end  ;  when  divided  by  sixty, 
it  makes  two,  which  is ,  woman  ;  and  when  divided  by  the 
whole  number  of  a  hundred  and  twenty,  the  product  is  one,  or 
man. 

And  cveiy  one  of  all  these  numbers  is  more  natural,  as  is 
proved  in  each  of  them,  but  the  composition  of  them  is  twofold, 
for  the  product  is  two  hundred  and  forty,  which  is  a  sign  that 
it  is  worthy  of  a  twofold  life  ;  for  as  the  number  of  years  is 
doubled,  so  also  we  may  imagine  that  the  life  is  doubled  too  ; 
one  being  in  connection  with  the  body,  the  other  being 
detached  from  the  body,  according  to  which  every  holy  and 
perfect  man  may  receive  the  gift  of  prophecy. 

Sixthly,  because  the  fifth  and  sixth  figures  arise,  the  three 
numbers  being  multiplied  together,  three  times  four  times  five, 
since  three  times  four  times  five  make  sixty  ;  so  in  like  man- 
ner the  next  following  numbers  four  times  five  times  six  make 
a  hundred  and  twenty,  for  four  times  five  times  six  make 
a  hundred  and  twenty. 


334  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

Seventhly,  when  the  number  twenty  has  been  taken  in, 
which  is  the  beginning  of  the  reduction  of  mankind,  1  mean 
twenty,  and  being  added  to  itself  two  or  three  times,  so  as  to 
make  twenty,  forty,  and  sixty,  these  added  together  make  a 
hundred  and  twenty.  But  perhaps  the  number  a  liundred  and 
twenty  is  not  the  general  term  of  human  life,  but  only  of  the 
life  of  those  men  who  existed  at  that  time,  and  who  were  to 
perish  by  the  deluge  after  an  interval  of  so  many  years,  which 
their  kind  Benefactor  prolonged,  giving  them  space  for  repentr 
ance ;  when,  after  the  aforesaid  term,  they  lived  a  longer  time 
iu  the  subsequent  ages. 

On  what  principle  it  was  that  giants  were  bom  of  angels  and 
women  ?* 

92.  The  poets  call  those  men  who  were  born  out  of  the 
earth  giants,  that  is  to  say,  sons  of  the  earth.f  But  Moses 
here  uses  this  appellation  improperly,  and  he  uses  it  too  very 
often  merely  to  denote  the  vast  personal  size  of  the  principsd 
men,  equal  to  that  of  Hajkf  or  Hercules. 

But  he  relates  that  these  giants  were  sprung  from  a 
combined  procreation  of  two  natures,  namely,  from  angels  and 
mortal  women  ;  for  the  substance  of  angels  is  spiritual ;  but  it 
occurs  every  now  and  then  that  on  emergencies  occurring  they 
have  imitated  the  appearance  of  men,  and  transformed  them- 
selves so  as  to  assume  the  human  shape ;  as  they  did  on  this 
occasion,  when  forming  connexions  with  women  for  the 
production  of  giants.  But  if  the  children  turn  out  imitators 
of  the  wickedness  of  their  motliers,  departing  from  the  virtue 
of  their  fathers,  let  ihem  depart,  according  to  the  determination 
of  the  will  of  a  depraved  rac3,  and  because  of  their  proud 
contempt  for  the  supreme  Deity,  and  so  be  condemned  as 
guilty  of  voluntary  and  deliberate  wickedness. 

But  sometimes  Moses  styles  the  angels  the  sons  of  God, 
inasmuch  as  they  were  not  produced  by  any  mortal,  but  are 
incorporeal,  as  being  spirits  destitute  of  any  body;  or  rather 
that  exhorter  and  teacher  of  virtue,  namely  Moses,  calls  those 

*  Genesis  vi.  4. 

+  The  Greek  name  Ftyag  is  said  to  be  derived  from  ytj  and  yevvau, 
"  to  bring  forth." 

X  Hajk  is  an  addition  of  the  Armenian  translator ;  it  is  the  name  of 
a  fabulous  patriarch  of  the  Armeuiaa  naiion. 


QUESTIONS  AND  SOLUTIONS.  336 

men  who  are  very  excellent  and  endowed  with  great  virtue  the 
sons  of  God ;  and  the  wicked  and  depraved  men  he  calls 
bodies,  or  flesh. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression :  "  God  considered 
anxiously,  because  he  had  made  man  upon  the  earth ;  and  he 
resolved  the  mattv^r  in  his  mind?"* 

93.  Some  persons  imagine  that  it  is  intimated  by  these 
words  that  the  Deity  repented ;  but  they  are  very  wrong  to 
entertain  such  an  idea,  since  the  Deity  is  unchangeable. 
Nor  are  the  facts  of  his  caring  and  thinking  about  the  matter, 
and  of  his  agitating  it  in  his  mind,  any  proofs  that  he  is 
repenting,  but  only  indications  of  a  kind  and  determinate 
counsel,  according  to  which  he  displays  care,  revolving  in  his 
mind  the  cause  why  he  had  made  man  upon  the  earth. 

But  since  this  earth  is  a  place  of  misery,  even  that  heavenly 
being,  man,  who  is  a  mixture  compounded  of  soul  and  body, 
from  the  very  hour  of  his  birih  to  that  of  his  death,  is  nothing 
else  but  the  slave  of  the  body.  That  the  Deity  therefore 
should  meditate  and  deliberate  on  these  matters  is  nothing 
surprising;  since  most  men  take  to  themselves  wickedness 
rather  than  virtue,  being  influenced  by  the  twofold  impulse 
mentioned  above ;  namely,  that  of  a  body  by  its  nature 
corruptible,  and  placed  in  the  terrible  situation  of  earth,  which 
is  the  lowest  of  all  places. 

Why  God,  after  having  threatened  to  destroy  mankind,  says 
that  he  will  also  destroy  all  the  beasts  likewise  ;  using  the 
expression,  "from  man  to  beast, f  and  from  creeping  things  to 
flying  creatures ; "  for  how  could  irrational  animals  have  com- 
mitted sin  ? 

94.  This  is  the  literal  statement  of  the  holy  scripture,  and 
it  infoijus  us  that  animals  were  not  necessarily  and  in  their 
primary  cause  created  for  their  own  sake,  but  for  the  sake  of 
mankind  and  to  act  as  the  servants  of  men  ;  and  when  the 
aien  wore  destroyed,  it  followed  necessarily  and  naturally  that 
ihey  nlso  should  be  destroyed  with  them,  as  soon  as  the  men, 
"or  whose  sake  they  had  been  made,  had  ceased  to  exist. 

*  Genesi;  vi.  6.     Tbe  translation  of  our  bible  is,  "It  repented  God 
.hat  1  e  liatl  n^ade  man  upuu  the  earth." 
t  Genesij  vi.  7. 


386  FHILO   JUD^US. 

But  as  to  the  hidden  meaning  conveyed  by  the  statement, 
since  man  is  a  symbol  for  the  intellect  which  exists  in  us,  and 
animals  for  the  outward  sense,  when  the  chief  creature  has 
first  been  depraved  and  corrupted  by  wickedness,  all  the  ou^ 
ward  sense  also  perishes  with  him,  because  he  had  no  relics 
whatever  of  virtue,  which  is  the  cause  of  salvation. 

Why  God  says,  I  am  indignant  that  I  made  them?* 

95.  In  the  first  place,  Moses  is  here  again  relating  what 
took  place,  as  if  he  were  speaking  of  some  illustrious  action  of 
man,  but,  properly  speaking,  God  does  not  feel  anger,  but  is 
exempt  from,  and  superior  to,  all  such  perturbations  of  spirit. 
Therefore  Moses  wishes  here  to  point  out,  by  an  extravagant 
form  of  expression,  that  the  iniquities  of  man  had  grown  to 
such  a  height,  that  they  stirred  up  and  provoked  to  auger  even 
that  very  Being  who  by  his  nature  was  incapable  of  anger. 

In  the  second  place  he  warns  us,  by  a  figure,  that  foolish 
actions  are  liable  to  punishment,  but  that  those  which  proceed 
from  wise  and  deliberate  counsel  are  praiseworthy. 

Why  it  is  afterwards  said,  that  Noah  found  grace  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord  ?  f 

96.  In  the  first  place,  the  time  calls  for  a  comparison  ;  since 
all  the  rest  of  mankind  has  been  rejected  for  their  ingratitude, 
he  places  the  just  man  in  the  place  of  them  all,  asserting  that 
he  had  found  favour  with  God,  not  because  he  alonn  was 
deserving  of  favour,  when  the  whole  universal  body  of  the 
human  race  had  had  benefits  and  mercies  heaped  on  them,  but 
because  he  alone  had  seemed  to  be  mindful  of  the  kindnesses 
which  he  had  received. 

In  the  second  place,  when  the  whole  generation  had  been 
given  over  to  destruction,  with  the  exception  of  one  single 
family,  it  followed  inevitably  that  that  remaining  household 
should  be  asserted  to  have  shown  itself  worthy  of  the  divine 
grace,  that  it  might  be,  as  it  were,  a  seed  and  spark  of  a  new 
race  of  mankind.  And  what  could  be  a  greater  grace  and 
mercy  than  that  the  man,  of  whom  this  is  said,  should  be  at 
tlie  same  time  the  end  and  beginning  of  the  family  of 
mankind  ? 

*  Genesis  vi   7.  +  Genesis  vl^  8. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  337 

Why  does  Moses  enumerate  the  generations  of  Noah  with 
reference  not  to  his  ancestors  but  to  his  virtues  ?* 

97.  He  does  this  in  the  first  place,  because  all  the  men  of 
that  age  were  wicked :  secondly,  he  is  here  imposing  a  law 
upon  the  will,  because,  to  an  anxious  follower  of  virtue,  virtue 
itself  stands  in  the  place  of  a  real  generation,  if  indeed  men 
are  the  means  of  the  generation  of  men,  but  the  virtues  of 
minds.  And  on  this  account  it  is  that  he  says,  he  was  a 
just  man,  perfect,  and  one  who  pleased  God  ;  but  justice,  and 
perfection,  and  grace  before  God,  are  the  greatest  of  virtues. 

What  was  the  meaning  of  Moses  when  he  says,  "  And  all 
the  earth  was  corrupt  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  the  earth  was 
filled  with  iniquity  ?"t 

98.  Moses  himself  has  given  us  the  reason  why  he  speaks 
thus,  in  the  sentence  in  which  he  asserts  that  iniquity  had 
arisen  by  reason  of  the  corruption  of  the  earth ;  for  deliverance 
from  iniquity  is  righteousness,  both  in  all  the  parts  of  the 
world,  in  heaven,  that  is,  and  earth,  and  among  men. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  his  saying,  "All  flesh  had  cor- 
rupted his  way  upon  the  earth  ?"J 

99.  In  the  first  place,  the  sacred  historian  calls  the  man  who 
is  devoted  to  the  love  of  himself,  flesh ;  therefore,  when  he 
had  already  said  he  was  flesh,  he  introduces  not  the  same 
flesh,  but  the  flesh  of  the  same  being,  namely,  of  man,  or  per- 
haps he  is  speaking  even  of  man  abstractedly  considered ;  for 
every  one  w'ho  passes  a  life  destitute  of  all  civilisation,  and 
bewildered  by  intemperance,  is  flesh. 

In  the  second  place,  he  supposes  here  the  cause  of  spiritual 
:;orruption  to  be,  as  in  truth  it  is,  the  flesh,  because  that  is 
-he  seat  of  desire ;  and  from  it,  as  from  a  living  spring,  arise 
ill  the  peculiar  appetites,  and  passions,  and  other  affections. 

In  the  third  place,  he  very  naturally  says,  that  all  flesh  had 
■orrupted  his  way ;  for  "  his"  is  a  partial  case,  declined  from 
he  nominative  case  of  the  pronoun  "  he,  she,  or  it ;"  for  as  for 
he  being  to  whom  we  refer  honour,  we  scarcely  dare  to  speak 
f  him  by  his  own  name,  but  we  call  him  He.  And  it  is  from 
his  that  the  principle  of  the  Pythagorean  philosophers  was 
erived,  who  said,  "  He  said  it,"  speaking  of  their  master  in  a 

*  Genesis  vi.  9.  t  Genesis  vi.  11.  ij:  Genesis  vi,  12. 

VOL.  IV.  Z 


338  PITIT.0   JUD^US. 


I 


glorious  manner,  since  they  feared  to  speak  of  him  by  name. 
And  the  same  custom  has  obtained  in  cities  and  in  private 
houses ;  for  the  servants,  when  speaking  of  the  arrival  of  their 
master,  say,  "  Here  he  comes ;"  and  so  when  the  prince  of  any 
individual  city  arrives,  they  use  the  same  form  of  speech,  "  He 
comes,"  when  they  speak  of  him. 

But  what  is  the  purpose  of  this  prolix  enumeration  of  all 
these  instances  on  my  part?  The  truth  is,  that  I  wished  to 
show  that  it  is  the  Father  of  the  universe  who  is  spoken  of 
here ;  since,  indeed,  all  his  good  qualities,  and  all  his  marvel- 
lous names,  are  widely  celebrated  by  the  praise  bestowed  upon 
the  virtues ;  and,  therefore,  out  of  reverence  he  has  used  that 
name  more  cautiously,  because  he  was  about  to  bring  on  the 
world  the  destruction  of  the  flood ;  but  the  case  of  the  pronoun 
"  He"  is  used  by  way  of  honour  in  these  phrases.  "  All  flesh 
had  corrupted  His  way,"  inasmuch  as  it  is  truly  convicted  of 
having  corrupted  the  way  of  the  Father,  in  accordance  with 
the  lusts,  and  desires,  and  pleasures  of  the  body ;  for  these  are 
the  enemies  and  opposers  of  the  laws  of  continence,  and  par- 
simony, and  chastity,  and  fortitude,  and  justice ;  by  which  the 
road  which  leads  to  God  is  found  out  and  widened,  so  that  it 
should  everywhere  be  a  beaten  and  plain  road. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "All  the  time  of  man 
has  come  against  me,  because  the  earth  is  filled  with  iniquity?"* 

100.  Those  who  resist  the  order  of  fate  proceed  upon  these 
and  many  other  arguments,  especially  in  that  of  sudden  death, 
which  oftentimes  produces  great  slaughter  in  a  short  period  oi 
time ;  as,  for  instance,  in  the  overthrow  of  houses,  in  confla- 
grations, in  shipwrecks,  in  civil  tumults,  in  battles  of  cavalry, 
in  wars  by  land  and  in  wars  by  sea,  and  in  pestilences.     Tc 
all  those  who  advance  arguments  of  this  kind  we  repeat  thf 
same  assertions  which  are  here  made  by  the  prophet,  on  th( 
principle  which  is  derived  from  himself.     If  indeed  that  ex 
pression,  "All  the  time  of  man  has  come  against  me,"  has  f 
meaning  of  this  kind,  the  term  which  has  been  determined  a' 
the  period  of  living  for  all  mankind,  behold  it  is  now  brough 
to  one  point  and  terminated  at  once  by  the  deluge ;  and  sinci 
this  is  the  case,  they  will  not  live  any  longer  according  to  th' 

*  Genesis  vi.  13.     The   version  given  here  does  not  in  the  leas 
resemble  that  in  our  Bible. 


I 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  339 

principle  of  fate  which  has  been  fixed ;  so  that  the  time  of 
each  separate  individual  is  now  reduced  to  one,  and  has 
received  its  destined  termination  at  the  same  time,  by  I  know 
not  what  harmony  and  periodical  revolution  of  the  stars,  by 
which  bodies  the  whole  race  of  mankind  is  continually  pre- 
served or  destroyed.  Let  those,  therefore,  all  receive  these 
things  in  any  manner  in  which  they  choose  who  study  these 
things,  and  those  too  who  argue  against  them. 

Nevertheless  we  must  first  of  all  make  this  statement,  that 
nothing  can  be  found  so  contrary  to,  so  opposite  to,  so  wholly 
repugnant  to,  the  wonderful  virtue  of  the  Deity  as  iniquity ; 
therefore,  after  he  said,  "  All  the  time  of  all  mankind  has  come 
up  against  me,"  he  adds  also  the  reason  of  its  contrariety  to 
him,  that  the  earth  is  filled  with  iniquity. 

In  the  second  place,  Time,  under  the  name  of  Chronos  or 
Saturn,  is  looked  upon  as  a  god  by  the  wickedest  of  men,  who 
are  desirous  to  lose  sight  of  the  one  essential  Being,  on  which 
account  he  says,  "  The  time  of  all  mankind  has  come  up 
against  me,"  because  in  fact  the  heathen  make  human  time 
into  a  god,  and  oppose  him  to  the  real  true  God.  But,  how- 
ever, it  is  now  insinuated,  in  other  passages  also  of ,  scripture, 
which  run  thus,  "  Time  has  departed  to  a  distance  from  them, 
but  the  Lord  is  in  us:"*  just  as  if  he  were  to^^ay,  time  is 
looked  upon  by  wicked  men  as  the  cause  of  the  world,  but  by 
wise  men  and  virtuous  men  time  is  not  looked  upon  in  this 
light,  but  God  only,  from  whom  all  times  and  seasons  do 
proceed. 

Again,  God  is  the  cause,  not  of  all  things,  but  only  of  good 
things  and  good  men,  and  of  those  men  and  things  which  are 
in  accordance  with  virtue ;  for  as  he  is  free  from  all  wicked- 
ness, so  likewise  he  cannot  be  the  cause  of  it. 

In  the  third  place,  by  that  expression  which  he  uses  in  this 
manner,  he  indicates  the  excess  of  impiety,  saying,  "  that  the 
time  of  all  mankind  has  arrived,"  that  is  to  say,  that  all  men, 
in  every  part  of  the  world,  have  agreed  together,  with  one 
mind,  to  work  wickedness ;  but  the  other  assertion  which  is 
K  re  made,  that  the  whole  earth  is  filled  with  iniquity,  amounts 
j.o  this,  that  there  is  no  part  of  it  whatever  free  from  wicked- 
'■less,  and  which  is  also  to  receive  and  to  bear  righteousness. 

Numbers  xiv.  9.     Compare  with  this  Isaiah  viii.,  Jeremiah  xlvi. 
.1-28,  Tsalm  L\xx  IG. 

Z    2 


840  PIIILO   JUDiEUS. 


4 


And  the  expression,  "  against  me,"  establishes  the  proof  of 
what  has  been  said,  inasmuch  as  it  is  only  tlie  judgment  of 
divine  election  which  is  altogether  firm  and  lasting. 


QUESTIONS,  AND  SOLUTIONS  TO  THOSE  QUESTIONS, 
WHICH  ARISE  IN  GENESIS. 

BOOK  II. 

What  is  the  preparation  of  Noah  ?* 

1.  If  any  one  should  wish  to  make  an  examination  of  the 
question  of  that  ark  of  Noah's  on  more  natural  principles,  he 
will  find  it  to  have  been  the  preparation  of  the  human  body, 
as  we  shall  see  by  the  examination  of  each  particular  respectr 
ing  it  separately. 

Why  does  he  make  the  ark  of  squared  pieces  of  wood  ?t 

2.  He  does  this  in  the  first  place,  because  the  figure  of  a 
square,  wherever  it  may  be  placed,  is  steady  and  firm,  consist- 
ing as  it  does  of  right  angles,  and  it  is  confirmed  in  a  purer  and 
clearer  manner  by  the  nature  of  the  human  body. 

In  the  second  place,  he  does  this  because,  although  our  body 
is  an  instrument,  and  although  every  portion  of  it  is  rounded 
off,  nevertheless  the  limbs  which  are  compounded  of  all  these 
portions  do,  by  some  manner  or  other,  evidently  reduce  that 
circular  orb  to  the  figure  of  a  quadrangle  or  square.  For  ex- 
ample, take  the  breast  which  is  rather  square  than  circular; 
in  the  same  manner  take  the  belly,  after  it  is  swollen  witii 
food  or  by  any  natural  excess,  for  there  are  some  men  pot- 
bellied by  nature,  who  are  to  be  excepted  from  our  present 
argument.  But  if  any  one  looks  upon  the  arms  and  hands, 
and  back  and  thighs,  and  feet  of  a  man,  he  will  find  all  thesq 
limbs  compounded  of  a  mixture  of  the  square,  with  the  cir- 
cular figure  at  the  same  time. 

In  the  third  place,  a  quadrangular  piece  of  wood  shows  in  itt 
extension  nearly  every  sort  imaginable  of  uneven  distinctionl 
inasmuch  as  its  length  is  greater  than  its  breadth,  and  it' 
breadth  greater  than  its  depth.  And  such  also  is  the  forma 
tion  of  our  bodies,  which  are  compounded  of  one  extensioi 
*  Genesis  vi.  li.  f  Genesis  vi.  16. 


I 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  S41 

which  is  great,  of  another  which  is  of  moderate  size,  of  another 
which  is  small,  great  in  its  length  and  small  in  its  depth. 

Why  does  God  say,  you  shall  make  the  ark  in  nests  ?* 
3.  He  gives  this  order  very  naturally,  for  the  human  body 
is  formed  of  holes  like  nests  ;  every  one  of  which  is  nourished 
and  grows  like  a  young  bird,  a  certain  spiritual  force  which  ex- 
ists in  it  from  its  earliest  origin  penetrating  through  it,  as,  for 
instance,  some  of  the  holes  and  nests  are  the  eyes,  in  which 
the  faculty  of  sight  has  its  abode ;  other  nests  are  the  ears, 
which  are  the  place  where  hearing  is  situated.  A  third  class 
of  nests  are  the  nostrils,  in  which  the  sense  of  smell  is 
lodged.  The  fourth  nest,  which  is  of  larger  dimensions  than 
those  already  mentioned,  is  the  mouth,  which  is  the  seat  of 
the  taste ;  and  it  has  been  made  of  large  size,  since,  besides 
taste,  there  is  also  another  still  more  important  instrument, 
which  is  that  of  articulate  speech,  reposing  in  it,  namely,  the 
tongue,  which,  as  Socrates  was  wont  to  say,  by  beating  in 
every  direction  in  various  manners,,  and  by  touching  different 
parts,  composes  and  forms  a  word,  being,  in  truth,  an  instru- 
ment under  the  immediate  guidance  of  reason. 

And  the  nest  is  placed  under  the  skull,  and  that  which  is 

called  the  membrane  of  the  brain  is  a  certain  nest,  as  it  were, 

jf  the  genius  of  each  man :  as  also  the  chest  is  a  nest,  in 

which  abide  the  lungs  and  the  heart,  and  both  these  things 

ire  receptacles  of  other  internal  organs ;  the  lungs  being  the 

)lace  in  which  the  power  of  breathing  is  lodged,  and  the  heart 

>eing  the  abode  of  both  the  blood  and  the  breath,  for  it  has 

wo  venticles,  which  are,  as  it  were,  a  certain  kind  of  nests  or 

eceptacles  in  the  breast ;  blood,  from  which  the  veins,  as  if 

hey  could  perceive  its  operations,  are  irrigated ;  and  a  breath- 

ng-hole,  which  again  is  extended  over  and  irrigates  the  per- 

eptive  channels  of  respiration. 

And  both  the  harder  as  well  as  the  softer  parts  do,  like 

ests  prepared  for  the  purpose,  nourish  the  bones  as  real  nests 

ourish  young  birds ;   the  harder  portion  of  which,  namely, 

le  marrow,  is  the  nest,  and  the  softer  flesh  is  the  nest  of 

leasure  and  pain ;  and  if  any  one  should  wish  to  investigate 

le  other  parts,  he  will  hnd  that,  in  every  respect,  the  nature 

'  man  has  much  the  same  foundation  as  the  ark. 

•  Genesis  vi.  14.     The  word  in  our  Bible  is  rooms,  not  ncots. 


342  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

Why  does  God  command  the  ark  to  be  smeared  with  pitch, 
both  on  the  inside  and  on  the  outside  ?* 

4.  Pitch  is  so  called  by  reason  of  its  bird-lime  like  tenacity, 
because  it  glues  together  whatever  was  disunited  before,  so  as 
to  form  one  indissoluble  and  indivisible  joint.  For  everything 
which  is  held  together  by  bird-lime  is  immediately  held  to  a 
natural  union ;  but  our  body  being  composed  of  many  parts  is 
united  on  the  outside,  and  is  held  together  by  its  own  proper 
habit,  but  the  previous  habit  of  connection  which  binds  those 
things  together  is  the  soul,  which,  being  situated  in  the  middle, 
penetrates  through  every  part  till  it  reaches  the  surface,  and 
then  is  turned  back  again  from  the  surface  to  the  centre,  so 
that  our  spiritual  nature  is  rolled  up  compactly  in  a  double 
fold,  being  united  in  a  firm  solidity  and  union. 

Therefore  this  ark  is  smeared  with  pitch,  both  on  the  inside 
and  the  outside,  for  the  reason  here  given. 

But  that  ark  which  is  placed  in  the  holy  of  holies,  and  is 
covered  over  with  gold,  is  the  similitude  of  the  world  ap- 
preciable only  by  the  intellect,  as  is  declared  in  the  account 
given  of  it :  since  just  as  there  is  a  world  appreciable  by  the 
intellect  incarnate  in  incorporeal  figures  existing  at  the  same 
time,  consisting  of  a  union  of  all  figures  by  a  certain  invisible 
harmony ;  for,  in  proportion  as  gold  is  a  more  noble  material 
than  pitch,  in  the  same  ratio  is  that  ark,  which  is  in  the  holy 
of  holies,  superior  to  this  one  of  which  we  are  now  speaking. 

And  again,  God  ordained  that  its  measure  should  be  qua- 
drangular, from  a  regard  to  usefulness ;  but  his  object  in  the 
other  ark  was  not  so  much  that  it  should  be  useful  as  that  it 
should  be  exempt  from  all  possibility  of  decay ;  for  the  nature 
of  incorporeal  things,  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  is  to  be 
exempt  from  decay,  being  incorruptible  and  permanent.  The 
one  ark  is  tossed  to  and  fro  by  the  winds  and  the  waters,  but 
the  other  has  its  station  constantly  in  the  holy  of  holies ;  and 
being  stable  it  is  akin  to  divine  nature,  as  the  other,  which  is 
tossed  about  in  every  direction,  and  moved  from  one  place  to 
another,  is  akin  to  and  the  emblem  of  created  nature.  Besides 
this,  that  ark  of  the  flood  being,  as  it  were,  an  example  of  cor- 
ruption, is  raised  on  high,  but  the  other,  which  is  in  the  holy 
of  holies,  imitates  the  incorruptible  condition  of  eternity 

*  Genesis  vi.  14. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  343 

Why  did  God  give  the  measures  of  the  ark  iu  the  following 
manner ;  the  length  to  be  of  three  hundred  cubiis,  and  the 
breadth  thereof  to  be  fifty  cubits,  and  the  height  to  be  thirty 
cubits :  and  above  it  was  to  be  raised  to  a  point  in  one  cubit, 
being  brought  together  gradually  like  an  obelisk  ?  * 

5.  It  was  necessary  that  so  vast  a  work  should  be  con- 
structed in  conformity  with  literal  directions,  in  order  that  so 
many  animals,  some  of  them  of  vast  size,  should  be  received 
into  it,  as  indviduals  of  each  class  were  introduced  with  the 
food  necessary  for  them ;  but  if  the  matter  is  considered  pro- 
perly with  reference  to  its  symbolical  meaning,  then,  for  the 
comprehension  of  the  formation  of  our  body,  we  shall  require 
to  make  use  not  of  the  quantity  of  cubits,  but  of  the  certain 
principles  and  proportions  which  are  observed  in  them. 

But  the  proportions  which  are  contained  in  them  are  of 
sixfold,  and  double,  and  other  portions  are  added.  For  three 
hundred  is  six  times  as  many  as  fifty,  and  ten  times  as  many 
as  thirty ;  and  again  fifty  is  by  two  thirds  a  larger  number  than 
thirty.  Such  then  are  also  the  proportions  of  the  body ;  for  if 
any  one  should  choose  to  investigate  the  matter  and  inquire 
into  it  carefully  in  all  its  points,  he  will  find  that  man  is 
made  in  an  exact  proportion  of  measurement,  neither  being 
too  long  or  too  little ;  and  if  a  string  be  let  down  from  his 
head  to  his  feet,  he  will  find  that  to  reach  that  distance  it 
requires  a  string  six  times  as  long  as  the  width  of  his  chest, 
and  ten  times  as  long  as  the  depth  of  his  ribs  and  thei  r 
breadth  as  a  second  part  of  depth  added  thereto.  Such  is  the 
certain  proportion,  received  in  accordance  with  nature,  of  the 
human  body  formed  on  exact  measurement  of  the  most  excel- 
jlently  made  men,  who  are  incorrect  neither  in  the  way  of 
xcess  nor  of  defect. 

But  again,  it  was  with  great  wisdom  and  propriety  that  God 
ordained  the  summit  to  be  completed  in  cne  cubit ;  for  the 
ipper  part  of  the  ark  imitates  the  unity  of  the  body ;  the 
lead  being  forsooth  as  the  citadel  of  the  king,  ha^dng  for  its 
uhabitant  the  chief  of  all,  the  intellect. 

But  those  parts  which  are  below  the  head  are  divided  into 
•eparate  portions,  as  for  instance  into  the  hands,  and  in  an 
special  decree  into  the  lower  parts,  since  the  thighs,  and  legs, 

*  Genesis  vi.  15. 


344  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

and  feet  are  all  kept  distinct  from  one  another,  therefore  who- 
ever should  wish  to  understand  these  matters,  on  the  prin- 
ciple ■which  I  have  pointed  out,  will  easily  comprehend  tho 
analogy  of  the  cubits  as  I  have  related  it. 

But  above  all  things  he  must  not  be  ignorant  that  each  of 
these  different  numbers  of  cubits  has  separately  a  certain  ne- 
cessaiy  proportion  and  principle,  beginning  with  the  first, 
those  in  the  length  of  the  ark.  Therefore  in  its  length  it  is 
composed  of  three  hundred  units,  placed  next  to  one  another 
in  continuation,  according  to  the  augmentation  of  units,  from 
these  twenty-four  numbers,  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six, 
seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven,  twelve,  thirteen,  fourteen, 
fifteen,  sixteen,  seventeen,  eighteen,  nineteen,  twenty,  twenty- 
one,  twenty-two,  twenty-three,  twenty-four.  But  the  twenty- 
fourth  number  is  above  all  others  a  natural  number,  being 
distributed  among  the  hours  of  day  and  night,  and  also  among 
the  characters  of  language,*  and  literal  speech ;  and  it  is  also  com- 
pounded of  three  cubes,  being  complete,  full,  and  compacted 
in  equality. 

For  the  number  three  constantly  exhibits,  as  belonging  to 
itself,  the  first  equality  of  all,  having  a  beginning,  and  a  mid- 
dle, and  an  end,  all  of  which  are  equal  to  one  another ;  and 
eight  is  the  first  cube,  because  it  again  has  declared  its  first 
equality  with  the  rest. 

But  the  number  twenty-four  has  likewise  a  great  number  of 
other  virtues,  since  it  is  the  substance  of  the  number  three 
hundred,  as  has  been  already  pointed  out ;  this  then  is  its  first 
virtue ;  and  it  has  another,  since  it  is  compounded  of  twelve 
quadrangular  figures,  joined  to  one  another  by  a  continuous 
unity;  and  besides  of  two  long  figures,  and  twelve  double 
figures,  being  forsooth  compounded  of  twos  separately  increased 
by  two  and  two. 

Therefore  the  angular  numbers  which  make  up  together  the, 
twelve  quadrangular  figures  are  these ;  one,  three,  five,  sevenj 
nine,  eleven,  thirteen,  fifteen,  seventeen,  nineteen,  twenty-one, 
and  twenty-three ;  but  the  quadrangular  figure  combines  the 
following  numbers,  one,  four,  nine,  sixteen,  twenty-five, 
thirty-six,  forty-nine,  sixty-four,  eighty-one,  a  hundred,  8 
hundred  and  twenty-one,  and  a  hundred  and  twenty-four. 

*  He  is  referring  to  the  Greek  alphabet,  which  consists  of  twenty 
four  letters. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  345 

But  those  angular  numbers  which  compose  the  other  long 
figures  are  these;  one,  four,  six,  eight,  ten,  twelve,  fourteen, 
sixteen,  eighteen,  twenty,  twenty-two,  twenty-four,  being 
twelve  in  all ;  and  after  these  come  the  compound  numbers, 
two,  six,  twelve,  twenty,  thirty,  forty-two,  fifty-six,  seventy-two, 
ninety,  a  hundred  and  ten,  a  hundred  and  thirty-two,  and  a 
hundred  and  fifty-six;  being  also  twelve.  And  if  you  put 
together  the  twelve  quadrangular  figures,  you  will  find  a  hun- 
dred and  forty-four,  and  if  you  add  the  other  twelve  long 
figures,  you  will  find  a  hundred  and  fifty-six ;  and  from  the 
combination  of  the  two  you  will  get  the  number  three  hundred, 
•ind  the  concord  of  full,  and  complete,  and  perfect  nature 
rising  up  to  the  equal  and  infinite  harmony  ;  for  a  complete  and 
perfect  nature  is  the  maker  of  equality,  according  to  the 
nature  of  a  triangle  ;  but  the  equal  and  the  infinite  are  the 
factors  of  inequality,  according  to  the  composition  of  the  other 
long  figure. 

But  the  universe  consists  of  a  combination  of  equality  and 
inequality,  on  which  account  the  Creator  himself,  even  amid 
the  destruction  of  all  earthly  things,  placed  a  sort  of  fixed 
pattern  of  stability  in  the  ark. 

This  then  is  enough  to  say  about  the  number  three  hundred. 
We  must  now  proceed  to  speak  of  the  fifty  cubits,  on  the  fol- 
owing  principle ;  for  in  the  first  place  it  is  composed  of  the 
ight  angle  of  the  quadrangular  figures ;  for  a  right  angle  is 
'-ompounded  of  three,  four,  and  five  ;  and  the  square  of  these 
s  nine,  sixteen,  and  twenty-five,  the  sum  total  of  which  when 
idded  together  is  fifty ;  in  the  second  place,  the  perfect 
lumber  fifty  is  composed  of  these  four  triangles  linked  toge- 
her,  one,  three,  six,  ten ;  and  again  of  these  four  equal 
luadrangles  also  united  together,  one,  four,  nine,  sixteen ; 
herefore  these  triangles  when  collected  together  make  twenty ; 
nd  the  quadrangles  make  thirty;  and  twenty  and  thirty 
dded  together  make  fifty. 

But  if  the  triangle  and  the  quadrangle  are  added  together, 

jhey  make  a  heptangular  figure  :  so  that  it  is  contained  by  its 

irtue  in  the  number  of  fifty,  that  divine  and  holy  number  ;  to 

-hich  the  prophet  had  regard  when  he  proclaimed  the  jubilee 

istival ;  and  the  whole  of  the  jubilee  year  is  free  and  a  deliverer. 

The  third  theorem  is  three  triangles  beginning  with  the 
nit,  connected  together  in  a  continuous  series,  and  three 


340  PIIILO   JUDiEUS. 

cubes  begiumiig  also  with  the  unit,  and  connected  together  in 
a  similar  manner,  which  together  make  fifty  ;  the  exam{)les  of 
the  first  are  one,  four,  and  nine,  which  make  fourteen  ;  the  ex- 
amples of  the  second  are,  one,  eight,  and  twenty-seven,  which 
together  make  thirty-six  ;  and  the  sum  total  of  the  two  when 
added  together  is  fifty. 

Again,  thirty  is  in  an  especial  manner  a  natural  number,  for 
as  in  the  series  of  units  the  number  three  is,  so  is  the  number 
thirty  in  the  series  of  decimals  ;  and  that  makes  up  the  cycle 
of  the  moon,  being  the  collection  of  separate  months  in  full 
delineation  ;  secondly,  it  is  composed  of  four  numbers,  which  are 
united  in  the  continual  series  of  these  quadrangular  figures, 
one,  four,  nine,  and  sixteen,  which  together  make  up  thirty ; 
on  which  account  it  was  not  without  some  foundation  and 
sufficient  reason  that  Heraclitus  called  that  number  "  genera- 
tion," when  he  said :  a  man  in  thirty  years  from  the  time  of 
his  birth  can  become  a  grandfather,  inasmuch  as  he  arrives  at 
the  age  of  puberty  in  his  fourteenth  year,  at  which  age  he  is 
capable  of  becoming  a  father  ;  and  at  the  end  of  the  year  his 
offspring  arrives  at  the  birth,  and  again  in  fifteen  yeare  more 
begets  another  offspring  like  himself;  and  out  of  these  names 
of  grandfathers,  fathers,  and  sons,  as  also  out  of  the  names  of 
grandmothers,  mothers,  and  daughters,  a  gfeneration  complete 
in  its  offspring  is  produced. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  a  door  in  the  side  :  for  he  says, 
•'  Thou  shalt  make  a  door  in  the  side  ?  "  * 

6.  That  door  in  the  side  very  plainly  betokens  a  human 
building,  which  he  has  becomingly  indicated  by  calling  it,  "in 
the  side,"  by  which  door  all  the  excrements  of  dung  are  cast 
out.  In  truth,  as  Socrates  says,  whether  because  he  learnt  it 
from  Moses  or  because  he  was  influenced  by  the  facts  them- 
selves, the  Creator,  having  due  regard  to  the  decency  of  our 
body,  has  placed  the  exit  and  passage  of  the  different  ducts  of 
the  body  back  out  of  the  reach  of  the  sense,  in  order  that 
while  getting  rid  of  the  fetid  portions  of  bile,  we  might  not  be 
disgusted  by  beholding  the  full  appearance  of  our  excrements. 
Therefore  he  has  surrounded  that  passage  by  the  back  and 
posteriors,  which  project  out  like  hills,  as  also  the  buttocks  aru 
made  soft  for  other  objects. 

*  Genesis  vi.  16. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  347 

Why  has  he  said  that  the  lower  part  of  the  ark  was  to  be 
made  with  two  and  with  three  stories  ?* 

7.  He  has  here  admirably  indicated  the  receptacles  of  food, 
calling  them  the  inner  parts  of  the  house  ;  since  food  is  corrup- 
tible, and  what  is  corruptible  belongs  to  the  inward  part,  be- 
cause it  is  borne  downwards,  since  some  small  portions  of 
meat  and  drink  which  we  take  are  borne  upwards,  but  the 
greater  part  is  secreted  and  cast  out  into  dung ;  and  the  intes- 
tines have  been  made  in  two  and  in  three  stories,  because  of  the 
providence  of  the  Creator  in  order  to  supply  abundant  support 
to  his  creatures ;  for  if  he  had  made  the  receptacles  of  food 
and  its  passage  having  a  direct  communication  between  the 
bowels  and  the  buttocks,  some  awkward  circumstances  must 
have  taken  place  ;  in  the  first  place  there  would  have  been  a 
frequent  deficiency,  and  want  and  hunger,  and  sudden 
evacuations  also  arising  from  divers  unseasonable  events ;  in 
the  second  place  there  would  have  been  an  immense  hunger, 
for  when  the  receptacles  are  emptied,  it  is  inevitable  that  hun- 
ger and  thirst  must  immediately  supervene,  like  absolute  mis- 
tresses in  difficulty  from  pregnancy,  and  then  it  follows  also 
that  the  pleasant  appetite  for  food  must  be  perverted  into 
greediness  and  into  an  unphilosophical  state ;  for  nothing  is 
so  very  inconvenient  as  for  the  belly  to  be  empty. 

And  in  the  third  place,  there  will  be  death  waiting  at  the 
door ;  since  those  persons  must  speedily  be  overtaken  by  death 
who  the  very  moment  that  they  have  done  eating  begin  again 
Lo  be  hungry,  and  the  moment  that  they  have  drunk  are  again 
Lhirsty,  and  who  before  they  are  thoroughly  filled  are  again 
3vacuated  and  oppressed  by  hunger ;  but  owing  to  the  long 
oils  and  windings  of  the  bowels  we  are  delivered  from  all 
eelings  of  hunger,  from  all  greediness,  and  from  being  prema- 
urely  overtaken  by  death ;  for  while  the  food  which  has  been 
aken  remains  within  us,  not  for  such  a  time  only  as  the  dis- 
ance  to  be  passed  requires,  but  for  so  long  as  was  necessary 
or  us,  a  change  in  it  is  effected ;  since  by  the  pressure  to 
vhich  it  is  subjected,  the  strength  of  the  food  is  extracted  in 
he  first  instance  in  the  belly ;  then  it  is  warmed  in  the  liver, 
nd  drawn  out ;  after  that  whatever  predominant  flavour  there 
ios  is  emitted  upwards  to  the  separate  parts,  in  the  case  of 

*  Genesis  vi.  16. 


348  pniLO  JUD.EUS. 

boys  in  order  to  contribute  to  their  growth,  and  in  the  case  of 
full-grown  men  to  add  to  their  strength  ;  and  then  nature,  col- 
lecting the  remaining  portions  into  dung  and  excrement,  casts 
them  out. 

Therefore  a  great  deal  of  time  is  necessarily  required  for  the 
arrangement  of  so  many  and  such  important  affairs,  nature 
effecting  its  operations  without  difficulty  by  perseverance. 

Moreover  the  ark  itself  appears  to  me  to  be  very  fitly  com- 
pared to  the  human  body ;  for  as  nature  is  exceedingly  prolific 
of  living  creatures,  for  that  very  reason  it  has  prepared  an 
opposite  receptacle  similar  to  the  earth  for  the  creatures  cor- 
rupted and  destroyed  by  the  flood ;  for  whatever  was  alive  and 
supported  on  the  earth,  the  ark  now  bore  within  itself  in  a 
more  general  manner,  and  on  that  account  God  ordained  it, 
being  borne  upon  the  waters  as  it  was,  to  be  as  it  were  like  the 
earth,  a  mother  and  a  nurse,  and  to  exhibit  the  fathers  of  the 
subsequent  race  as  if  pregnant  with  it,  together  with  the  sun 
and  moon,  and  the  remaining  multitude  of  the  stars,  and  all 
the  host  of  heaven  ;  because  men  beholding  by  means  of  that 
which  was  made  by  art,  a  comparison  and  analogy  to  the  human 
body,  might  in  that  manner  be  more  manifestly  taught,  for 
this  was  the  cause  of  the  various  disputes  among  mankind ; 
since  there  is  nothing  which  has  so  much  contributed  to  keep 
man  in  a  servile  condition  as  the  essential  humours  of  the 
body,  and  the  defects  which  arise  in  consequence  of  them,  and 
most  especially  the  vicious  pleasures  and  desires. 

Why  does  he  say  that  the  deluge  will  be  to  the  con'upting  of  all 
flesh  in  which  there  is  the  breath  of  life  beneath  the  heaven?* 

8.  One  may  almost  say  that  what  he  had  previously  spoken 
in  riddles  he  has  now  made  plain ;  for  there  was  no  other 
cause  for  the  corruption  of  mankind,  except  that,  being  slaves 
to  pleasure  and  to  desire,  they  did  everything,  and  were 
anxious  about  everything  for  that  reason  only  ;  moreover  they 
passed  a  life  of  extreme  misery. 

But  he  added  also,  in  a  very  natural  manner,  the  place 
where  the  breath  of  life  is,  using  the  expression,  "  under  hea- 
ven," because  forsooth  there  are  living  beings  also  in  heaven; 
for  a  happy  body  has  not  been  made  out  of  a  heavenly  sub- 
stance, as  if  in  truth  it  had  received  some  peculiar  and  admi- 

*  Genesis  vi.  17. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  849 

rable  condition,  superior  to  that  of  other  living  creatures,  but 
heaven  appears  to  have  been  made  especially  worthy  of  and  for 
the  sake  of  these  admirable  and  divine  living  beings,  all  of 
which  are  intellectual  spirits ;  so  that  they  give  a  share  and 
participation  in  themselves  and  in  the  essence  of  vitality  even 
to  the  creatures  which  exist  upon  the  earth,  and  give  life  to 
all  those  which  are  capable  of  receiving  it. 

Why  does  he  say,  all  things  which  existed  upon  the  earth  shall 
be  consumed  ;  for  what  sin  can  the  beasts  commit  ?  ^' 

9.  In  the  first  place,  as,  when  a  sovereign  is  slain  in  battle 
the  military  valour  of  the  kingdom  is  also  crushed,  so  also  he 
now  has  thought  it  reasonable  that  when  the  whole  human 
race,  bearing  analogy  to  a  sovereign,  is  destroyed,  he  should 
also  destroy  simultaneously  with  it  the  species  of  beasts  like- 
wise, on  which  account  also  in  pestilences  the  beasts  die  first, 
and  especially  those  which  are  bred  up  with  and  associate 
with  men,  such  as  dogs  and  similar  animals,  and  afterwards 
the  men  die  too. 

In  the  second  place,  as,  when  the  head  is  cut  off,  no  one 
blames  nature  if  the  other  portions  of  the  body  also,  numerous 
and  important  as  they  are,  are  destroyed  along  with  it,  so  too 
now  no  one  can  find  fault  with  anything,  since  man  is  as  it 
were  the  head  and  chief  of  all  animals,  and  when  he  is  de- 
stroyed it  is  not  at  all  strange  if  all  the  rest  of  the  beasts  are 
destroyed  also  along  with  him. 

In  the  third  place,  animals  were  originally  made,  not  for 
their  own  sakes,  as  has  been  said  by  the  philosophers,  but  in 
order  to  do  service  to  mankind,  and  for  their  use  and  glory ; 
therefore  it  is  very  reasonable  that  when  those  beings  are  de- 
stroyed for  the  sake  of  whom  they  had  their  existence,  they 
also  should  be  deprived  of  life,  and  this  is  the  reason  of  this 
assertion  in  its  literal  sense ;  but  with  respect  to  its  hidden 
meaning  we  may  say,  when  the  soul  is  exposed  to  a  deluge 
from  the  overflow  of  vices,  and  is  in  a  manner  stifled  by  them, 
those  portions  also  which  are  on  the  earth,  the  earthly  parts  I 
mean  of  the  body,  must  of  necessity  likewise  perish  along  with 
it ;  for  life  passed  in  wickedness  is  death  ;  the  eyes  though 
they  see  perish,  inasmuch  as  they  see  wrongly;  the  eare  also 
though  they  hear  perish,  inasmuch  as  they  hear  wrongly  ;  and 

•  Genejiia  vi.  18. 


350  PIIILO  JUDiEUS. 

the  whole  body  of  the  senses  perishes,  inasmuch  as  they  are  all 
exercised  wrongly. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  I  will  set  up  my 
treaty  with  you?* 

10.  In  the  first  place,  he  here  warns  us  that  no  man  is  the 
inheritor  of  the  divine  substance,  except  him  who  is  endowed 
with  virtue ;  since  the  inheritance  of  men  is  possessed  when 
they  themselves  are  no  longer  in  existence,  but  when  they  are 
dead ;  but  as  God  is  everlasting  he  grants  a  participation  in 
his  inheritance  to  wise  men,  rejoicing  at  their  entering  into 
possession  of  it ;  for  he  who  has  entered  into  possession  of 
everything  is  in  w-ant  of  nothing,  but  they  who  are  in  distress 
from  a  want  of  all  things  are  in  the  possession  of  no  portion 
of  truth. 

And  on  this  account  God,  showing  himself  favourable  to  the 
virtuous,  benefits  them,  bestowing  on  them  those  things  of 
which  they  have  need. 

In  the  second  place,  he  bestows  on  the  wise  man  a  certain 
and  more  ample  inheritance  ;  for  he  does  not  say,  I  will  set  up 
my  treaty  for  you,  but  with  you  ;  that  is  to  say,  you  are  your- 
self a  just  and  true  treaty,  which  I  will  set  up  for  the  race 
endued  with  reason,  who  have  need  of  virtue,  for  a  possession 
and  a  glory  to  them. 

Why  does  he  say  :  "  Enter  thou  and  all  thy  house  into  the 
ark,  because  I  have  seen  that  thou  art  a  just  man  before  me  in 
that  generation  ?  "  f 

11.  In  the  first  place,  certain  faith  receives  approbation, 
inasmuch  as  for  the  sake  of  one  man  who  is  just  and  worthj 
many  men  are  saved  by  reason  of  their  relationship  to  him: 
as  is  the  case  too  with  sailors  and  armies,  when  the  one  havt 
a  good  captain  and  the  others  an  excellent  and  skilful  general 

In  the  second  place,  he  extols  the  just  man  with  praise,  who 
thus  acquires  virtues,  not  for  himself  alone,  but  also  for  hi^ 
whole  family,  which  in  this  way  deserves  safety.  And  it  is 
with  peculiar  propriety  that  this  expression  is  added,  naraelj 
"  I  have  seen  that  thou  art  a  just  man  before  me;"  for  mer 
approve  of  the  life  of  any  one  upon  one  principle,  and  God  oi 

*  Genesis  VI,  ^9.  +  Genesis  vii   1. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  351 

quite  a  different  one  ;  for  they  judge  by  what  is  visible,  but  he 
derives  his  tests  from  the  invisible  designs  of  the  soul. 

Moreover,  that  is  a  very  remarkable  expression  which  is 
added  as  an  insertion,  namely,  the  one  which  says,  "  I  have 
seen  that  thou  art  a  just  man  in  this  generation;"  that  he 
might  not  appear  to  condemn  those  who  had  gone  before,  nor 
cut  off  the  future  hope  of  coming  generations.  This  is  the 
sense  of  the  passage  taken  according  to  the  letter. 

But  if  we  look  at  its  inward  meaning,  when  God  will  save 
the  intellect  of  the  soul,  which  is  the  principal  part  of  the 
man,  that  is  to  say,  the  head  of  the  family,  then  also  he  will 
save  the  whole  family  along  with  him ;  I  mean  all  the  parts, 
and  all  those  who  bear  an  analogy  to  the  parts,  and  to  the 
word  which  is  uttered,  and  to  the  circumstances  of  the  body ; 
for  what  the  intellect  is  in  the  soul,  that  also  is  the  soul  in  the 
body.  All  the  parts  of  the  soul  are  in  good  condition,  owing 
to  the  result  of  counsels,  and  all  its  family  derives  the  benefit 
along  with  it.  But  when  the  whole  soul  is  in  a  good  condition, 
then  also  its  habitation  is  again  found  to  be  benefited  by  its 
advantages,  that  is  to  say,  the  body  is  benefited  by  purity  of 
morals  and  sobriety,  those  overstrained  desires  which  are  the 
causes  of  diseases  being  cut  off. 

Why  does  he  order  seven  of  each  of  the  clean  animals,  male 
and  female,  to  be  taken  into  the  ark,  but  of  the  unclean  animals 
only  two,  male  and  female,  in  order  to  preserve  seed  upon  all 
the  earth  ? 

12,  By  divine  ordinance  he  has  asserted  the  number 
?even  to  be  clean,  and  the  number  two  to  be  unclean ;  since 
he  number  seven  is  clean  by  nature,  inasmuch  as  that  is 
I  virgin  number,  free  from  all  admixture,  and  without  any 
)arent.  Nor  does  it  generate  any  thing,  nor  is  it  generated, 
IS  each  of  those  numbers  which  are  below  the  number  ten,  on 
ccount  of  their  similitude  to  the  unit,  because  it  is  uncreated 
nd  unbegotten,  and  nothing  is  generated  by  it,  although  it  is 
Lsolf  the  cause  of  creation  and  generation  ;  because  it  rouses 
ho  virtues  of  all  things  which  are  well-arranged,  for  the  gene- 
ation  of  created  beings. 

But  the  number  two  is  not  clean.  In  the  first  place, 
ecause  it  is  empty,  not  solid  ;   and   because  it  is  not  full, 

*  Genesis  vii.  2. 


352  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 


\ 


therefore  neither  is  it  clean ;  because  it  is  Ukewise  the  begin- 
ning  of  infmite  immensity  by  reason  of  its  materiality.  It  also 
labours  under  inequality  on  account  of  the  other  long  numbers;! 
for  all  the  other  numbers  after  two  which  are  increased  in  a 
twofold  proportion  are  long  numbers.  But  that  which  is  un- 
equal is  not  clean,  as  neither  is  that  which  is  material ;  buti 
that  which  proceeds  from  such  is  fallible  and  inelegant,  beingi 
destitute  of  the  purity  of  reason  to  conduct  it  to  completeness^ 
and  perfection ;  and  it  conducts  it  to  such  by  its  own  intrinsic 
power,  and  by  songs  of  harmony  and  equality. 

This  is  enough  to  say  on  the  physical  part  of  the  subject;  it 
remains  for  us  to  speak  of  its  moral  bearings. 

The  irrational  parts  of  our  soul  which  are  destitute  of 
intellect  are  divided  into  seven ;  that  is  to  say,  into  the  five 
senses,  and  the  vocal  organ,  and  the  seminal  organ.  No,w 
these  in  a  man  endued  with  virtue  are  all  clean,  and  by  nature 
feminine,  inasmuch  as  they  belong  to  the  irrational  species; 
but  to  a  man  who  has  come  into  full  possession  of  his  inherit- 
ance they  are  masculine ;  for  men  endued  with  virtue  are  also 
the  parents  of  the  virtue  of  counsel  to  themselves,  the  best  part  oi 
them  not  permitting  them  to  come  to  the  external  senses  in  a 
precipitate  and  unbridled  manner,  but  repressing  them  and 
leading  them  back  to  right  reason. 

But  in  the  wicked  man  there  exists  a  twofold  wickedness; 
since  the  unjust  man  is  full  of  doubts  and  perplexities,  as  a 
hesitating  person,  mingling  things  which  ought  not  to  be  mixed, 
and  connecting   them  with  one   another,   confounding    those 
thiugs  which  may  very  easily  be  kept  separate.     Such  are 
those   passions  which  imbue  the  soul  with  some  particular 
colour,  like  a  man  spotted  and  leprous  in  body,  the  originally 
sound  counsel  being  infected  and  contaminated  by  that  which 
is  destructive  and  fatal.     But  the  principle  of  the  entrance  and 
of  the  custody  of  animals  is  added  in  a  natural  manner;  for 
he  says,  "  for  the  sake  of  nourishing  seed."     If  we  take  the 
expression   according   to   the   letter,   inasmuch   as,   althougbi 
particular  individuals  may  be  destroyed,  still  at  least  a  race  i? 
preserved  to  be  the  seed  of  future  generations ;  forsooth  that 
the  intention  of  God,  conceived  at  the  formation  of  the  world 
might  remain  for  ever  and  ever  unextinguishable,  the  differeul 
races  of  creatures  being  preserved. 

But  if  we  regard  the  inward  meaning  of  the  words,  it  is 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  353 

necessary  that  in  the  irrational  parts  of  the  soul,  likewise, 
there  should  be  motions  which  are  clean,  as  certain  seminal 
principles,  although  the  animals  themselves  are  not  clean ; 
since  the  nature  of  mankind  is  capable  of  admitting  contrarieties, 
for  instance,  virtue  and  wickedness  ;  each  of  which  he  deline- 
ated at  the  creation  of  the  world,  by  the  tree  bearing  the  name 
of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  Forsooth  our 
intellect,  in  which  there  is  both  knowledge  and  intelligence, 
comprehends  both  good  and  evil ;  but  good  is  akin  to  the 
number  seven,  and  evil  is  the  brother  of  duality. 

Moreover,  the  law  of  wisdom,  which  abounds  in  beauty,  says 
expressly  and  carefully,  that  seed  is  to  be  nourished,  not  in 
one  place  only,  but  in  all  the  earth,  both  naturally,  in  the  first 
instance,  and  also  morally,  in  its  peculiar  sense ;  because  it  is 
very  natural,  and  suitable  to  the  character  of  God,  to  cause 
|tliat  which  in  all  parts  and  divisions  of  the  world  is  said  again 
to  be  the  seed  of  living  beings,  to  fill  places  which  have  been 
3vacuated  a  second  time  with  similar  creatures,  by  a  repeated 
generation ;  and  not  altogether  to  desert  our  body,  inasmuch 
18  it  is  an  earthly  substance,  as  if  it  were  a  thing  deserted  by 
lind  void  of  all  principle  of  life. 

I  Since,  if  we  practise  the  drinking  of  wines  and  the  eating  of 
neats,  and  indulge  in  the  ardent  desire  of  the  female,  and  in 
hort  practise  in  all  things  a  delicate  and  luxurious  life,  we  are 
hen  only  the  bearers  of  a  corpse  in  the  body ;  but  if  God, 
iking  compassion  on  us,  turns  away  the  overflow  of  vices  and 
3nders  the  soul  dry,  he  will  then  begin  to  make  the  body 
ving,  and  to  animate  it  with  a  purer  soul,  the  governing 
rinciple  of  which  is  wisdom. 

Why,  after  the  entrance  of  Noah  into  the  ark,  did  seven  days 
apse,  after  which  the  deluge  came?"* 

13.  The  kind  Saviour  of  the  world  allows  a  space  for  the 

pentance  of  sinners,  in  order  that  when  they  see  the  ark 

od  in  front  of  them  as  a  sort  of  type,  made  with  respect  to 

then  present  time,  and  when   they  see  all  the  different 

ids  of  living  creatures  shut  up  in  it  which  the  earth  used  to 

jar  on  its  surface,  according   to  its   parts  adapted   to   the 

"Terent  species,   they  might  believe   the  predictions   of  the 

luge  which  had  been  made  to  them,  so  that,  fearing  total 

*  Genesis  vii.  10. 
VOL.  IV.  A   A 


354  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

destruction  above  all  things,  they  might  be  speedily  converted, 
destroying  and  eradicating  all  their  iniquity  and  wickedness. 

In  the  second  place,  this  language  is  a  most  manifest  repre- 
sentation of  the  exceeding  great  abundance  of  the  kind  mercy 
of  the  beneficent  Saviour,  by  destroying  the  wickedness  of 
many  years,  which  from  the  time  of  their  birth  to  old  age  has 
extended  itself  over  their  conduct  in  those  persons  who  practise 
penitence  for  a  few  days,  for  the  divine  nature  forgets  all  evil 
and  is  a  lover  of  virtue.  When  therefore  it  beholds  faithful 
virtue  in  the  soul,  it  gives  it  honour  in  a  wonderful  degree,  in 
order,  in  the  first  place,  to  take  away  all  kinds  of  evil  which 
impend  over  it  from  its  sins. 

In  the  third  place,  the  number  of  seven  days  after  the 
entrance  of  Noah  into  the  ark,  during  which  the  command  of 
God  kept  off  the  flood,  is  a  recollection  of  the  creation  of  the 
world,  the  birthday  festival  of  which  is  kept  on  the  seventh 
day,  showing  manifestly  the  authority  of  the  Father;  just  as 
if  he  were  to  say,  "  I  am  the  Creator  of  the  world,  commanding 
things  to  exist  which  have  no  existence ;  and  at  the  same  time 
I  am  he  who  am  now  about  to  destroy  the  world  with  a  great 
flood.  But  the  original  cause  of  the  creation  of  the  world  was 
the  goodness  which  is  in  me,  and  my  kindness ;  and  the  cause  '■ 
of  its  impending  destruction  is  the  ingratitude  and  impiety  of 
those  persons  who  have  been  loaded  by  benefits  by  me." 

Therefore  he  causes  an  interval  of  seven  days,  in  order  that 
the  unbelieving  may  remember,  and  that  those  who  have 
abandoned  their  faith  in  the  Parent  of  the  world  may  in  a 
suppliant  spirit  return  to  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  so  may 
entreat  him  again  that  his  works  may  be  everlasting ;  and  that 
they  may  offer  their  entreaty,  not  with  mouth  and  tongue,  but 
rather  with  the  heart  of  amendment  and  penitence. 

Why  did  the  rain  of  the  deluge  last  forty  days  and  an  equal 
number  of  nights  ?* 

14.  In  the  first  place,  the  word  day  is  used  in  a  double 
sense.  The  one  meaning  that  time  which  is  from  morning  to' 
evening,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  first  rising  of  the  sun  in  the[ 
east  to  his  sinking  in  the  west.  Therefore  they  who  make 
definitions,  say,  "  That  is  da}^,  as  long  as  the  sun  shines  on 
the  earth." 

*  Genesis  vii.  4. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  355 

In  another  sense,  the  word  day  is  used  of  the  day  and  night 
together.  And  in  this  sense  we  say  that  a  month  consists  of 
thirty  days,  combining  together  and  computing  the  period  of 
night  in  the  same  calculation. 

These  premises  having  been  first  laid  down  thus,  I  say  that 
the  word  now  spoken  of  has  not  been  incorrectly  employed, 
inasmuch  as  it  implies  forty  days  and  forty  nights ;  but  is  also 
so  used  in  order  to  suggest  a  double  number  determined  for  the 
generation  of  mankind,  namely,  forty  and  eighty,  as  many 
men  skilled  in  medicine,  and  indeed  also  in  physical  science, 
have  suggested ;  but  it  is  especially  described  in  the  sacred  law, 
which  was  to  them  also  the  first  principle  of  natural  science. 

Since  therefore  destruction  was  on  the  point  of  overwhelming 
all  men  and  women  every  where  on  account  of  the  excessive 
combination  of  iniquities  and  quarrels,  the  Judge  of  all  con- 
sidered it  becoming  to  allot  an  equal  time  to  their  destruction 
to  that  which  he  had  consumed  in  the  original  creation  of 
nature  and  to  the  work  of  giving  life  to  the  world ;  for  the 
■  principle  of  procreation  is  the  perseverance  of  seed  in  the 
different  parts ;  but  it  was  necessary  to  honour  the  male  creature 
with  pure  light,  which  know^s  not  the  shade ;  but  the  woman 
had  a  mixture  in  her  body  of  night  and  darkness. 

Therefore,  in  the  creation  of  the  whole  world,  the  excess  of 
the  male  or  the  miequal  number,  being  composed  of  unity, 
becomes  the  parent  of  square  numbers ;  but  the  woman  who  is 
jan  unequal  number,  being  compounded  of  duality,  becomes  the 
jparent  of  other  long  numbers.  Moreover,  the  square  is 
jsplendour  and  light  combining  together  by  the  equality  of  the 
sides ;  but  the  other  numbers  being  long  necessarily  exhibit 
aight  and  darkness  by  reason  of  their  inequality,  since  that 
Which  is  in  excess  throws  a  shade  over  that  which  lies  beneath 
he  excess. 

In  the  second  place,  the  number  forty  is  the  produce  of 
nany  virtues,  as  has  been  suggested  in  another  place.     It  is 
ilso  often   used  for  the  judgment  of  legislation,   both  with 
eference  to  those  persons  who  have  done  any  thing  rightly 
ieserving  of  praise  and  honour,  and  also  with  reference  to 
'hose  who  on  account  of  their  sins  meet  with  reproaches  and 
unishments;   so  that  it  is  superfluous  to  adduce  proofs  to 
omonstrate  what  is  evident. 
What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  I  will  destroy 

A  A  2 


356  ruiLO  JUD^EUS. 

every  living  substance  that  I  have  made  from  off  the  face  of 
the  earth?"* 

15.  Do  you  not  all  shrink  hack  in  astonishment  \vhen  you 
hear  these  words,  by  reason  of  the  beauty  of  the  sentence  ?  for 
he  has  not  said,  "  destroy  from  the  earth,"  but  "from  the  face 
of  the  earth,"  that  is  to  say  from  its  surface ;  in  order,  that  is, 
that  in  the  lowest  depth  of  the  earth  the  vital  efficacy  of  all 
seeds  might  be  preserved  unhurt,  and  free  from  all  injury 
which  could  possibly  bring  damage  to  it ;  since  the  Creator 
was  not  forgetful  of  his  original  design,  but  destroys  those 
only  who  come  in  his  way,  and  who  move  only  on  the  surface 
of  the  earth,  but  leaves  the  roots  in  the  depth,  in  order  to 
produce  the  generation  of  other  causes. 

Moreover,  that  expression,  "  I  will  destroy,"  was  also 
written  by  divine  inspiration;  for  it  happens  that  if  we 
remove  the  letters  which  require  to  be  removed,  the  whole 
table  for  the  reception  of  letters  remains  the  same.  By  which 
he  proves  that  he  will  destroy  the  fickle  generation  on  account 
of  their  impiety,  but  the  conversation  and  essence  of  the 
human  race  he  will  preserve  for  ever  and  ever  to  be  the  seed  of 
future  generations.  And  what  follows  agrees  with  this,  since 
to  the  expression,  "I  will  destroy,"  this  other  is  also  added,  all 
natural  existence,  every  thing  which  exists,  or  rises  upon  the 
earth ;  but  existence  is  the  destruction  of  the  opposite  cha- 
racteristics ;  and  that  which  is  dissolved  loses  quality,  but 
retains  body  and  materiality.  This  is  the  letter  of  what  is 
said. 

But  in  the  inward  meaning,  the  flood  is  symbolically  repre- 
sentative of  spiritual  dissolution.  When  therefore  by  the 
grace  of  the  Father  we  desire  to  throw  away  and  to  wash  off 
all  sensible  and  corporeal  qualities  by  which  the  intellect  was 
infected  as  by  swelling  sores,  then  the  muddy  slime  is  got  rid 
of  as  by  a  deluge,  sweet  waters  and  wholesome  fountains 
supervening. 

Why  does  he  say  :  "  Noah  did  every  thing  which  the  Lord 
commanded. (or  ordered)  him?"! 

16.  A  noble  panegyric  for  the  just  man.  In  tne  first  place, 
because  with  an  ingenuous  mind  and  a  purpose  full  of  affection 

*  Geneeia  vii.  i.  f  Genesis  vii.  6. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  357 

towards  God  he  performed,  not  a  part  of  what  he  had  been 
commanded,  but  the  whole  of  God's  commands.  But  the 
second  is  the  more  true  expression,  because  he  does  not  choose 
so  much  to  command  as  to  order  him ;  for  masters  command 
their  slaves,  but  friends  order  friends,  and  especially  elder 
friends  order  younger  ones.  Therefore  it  is  a  marvellous  gift 
to  be  found  even  in  the  rank  of  servants,  and  in  the  list  of 
ministers  of  God ;  and  it  is  a  superabundant  excess  of  kind- 
ness for  any  one  to  be  a  beloved  friend  to  the  most  glorious 
,  Uncreated  Essence. 

Moreover,  the  sacred  writer  has  here  carefully  employed 
'  both   names,  the  Lord   God,  as  declaratory  of   his  superior 
'  powers  of   destroying   and  benefiting,  using  the   word  Lord 
!  first,  and  placing  the  name  God,   giving  the  idea  of  bene- 
ficence, second ;   since  it  was  a  time  of  judgment  let   the 
name  which  is  the  indication  of  his  destroying  power  come 
first.     But  still,  as  he  is  a  kind  and  merciful  king,  he  leaves 
as  relics  the  seminal  elements  by  which  the  vacant  places 
may  be  replenished,  for  which  reason,  at  the  first  beginning 
of  the  account  of  the  creation,  the  expression,  '*Let  there  be," 
was  not  an  exterminating  act  of  power,  but  a  beneficent  one. 

Therefore,  at  the  creation,  he  changed  the  appellations  and 
use  of  names ;  but  as  the  name  God  is  an  indication  of  his 
beneficent  power,  the  sacred  writer  has  more  frequently  em- 
Iployed  that  in  his  account  of  the  creation  of  the  universe, 
jbut  after  everything  was  perfected  then  he  called  him  Lord, 
'm  reference  to  the  creation  itself,  for  this  name  betokens 
royal  power  and  the  ability  to  destroy ;  since,  where  the  act 
)f  generation  is  God  is  used  first  in  order,  but  when  punish- 
jnent  is  spoken  of  the  name  Lord  is  placed  before  the  name 
'>od. 

Why  did  the  deluge  take  place  in  the  six  hundredth  year  of 
ho  life  of  Noah,  and  in  the  seventh  month,  and  on  the  twenty- 
(  venth  day  of  the  month  ?* 

17.  Perhaps  it  happened  that  the  just  man  was  born  at 

u;  beginning  of   the  month,  at  the  first  beginning  of  the 

jommencement  of  that  very  year  which  they  are  accustomed 

')  call  the  sacred  year,  out  of   honour,  otherwise  the  sacred 

istorian  would  not  have  been  so  carefully  accurate  in  fixing 

•  Genesis  vii.  11. 


358  PHILO   JUD^US. 

the  day  and  month  when  the  deluge  began  to  the  seventh 
month  and  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  month. 

But,  perhaps,  by  this  minuteness  he  intended  manifestly 
to  indicate  the  precise  time  of  the  vernal  equinox,  for  that 
always  occurs  on  the  twenty -seventh  day  of  the  seventh  month. 

But  why  was  it  that  the  deluge  fell  on  the  day  of  the  vernal 
equinox  ?  Because  about  that  time  the  birth  and  increase 
of  everything  take  place,  whether  living  creatures  or  plants ; 
therefore  the  vengeance  and  punishment  inflicted  brings  with 
it  the  more  terrible  and  dreadful  threats,  as  happening  at  the 
period  of  plenty  and  fertility  of  the  sheaves  of  corn,  and 
indeed,  in  the  very  midst  of  that  productiveness,  and  bringing 
the  evil  of  utter  destruction  as  a  reproof  of  the  impiety  of 
those  who  are  exposed  to  the  punishment. 

For  behold,  says  he,  all  nature  contains  its  own  productions 
within  itself  in  the  greatest  abundance,  namely,  wheat  and 
barley,  and  everything  else  which  is  produced  from  seed, 
brought  on  to  complete  generation,  as,  also,  it  begins  to 
generate  the  fruits  of  trees ;  but  you,  like  mortals,  corrupt 
its  mercies,  perverting  the  divine  gifts,  and  purposes,  and 
mysteries. 

But  if  the  deluge  had  taken  place  at  the  autumnal  equinox, 
when  there  was  nothing  growing  on  the  earth,  but  when  all 
the  crops  were  collected  into  their  proper  storehouses,  it  would 
not  have,  in  any  degree,  been  looked  upon  as  a  punishment, 
but  rather  as  a  benefit,  as  the  water  would  have  cleansed  the 
plains  and  the  mountains.  But  as  the  first  man  who  was 
produced  out  of  the  earth  was  also  created  at  the  same  season 
of  the  year,  he  whom  the  diWne  writer  calls  Adam,  because 
in  fact  it  was  on  every  account  proper  that  the  grandfather, 
or  original  parent,  or  father  of  the  human  race,  or  by  what- 
ever name  we  may  choose  to  designate  that  original  founder 
of  our  kind,  should  be  created  at  the  season  of  the  vernal 
equinox,  when  all  earthly  productions  were  full  of  their  fruit ; 
but  the  vernal  equinox  takes  place  in  the  seventh  month, 
which  is  also  called  the  first  in  other  passages,  with  reference' 
to  a  different  idea. 

Since,  therefore,  the  first  beginning  of  the  generation  of  our 
race,  after  the  destruction  caused  by  the  deluge,  commenced 
with  Noah,  men  being  again  sown  and  procreated,  therefore 
lie  also  is  recognised  as  resembling  the  first  man  born  of  the 


QUESTIONS  AND  SOLUTIONS.  359 

earth,  as  far  as  such  resemblance  or  recognition  is  possible. 
And  the  six  hundredth  year  has  for  its  origin  the  number 
six ;  and  the  world  was  created  under  the  number  six,  there- 
fore, by  this  same  number  does  he  reprove  the  wicked,  putting 
them  to  shame  because  he  would,  unquestionably,  never,  after 
he  had  created  the  universe  by  means  of  the  number  six,  have 
destroyed  all  the  men  who  lived  on  the  earth  under  the  form 
of  six,  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  preposterous  excess  of  their 
iniquities.  For  the  third  power  of  six  and  the  minor  power 
is  the  number  six  hundred,  and  the  mean  between  both  is 
sixty,  since  the  number  ten  more  evidently  represents  the 
likeness  of  unity,  and  the  number  a  hundred  represents  the 
minor  power. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  the  fountains 
of  the  deep  were  broken,  and  the  springs  of  heaven  were 
opened?"* 

18.  The  literal  meaning  is  plain  enough,  for  it  suggests 
the  two  extremities  of  the  universe,  the  heaven  and  the  earth, 
to  have  met  together  for  the  destruction  of  mortals  deserving 
of  condemnation,  the  waters  running  forth  to  meet  one  another 
from  all  quarters,  for  part  of  them  bubbled  up  from  out  of  the 
earth,  and  part  descended  downwards  from  heaven  ;  and  in 
truth,  that  expression  is  very  explicit,  "  The  fountains  were 
broken  up,"  for  when  a  rupture  is  effected  then  the  thing 
confined  rushes  forth  without  any  hindrance. 

But  with  reference  to  the  interior  meaning  of  the  expression 
we  may  as  well  say  this :  the  heaven  is  symbolically  the  hu- 
man intellect,  and  the  earth  is  the  sense  and  body,  therefore 
there  is  great  distress  and  calamity  when  neither  remains,  but 
vvhen  each  threatens  a  secret  attack.  But  what  is  the  exact 
neaning  of  my  words  ? 

It  often  happens  that  acuteness  of  intellect  exhibits  cunning 
md  wickedness,  and  bears  itself  with  bitterness  in  every  re- 
spect when  the  lusts  of  the  body  are  restrained  and  bridled  ; 
Hit  the  contrary  fact  often  prevails,  and  the  lusts  rejoice  in 
lieir  opportunities  and  proceed  onward,  gaining  strength  from 
uxury  and  abundan-ce  of  means  ;  therefore,  the  gate  of  these 
lists  is  the  outward  sense  combined  with  the  body ;  but  when 
lie  intellect,  neglecting  outward  circumstances,  is  consistent 
*  Genesis  vii.  11. 


360  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

with  itself,  then  the  senses  lie  harmless,  as  if  completely 
abandoned ;  but  when  both  are  united,  the  intellect  in  exert- 
ing all  cunning  and  wickedness,  and  the  body  irrigated  with 
all  the  senses  and  gorged  with  every  kind  of  vice  to  satiety, 
then  we  are  exposed  to  a  deluge  ;  and  this  is  in  fact  a  great 
deluge,  when  the  streams  of  the  intellect  are  opened  by 
iniquity,  and  folly,  and  greedy  desire,  and  injustice,  and 
arrogance,  and  impiety,  and  when  the  fountains  of  the  body 
are  opened  by  lust,  and  desire,  and  intemperance,  and  obscenity, 
and  gluttony,  and  lasciviousness,  with  relations  and  sisters,  and 
all  irremediable  diseases. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "And  the  Lord  shut 
him  in,  closing  the  doors  of  the  ark  ?  "* 

19.  Since  we  have  said  that  the  structure  of  the  human 
body  is  symbolically  indicated  by  the  ark,  we  must  take  notice, 
also,  that  on  the  outside  this  body  is  enclosed  by  a  hard  and 
dense  skin,  to  be  a  covering  to  all  its  parts  ;  for  nature  has 
made  this  as  a  sort  of  coat,  to  prevent  either  cold  or  heat 
from  being  able  to  do  man  injury. 

The  literal  meaning  of  the  expression  is  plain  enough,  for 
the  door  of  the  ark  is  carefully  shut  by  divine  virtue  for  the 
sake  of  security,  lest  the  water  should  enter  in  at  any  part, 
as  it  was  to  be  tossed  about  by  the  waves  for  an  entire  year. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  the  water 
was  greatl3?  increased,  and  bore  up  the  ark  which  floated  upon 
the  water  ?  "f 

20.  The  literal  meaning  is  plain  enough,  but  it  contams  ed 
allegorical  reference  to  our  bodies,  which  ought  to  be  borne 
up  as  if  on  the  water,  and  by  fluctuating  with  our  necessities 
to  subdue  hunger  and  thirst,  cold  and  heat,  by  which  it  is 
agitated,  disturbed,  and  kept  in  motion. 

Why  did  the  water  overflow  fifteen  cubits  above  all  the 
highest  mountains  ?J 

21.  With  respect  to  the  literal  statement  we  must  remark 
that  the  excess  was  not  merely  one  of  fifteen  cubits  above  all 
high  mountains  but  above  those  which  were  a  great  deal  more 

•  Genesis  vii.  16.  f  Genesis  vii.  17.  +  Genesia  vii.  19. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  361 

lofty  and  high  tharx  some  others  ;  therefore  it  was  a  great  deal 
more  than  that  height  above  the  lower  ones. 

But  we  must  interpret  this  statement  allegorically ;  for  the 
loftier  mountains  shadow  forth  the  senses  in  our  body,  because 
it  has  been  permitted  to  them  to  occupy  the  abode  of  stability 
in  the  lofty  region  of  our  head.  And  there  are  five  numbers- 
oi  these,  each  to  be  considered  separately,  so  that  they  amount 
in  all  to  fifteen. 

As,  there  is  the  faculty  of  sight,  the  thing  which  is  visible, 
|:he  act  of  seeing. 

1   The  faculty  of  hearing,  the  thing  which  is  audible,  and  the 
lict  of  hearing. 

\   The  faculty  of  smelling,  the  thing  which  can  be  smelled, 
,.nd  the  act  of  smelling. 

The  faculty  of  taste,  the  thing  which  can  be  tasted,  and  the 
ct  of  tasting. 

The  faculty  of  touch,  the  thing  which  can  be  touched,  and 
,:ie  act  of  touching. 

These  are  the  fifteen  cubits  in  excess  ;  for  they  also  are 
verwhelmed  by  the  overflow,  being  destroyed  by  the  un- 
jasonable  influx  of  infinite  vices  and  evils. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  all  flesh 
ipable  of  motion  perished?"* 

22.  It  is  with  especial  propriety,  and  strictly  in  accordance 
ith  natural  truth,  that  the  sacred  historian  has  here  pro- 
unced  all  flesh  capable  of  motion  devoted  to  destruction  ; 
ir  flesh  excites  pleasures,  and  is  excited  by  pleasures  ;  and 
ch  affections  are  the  causes  of  the  destruction  of  souls,  as 
the  other  hand  sobriety  and  patience  ai'e  the  causes  of 
fety. 

jWhat  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  And  everything 
Ich  was  on  the  dry  land  died  ?  "t 

|23.  The  literal  meaning  is  notorious,  because  in  that  great 
•  uge  everything  which  was  upon  the  earth  was  destroyed 
i  perished  ;  but  with  respect  to  the  secret  meaning,  as, 
iice  the  material  of  timber,  when  it  is  parched  and  dry,  is 
I'dily  consumed  by  fire,  so,  likewise,  when  the  soul  is  not 
I  igled  with  wisdom,  and  justice,  and  piety,  and  the  other 
•  Qcneais  vii.  21.  t  Genesis  vii.  22. 


362  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

enduring  virtues,  which  alone  are  able  to  impart  real  joy  t 
the  thoughts,  then  it,  being  parched  up  and  dried  like  a  plan 
which  is  deprived  of  any  power  of  budding  or  producing  seed 
or  like  a  withered  trunk,  dies,  being  handed  over  to  the  merc^ 
of  the  overwhelming  overflow  of  the  body. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  *'  It  destroyed  ever 
living  substance  which  was  on  the  face  of  the  earth?"* 

24.  The  literal  meaning  of  these  words  only  announces 
plain  statement  of  a  fact,  but  it  may  be  turned  into  an  all* 
gory  in  this  manner.  It  is  not  without  reason  that  the  sacre* 
historian  has  used  the  words  "  a  living  substance,"  for  tha 
is  characteristic  of  ambition  and  pride,  which  lead  men  t 
despise  both  divine  and  human  laws  ;  but  ambition  and  arrc 
gance  do  rather  appear  on  the  face  of  our  earthly  and  corpores 
nature  with  an  elated  countenance  and  contracted  brows. 

Since  there  are  some  persons  who  come  nearer  to  one  wit 
their  feet,  but  with  their  chests,  and  necks,  and  heads  lea 
back,  and  are  actually  borne  backwards  and  bend  away  lik 
a  balance,  so  that  with  one  half  of  their  body,  in  consequenc 
of  the  position  of  their  feet,  they  project  forward,  but  bad 
ward  with  the  upper  portion  of  their  chests,  drawing  then 
selves  back  like  those  persons  whose  muscles  and  nerves  are  i 
pain,  by  which  they  are  prevented  from  stooping  in  a  naturs 
manner.  But  men  of  this  kind  it  was  determined  to  put  a 
end  to,  as  one  may  see  from  the  records  of  the  Lord  and  tt 
divine  history  of  the  scriptures. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  Noah  remained  alon 
and  they  who  were  with  him  in  the  ark  ?"  f 

25.  The  literal  meaning  of  this  is  evident;  but  with  r 
spect  to  its  concealed  sense  we  may  advance  an  opinion,  th 
the  intellect  which  is  desirous  of  studying  justice  and  wisdo 
does,  like  a  tree,  discard  all  noxious  shoots  which  bud  for 
about  it,  and  rejects  all  extravagant  humours  of  superfluoi 
vigour,  I  mean  immoderate  excess  of  the  affections,  ai 
wickedness,  and  all  the  effects  of  such. 

Therefore  he  is  here  said  to  have  been  left  alone  with  tho 
of  his  own  kindred,  and  his  kindred  are  properly  all  tho 
designs  and  thoughts  of  each  individual,  which  are  regulat 
*  -Geneds  vii.  23.  t  Genesis  vii.  24. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  363 

in  accordance  with  virtue,  on  which  account  the  statement  is 
added  "  And  he  remained  alone,  and  they  who  were  with 
liim,"  in  order  to  reveal  a  more  genuine  joy;  but  he  remained 
jin  the  ark,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  body,  because  it  was  purified 
'from  every  vice  and  spiritual  disease,  as  the  intellect  was  not 
lyet  put  in  such  a  condition  as  to  be  wholly  incorporeal. 
f    And  on  this  account  also,  we  must  render  thanks  to  the 

Ttterciful  Father,  because  he  received  his  consort  and  colleague 
!io  longer  as  one  endowed  with  superior  power,  but  to  be  sub- 
jjrdinate  to  his  own  power,  on  which  account  also  the  body  is 
jiot  submerged  in  the  deluge,  but  rising  above  the  flood  is  not 
\\i  all  destroyed  by  the  eddies  of  the  cataracts,  which  a  cra- 

mlous,  libidinous,  vanity-loving  will,  overflowing  all  things, 

aises  to  an  eminence. 

Why  is  it  that  the  sacred  writer  says,  *'  And  God  was 
aindful  of  Noah,  and  of  the  beasts,  and  of  the  cattle,"  but 
oes  not  add  that  he  remembered  his  wife  and  children  ?* 

26.  As  the  husband  agrees  with  and  is  equal  to  his  wife, 
nd  as  the  father  is  equal  to  his  sons,  there  is  no  need  of  men- 
^ning  more  names  than  one,  but  one,  the  first,  is  sufficient ; 

refore,  by  naming  Noah  he,  in  effect,  names  all  those  who 
ere  with  him  of  his  family ;  for  when  husband,  and  wife, 
nd  children,  and  relations  are  all  agitated  by  discord,  then 

is  no  longer  possible  for  such  to  be  called  one  family,  but 

jistead  of  being  one  they  are  many;  but  when  harmony  exists 

Men  one  family  is  exhibited  by  one  superior  of  the  house,  and 

1  are  seen  to  depend  upon  that  one,  like  the  branches  of  a 

jee  which  shoot  out  from  it,  or  the  fruit  upon  a  vine  branch 

hich  does  not  fall  off  from  it. 

And  in  another  part,  also,  the  prophet  has  said,  "  Have  a 
jgard  to  Abraham  your  father,  and  to  Sarah  who  brought 
'u  forth,"  where,  because  in  fact  it  was  one  family,  he  displays 

•'  agreement  by  mentioning  the  woman. 

Why  is  it  that  the  sacred  writer  made  mention  first  of  the 
sts  and  afterwards  of  the  cattle,  saying  that  God  re- 
mbered  Noah,  and  the  beasts,  and  the  cattle  ?t 

'^7.  In  the  first   place,  that  poetical   rule   has   not   been 
[iressed   in  vain,   that  he   led  the   bad   into   the  middle; 


Genesis  viii.  1.  +  Ibid. 


364  PHILO   JUD.EUS. 

therefore  he  places  the  beasts  in  the  middle,  between  th( 
domestic  animals,  that  is  to  say  the  men  and  the  cattle,  ii 
order  that  they  might  be  tamed  and  civilized  by  having  ai 
intimate  association  with  both. 

In  the  second  place,  he  thought  it  scarcely  reasonable  t< 
bestow  a  provident  benefit  on  the  beasts  by  themselves,  becausi 
he  was  about  immediately  to  add  a  statement  of  the  beginnin; 
of  the  diminution  of  the  deluge.  This  is  the  explanation  o 
the  statement  taken  literally. 

But  with  respect  to  the  inner  meaning,  that  just  intellect 
dwelling  in  the  body  as  if  in  the  ark,  possesses  both  beast 
and  living  animals,  not  those  particular  ones  which  bite  an( 
hurt,  but,  that  I  may  use  such  an  expression,  those  genera 
kinds  which  contain  in  themselves  the  principles  of  seed  am 
origination  ;  since  without  these  the  soul  cannot  be  manifes 
in  the  body.  Moreover,  the  soul  of  the  foolish  man  employ 
all  poisonous  and  deadly  animals,  but  that  of  the  wise  mai 
those  only  which  have  changed  the  nature  of  wild  beasts  int 
that  of  domestic  creatures. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,   "  He  brought 
breath  over  the  earth,  and  the  water  ceased  ?  "* 

28.  Some  people  say  that  what  is  here  meant  by  "a  breath 
is  the  wind,  at  which  the  deluge  ceased.  But  I  am  not  awar 
that  water  is  diminished  by  wind,  but  only  that  it  is  disturbe 
and  agitated  into  waves,  for  if  it  were  otherwise  the  vast  exter 
of  the  sea  would  have  been  wholly  dried  up  long  ago. 

Therefore  it  appears  to  me  that  the  sacred  writer  here  mear 
the  breath  of  the  Deity,  by  which  the  whole  universe  obtain 
security  at  the  same  time  with  the  calamities  of  the  worl( 
and  with  those  things  which  exist  in  the  air,  and  in  ever 
mixture  of   plants  and  animals.     Since  the   deluge  of  thi 
time  was  no  trifling  infliction  of  water,  but  an  immense  au 
boundless  overflow,  extending  almost   beyond  the  pillars  < 
Hercules  and  the  great  Mediterranean  Sea,  since  the  who 
earth  and  all  the  spaces  of  the  mountains  were  covered  wit 
water ;  and  it  is  scarcely  likely  that  such  a  vast  space  cou 
have  been  cleared  by  a  wind,  but  rather,  as  I  have  said, 
must  have  been  done  by  some  invisible  and  divine  virtue. 

*  Genesis  viii.  2. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  365 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  The  fountains  of 
he  deep  were  closed,  and  the  cataracts  of  heaven  ?  "* 

29.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  agreed  upon  by  all.  that  in  the 

rst  period  of  forty  days  the  waters  of  punishment  fell  un- 

iterruptedly,  the  lowest  fountains  of  the  earth  being  burst 

bunder ;    and   from   above,    the   cataracts   of   heaven    being 

joened,  and  pouring  down  until  all   places,   both  level   and 

^lountainous,    were    covered    with   the    inundation ;    and    for 

lother  period  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  entire  days  the  waters 

d  not  cease  to  fall,  nor  did  the  streams  cease  to  flow,  nor 

le  springs  to  burst  up,  though  still  in  milder  quantities,  not 

as  to  increase  the  existing  flood,  but  only  so  as  to  secure 

e  duration  of  the  existence  of  the  deluge,  which  was  also 

sisted  from  on  high ;  and  this  is  what  is  indicated  in  the 

eantime  by  the  statement  that  after  a  hundred   and  fifty 

ys  the  fountains  and  the  cataracts  were  closed  up  ;  therefore, 

lile  as  yet  they  were  not  closed  up  it  is  plain  that  they 

!re  in  action. 

In  the  second  place,  it  was  necessary  that  that  which  afforded 

3  excessive  supply  of  waters  for  the  deluge,  namely,  the 

iible  reservoir  of  water,  the  one  from  the  fountains  of  the 

th,  and  the  other  from  the  pourings  forth  of  heaven,  should 

both  closed,  for  the  more  the  stores  from  which  any  material 

supplied  fail,  the  more  it  is  consumed  by  itself,  especially 

en  divme  virtue  has  given  the  command. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  expression.     But  with 

1  pect  to  the  inner  sense  of  the  passage,  since  the  deluge 

<  the  mind  arises  from  two  things,  for  it  arises  partly  from 

( insel,  as  if  from  heaven,  and  in  another  degree  also  from 

tj   body  and  from  sense,  as  if  from  earth,  the  vices  being 

rfiprocally  introduced  by  the  passions  and  the  passions  by 

vices,  it  was  inevitably  necessary  that  the  word  of  the 

0  physician  entering  in  as  a  salutary  visitation  for  the 

se  of  healing  the  disease,  should  prevent  both  kinds  of 

low  for  the  future  ;   for  it  is  the  first  principle  of  the 

ical  art  to  drive  away  the  cause  of  the  infirmity  and  to 

1  ■  c  no  longer  any  materials  for  disease  ;  and  the  scripture 

ics  this,   also,  in  the  case  of  the  leper,   for  when  the 

^y  is  checked  and  is  prevented  from  extending  further, 

•  Genesis  viiL  2. 


366  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

it  then  fixes  the  station  and  abode  of  the  leprous  man  in  the 
8am e  place  by  a  law,  because  the  character  of  being  stationary 
implies  cleanliness,  for  that  which  is  moved  contrary  to  nature 
is  unclean. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement  that  after  a  hundred 
and  fifty  days  the  water  began  to  abate  ?  ^- 

30.  We  must  here  inquire  whether  those  hundred  and 
fifty  days,  during  which  the  water  was  abating,  are  to  be 
distinguished  from  the  four  months,  or  whether  they  have  a 
reference  to  the  days  previously  mentioned,  during  which  the 
deluge  went  on  unceasingly,  as  still  increasing. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  The  ark  settled  in  the  seventh  montli 
on  the  seven  and  twentieth  day  of  the  month  ?  "f 

31.  It  is  reasonable  here  to  consider  how  the  beginning  of 
the  deluge  commences  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  twenty- 
seventh  day  of  the  month,  and  how  the  diminution,  when  the 
ark  rested  on  the  top  of  the  mountains,  again  took  place  in 
the  seventh  month  and  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the 
month ;  therefore  we  must  say,  that  there  is  here  an  ho- 
monymy  of  months  and  days,  for  the  beginning  of  the  flood 
took  place  in  the  seventh  month,  beginning  at  the  birthday 
of  the  just  man,  near  the  time  of  the  vernal  equinox,  and 
its  diminution  took  place  in  the  seventh  month,  beginning 
from  the  highest  point  of  the  flood  at  the  autumnal  equinox, 
since  the  two  equinoxes  are  separated  from  one  another  by 
seven  months,  having  an  interval  of  five  months  between  them. 

For  the  seventh  month  of  the  equinox  is  also  by  its  virtue 
the  first  month,  because  the  creation  of  the  world  took  place 
in  it,  on  account  of  the  abundance  of  all  things  at  that  season. 
And,  in  like  manner,  the  seventh  month  of  the  autumnal 
equinox,  which,  according  to  time,  is  the  first  in  dignity,  having 
its  principle  of  that  number  seven  derived  from  the  air; 
therefore,  the  deluge  took  place  in  the  seventh  month,  not 
according  to  time  but  according  to  nature,  having  for  its 
principle  and  commencement  the  spring  season. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  In  the  tenth  month,  on  the  first  day  o: 
the  month,  the  heads  of  the  mountains  appeared  ?  "t 

*  Genesis  viii.  3."  t  Genesis  viii.  4.  1  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  367 

32.  As  in  numerals  the  number  ten  is  the  extreme  bound 
of  the  units,  being  a  definitive  and  perfect  number,  so  too 
it  is  the  cycle  and  end  of  the  units,  and  also  the  beginning  and 
cycle  of  the  decades,  and  of  infinity  of  numbers ;  thus  the 
Creator,  on  the  cessation  of  the  deluge,  condescended  that  the 
tops  of  the  mountains  should  appear  in  the  number  of  the 
decade,  being  a  defi^nitive  and  perfect  number. 

Why  was  it  after  forty  days  that  the  just  man  opened  the 
window  of  the  ark  ?  * 

33.  We  must  observe  carefully  that  the  divine  historian 
uses  the  same  number  in  speaking  of  the  influx  of  the  deluge 
and  in  mentioning  the  cessation  and  complete  removal  of  the 
evil ;  forsooth  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  of  the  seventh  month 
in  the  six  hundredth  year  of  the  life  of  Noah,  that  is  to  say  in 
the  six  hundredth  year  after  his  nativity,  the  deluge  began  at 
the  spring  season;  but  on  the  twenty -seventh  day  of  the 
seventh  month,  the  ark  rested  on  the  top  of  the  mountains  at 
the  vernal  equinox. 

But  it  is  plain  from  these  circumstances  that  the  deluge 
became  invisible  in  the  six  hundred  and  first  year  of  Noah's 
life,  again  on  the  seventh  month  and  the  twenty-seventh  day 
of  it,  so  that  after  the  lapse  of  an  entire  year,  it  again  settled 
and  established  the  earth  as  it  was  at  the  moment  of  its  de- 
struction, in  the  spring  season,  budding  forth  and  covered  with 
i'erdure  and  full  of  all  kinds  of  fruits. 

But  again  in  a  similar  manner  the  overflow  of  the  deluge 

.ook  place  for  forty  days,  the  cataracts  of  heaven  being  opened 

md  fountains  bursting  upwards  from  the  lowest  depths  of  the 

iarth ;  and  again  a  hope  of  renewal  took  place  at  intervals  of 

"orty  days  after  a  sufficient  cessation  of  the  rains,  when  he 

pened  the  window ;  and  again  the  duration  of  the  permanent 

leluge  lasted  for  a  period  of  a  hundred  and  fifty  days,  as  also 

ts  gradual  diminution  occupied  a  period  of  a  hundred  and 

ifty  days ;  so   that  we  may  well  admire   the   equality  of  the 

rrangement,  for  the  evil  increased  and  ceased  according  to  the 

ime  number,  like  the  moon,  which  from  its  first  rise  proceeds 

I  its  increase  according  to  an  equal  number,  going  onward  to 

,8  perfect  fulness  of  light,  and  then  again  with  an  equal  num- 

cr  in  its  decrease,  returning  back  to  its  original  state,  after 

*  Genesis  viiL  5. 


368  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

having  been  previously  fall ;  and  in  like  manner  in  the  case  oi 
divine  chastisements,  the  Creator  preserves  a  regular  order, 
banishing  all  irregularity  from  the  divine  borders. 

What  is  the  window  of  the  ark,  which  the  just  man  opens  ?* 

34.  The  literal  statement  scarcely  admits  of  any  difficulty  or 
doubt,  inasmuch  as  it  is  plain ;  but  with  reference  to  the  inner 
meaning  we  have  this  to  say  :  each  separate  part  of  the  senses 
has  imitated  the  windows  of  the  body,  since  it  is  through  them 
as  through  windows  that  the  comprehension  of  sensible  objects 
enters  into  the  intellect,  and  again  it  is  through  them  that  the 
intellect  stretches  forth  as  if  escaping;  but  a  portion  of  these 
windows,  the  senses,  the  more  noble  portion  too,  I  say,  is  the 
sight ;  inasmuch  as  that  above  all  the  rest  is  akin  to  the  soul, 
and  it  is  intimately  acquainted  with  light,  the  most  beautiful 
of  the  essences,  and  it  is  the  minister  of  sacred  things ;  more- 
over that  is  the  one  which  first  laid  open  the  road  to  philo- 
sophy. 

For  beholding  the  regular  motion  of  the  sun,  and  of  the 
moon,  and  the  erratic  course  of  the  other  planets,  and  the  uner- 
ring circular  motion  of  the  whole  heaven,  and  the  order  and 
harmony  there  existing  beyond  all  calculation,  as  if  it  wert 
the  one  real  creator  of  the  whole  world,  it  by  itself  related  tc 
its  one  chief  counsellor  and  director  all  that  it  saw :   and  ther 
intellect,  seeing  those  things  with  its  acute  eye,  and  by  those 
things  discerning  superior  demonstrative  ideas,  and  the  caus( 
of  all  those  things,  immediately  perceived  that  there  was  i 
God  at  the  same  moment  that  it  arrived  at  the  conception  a 
generation  and  providence,  because  forsooth  it  was  plain  tha 
this  visible  nature  was  not  created  by  itself :  for  it  was  impos 
sible  that  such  a  harmony,  and  order,  and  reason,  and  mos 
consistent  analogy,  and  that  a  concord  of  such  a  character  am 
extent,  and  that  such  true  and  perfect  felicity  should  exist  b; 
its  own  power :   but  it  was  necessary  that  there  must  be  som 
Creator  and  parent  of  it  acting  like  a  governor  and  director 
who  generated  these  things,  and  then  having  generated  ther 
preserves  them  safe  and  sound. 

Why  did  he  send  out  a  raven  first  ?  f 
35.  If  we  look  to  the  literal  statement,  the  raven  is  said  t 
*  Genesis  viii,  6.  t  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  369 

lie  an  animal  particularly  set  apart  for  being  sent  on  messages 
und  employed  in  ofiBces ;  for  to  this  very  day  many  people 
watch  its  mode  of  flight  and  its  chattering,  judging  that  it 
j^nves  some  intimation  of  unknown  facts ;  but  with  respect  to 
the  hidden  meaning,  as  a  raven  is  a  black,  and  arrogant,  and 
speedy  animal,  it  is  a  sign  of  wickedness,  which  brings  night 
and  darkness  over  the  soul,  and  it  is  also  swift  to  meet  all  the 
things  of  the  world  in  its  flight. 

And  also  that  it  is  very  bold,  so  as  at  times  to  cause  the 
destruction  of  those  who  seek  to  catch  it,  since  pride  produces 
also  rash  impudence,  the  opposite  of  which  is  virtue,  which  is 
consistent  with  the  brilliancy  of  light,  and  is  by  nature  deco- 
rated with  a  modest  bashfulness ;  therefore  it  is  quite  natural 
.that  if  there  was  any  darkness  remaining  behind  in  the  intel- 
llect,  darkness  which  exists  in  accordance  with  folly,  he  should 
■xpel  that  and  send  it  out  beyond  his  borders. 

Why  did  the  raven  after  it  had  gone  forth  not  return,  when 
there  was  not  yet  any  part  of  the  earth  dried  ?* 

36.  This    passage   admits    of  an  allegorical   interpretation 

;ince  injustice  is  contrary  to  the  light  of  justice ;  so  that  in 

omparisou  of  the  admirable  actions  of  the  man  endued  with 

iitue,  it  thinks  it  more  desirable  to  rejoice  with  its  kinsman 

he  deluge;  for  injustice  is  a  lover  of  confusion  and  corruption. 

"Why  does  he  speak  here  in  an  incorrect  manner,  "  Till  the 
ater  was  dried  up  from  the  earth;"  when  it  was  not  the 
»ater  which  was  dried  up  from  the  earth,  but  the  earth  which 
^as  dried  from  the  water  ?  f 

37.  He  uses  this  expression  in  an  allegorical  sense,  indicat- 
ig  by  the  fall  of  the  waters  the  immensity  of  vices,  by  which 
hen  saturated  and  vigorous  the  soul  is  corrupted,  but  when 
ley  are  dried  up  and  withered,  it  is  preserved ;  for  then  they 
mnot  inflict  any  mischief  upon  it,  since  they  are  become 
iipotent  and  dead. 

Why  does  he  in  the  second  place  send  forth  the  dove,  and 
hy  does  he  send  it  forth  from   himself  to  see  whether  the 
Iter  had  ceased,  when  he  uses  no  such  expressions  about  the 
•vcni?J 

•  GenesiB  viiL  7.  +  Ibid.  J  Genesia  viii  8. 

VOL.  IV.  B  B 


370  PHILO   JUD^US. 

In  the  first  place,  the  dove  is  a  clean  animal,  and  in  the 
second  place  it  is  tame,  civilised,  and  one  which  associates 
with  mankind,  on  which  account  also  the  honour  has  been 
allotted  to  it  of  being  offered  up  upon  the  altar  in  sacrifices ; 
and  on  this  account  the  sacred  writer,  sanctioning  this  honour 
and  adding  the  weight  of  his  assertion,  has  said,  he  sent  it 
forth  from  himself,  declaring  by  this  expression  that  it  dwelt 
with  him ;  and  again,  by  the  expression  that  it  was  to  see 
whether  the  water  was  abated,  he  displays  the  common  anxiety 
felt  by  both. 

But  those  birds,  the  raven  and  the  dove,  are  symbols  of 
wickedness  and  virtue :  for  the  one,  whether  it  is  wickedness 
or  the  raven,  has  no  house,  nor  habitation,  nor  city,  being  an 
insolent  unsociable  bird ;  but  the  other,  namely  virtue,  has  a  | 
regard  to  humanity,  and  to  the  public  good :  and  so  the  man  i 
endowed  with  virtue  sends  that  bird  forth  as  his  ambassador 
for  desirable  and  salutary  objects,  wishing  to  receive  from  it 
desirable  information  ;  and  she.  like  an  ambassador,  brings  us 
back  genuine  pleasure,  so  that  what  is  hurtful  may  be 
guarded  against,  and  what  is  useful  may  be  diligently  and 
carefully  admitted. 

Why  did  the  dove,  when  it  found  no  rest  for  its  feet,  return 
to  Noah?* 

39.  Is  not  the  reason  of  this  evident,  and  is  it  not  a  plain i 

proof  that  wickedness  and  virtue  are  symbolically  indicated  by 
the  raven  and  the  dove  ?  For  behold  the  dove,  which  is  the 
last  sent  out,  finds  no  rest.  How,  then,  could  the  raven,  who 
departed  previously,  while  the  calamity  of  the  deluge  was  still 
prevailing,  find  any  place,  and  make  a  settlement  ?  For  the 
raven  was  neither  a  swan  nor  an  ibis,  nor  did  he  belong  to  the 
class  of  aquatic  birds. 

But  the  sacred  writer  here  points  out  in  an  enigmatical 
manner,  that  wickedness,  when  it  has  gone  forth  out  of  doors, 
to  the  swelling  whirlpools  of  the  vices  and  passions  which 
overflow  and  corrupt  the  soul  and  life,  joyfully  admits  them, 
and  dwells  with  and  takes  up  its  abode  with  them,  as  with  its 
nearest  friends  and  relations ;  but  virtue,  turning  away  with 
loathing  from  even  the  first  sight  of  them,  at  once  springs 
back,  and  does  not  return,  scarcely  finding  rest  for  its  feet; 

*  Genesis  viii.  9. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  871 

finding,  in  fact,  no  standing  ground  anywhere,  and  no  place 
worthy  of  itself.  For  what  other  greater  evil  can  there  1)0 
than  this,  that  virtue  should,  not  be  able  to  find  in  the  soul 
any  place  ever  so  small  for  rest  and  for  abiding  in  ? 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  Putting  forth  his 
hand,  he  received  her,  and  brought  her  in  to  himself?"* 

40.  The  literal  meaning  is  plain,  but  with  respect  to  the 
ihidden  sense  we  must  elicit  the  truth  carefully.     The  wise 

an  employs  truth  as  an  overseer  of  and  ambassador  in  im- 
rtant  affairs,  which,  when  it  perceives  that  those  natures  are 
orthy  of  it,  abides  among  and  dwells  with  them,  correcting 
them,  and  making  them  better,  since  wisdom  is  a  very  common, 
md  equal,  and  useful  thing.  But  when,  with  reference  to  the 
ijiposite  natures,  it  sees  that  in  some  points  they  are  prepos- 
I  rously  redundant  and  in  others  altogether  deficient,  it  returns 

0  its  proper  place;  and  the  man  endowed  with  virtue  admits 

1  in  word,  putting  forth  his  hand  to  take  it,  and  in  fact 
pening  all  his  intellect  for  its  reception,  and  unfolding  it  by 
he  perfect  number,  full  and  equal,  with  all  imaginable  prompti- 
iide. 

Nor  even  then,  when  he  had  sent  her  forth  from  himself  to 
Kamine  the  natures  of  other  things,  had  he  separated  it  from 
imself,  but  had  only  acted  like  the  sun,  which  seuds  forth  his 

;ims  to  give  light  to  all  things,  because  it  is  not  at  all  con- 
--tent  with  the  character  of  his  boundless  light  to  be  separated 

all. 

Why  did  he,  after  waiting  yet  seven  other  days,  send  forth 

0  dove  a  second  time  ?t 

41.  This  is  an  excellent  example  for  life,  since  although  it 
11  behold  natures  obstinate  at  first,  still  the  hope  of  changing 
em  into  better  natures  is  scarcely  allowed  to  drop  ;  and  as  a 
udent  physician  does  not  in  a  moment  apply  a  perfect  cure  to 
lisease,  or  effect  a  complete  restoration  to  health,  but  employs 
utary  medicines  after  he  has  given  nature  an  opportunity  of 
•It  opening  the  way  to  recovery,  so  too  the  man  endowed  with 
tue  behaves  with  respect  to  the  employment  of  the  word 
ich  is  in  accordance  with  the  law  of  wisdom. 

But  the  number  seven  is  the  sacred  and  dominical  number, 

1  *  Genesis  viii.  9.  t  Genesis  viiL  10. 

B   B   2 


372  pniLO  JUD^us. 

according^  to  wliich  the  Father  of  the  universe,  when  he  made 
the  world,  is  said  to  have  looked  upon  his  work.  And  the 
contemplation  of  the  world,  and  of  all  the  things  contained  in 
it,  is  nothing  else  but  philosophy,  and  that  excellent  and  select 
portion  of  it  which  wisdom  contains,  comprehending  within 
itself  also  a  work  still  more  necessary  to  be  seen. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  *'  The  dove  returned 
a  second  time  to  him  about  evening,  having  in  her  mouth  a 
leaf  and  a  thin  branch  of  olive  ?"* 

42.  All  these  separate  points  are  selected  and  approved 
signs — the  returning,  the  returning  about  evening,  the  having 
an  olive-leaf  and  a  thin  branch  of  that  tree,  and  oil,  and  the 
having  it  in  her  mouth ;  but  yet  every  one  of  these  signs  can 
be  examined  with  a  certainty  beyond  certainty,  for  the  return 
is  distinct  from  its  previous  return,  for  that  one  bore  with  it  an 
announcement  of  nature  being  wholly  corrupted  and  rebellious, 
and  being  wholly  destroyed  by  the  deluge,  that  is  to  say,  by 
great  ignorance  and  insolence ;  but  this  second  return  brings 
the  news  of  the  world  beginning  to  repent,  but  to  find  repent- 
ance is  not  an  easy  task,  but  is  a  difficult  and  laborious 
business. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  the  dove  arrived  in  the 
evening,  having  passed  the  whole  day  from  morning  to  evening 
in  its  visitations ;  in  word,  indeed,  examining  places,  but  in 
fact  investigating  the  different  parts  of  nature  itself  by  con- 
tinual visitation,  and  seeing  them  all  clearly  from  beginning  tc 
end,  for  the  evening  is  the  indication  of  the  end. 

The  third  sign,  again,  is  its  bringing  a  leaf;  but  a  leaf  is  a 
small  part  of  a  tree,  still  it  does  not  exist  without  a  tree.  And 
the  beginning  of  displaying  repentance  is  somewhat  corre- 
sponding to  this,  since  the  beginning  of  correction  has  some 
slight  indications  about  it,  which  we  may  call  a  leaf,  by  whict 
it  appears  to  receive  guardianship,  but  can  easily  be  shaker 
off ;  so  that  the  hope  shall  in  that  case  not  be  great  of  attain- 
ing the  desired  improvement,  which  is  typified  by  the  leaf  o) 
no  other  tree  but  of  the  olive  alone,  and  oil  is  the  material  o: 
light.  For  wickedness,  as  I  have  said  before,  is  profounc 
darkness,  but  virtue  is  luminous  brilliancy,  and  repentance  if 
the  beginning  of  light.     But  you  must  not  yet  suppose  thai 

*  Genesis  viii.  11. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  373 

the  beginning  of  repentance  is  only  visible  in  branches  just 
germinating  and  beginning  to  look  green,  but  that  it  exists  too 
while  they  are  still  dry,  and  while  the  seminal  principle  is  dry 
and  quiescent. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  the  fifth  sign  is  shown,  that, 
namely,  of  the  dove  when  it  comes  bearing  a  slender  branch. 

And  the  sixth  sign  is  that  this  slender  branch  was  in  its 
mouth,  for  the  number  six  is  the  first  perfect  number,  since 
virtue  bears  in  its  mouth,  that  is  to  say  in  its  conversation,  the 
seeds  of  wisdom  and  justice,  or,  in  one  word,  of  honesty  of  the 
soul ;  and  not  only  bears  this,  but  gives  some  portion  of  parti- 
cipation in  it  even  to  the  foolish,  by  drawing  up  water  for  their 
souls,  and  irrigating  them  with  the  desire  of  repentance  for 
their  sins. 

Why  is  it  said,  "  And  Noah  knew  that  the  waters  had 
ceased  from  off  the  earth  ?"  * 

43.  The  literal  statement  is  plain,  since  if  the  leaf  had  been 

taken  up  from  off  the  water  it  would  have  been  wet  and  soaked, 

but  now  he  says  that  it  was  dry  and  slender,  as  if  it  had 

become  dry  by  being  on  the  earth  which  was  dried.     But  with 

reference  to  its  inward  meaning,  the  wise  man  takes  it  as  a 

vmbol  of  repentance,  and  wishes  to  check  the  calamities  of 

'  xcessive  obstinacy  by  taking  the  leaf,  since  it  was  not  yet  green, 

but  slender,  for  the  reason  which  has  been  already  mentioned. 

At  the  same  time  we  may  admire  the  Father  on  account  of 

his  exceeding  kindness,  for  although  corruption  had  prevailed 

)ver  all  the  men  who  lived  on  the  earth  from  the  excess  of 

lieir  iniquities,  still  there  remained  some  relics  of  antiquity 

nd  of  that  which  was  from  the  beginning,  and  a  slight  seed  of 

revious  virtues ;  by  which  it  is  intimated  nevertheless  that 

lie  memory  of  all  the  good  deeds  that  have  been  done  from 

'io  beginning  is  not  wholly  destroyed.     On  which  account  a 

rtain  prophet,  the  kinsman  and  friend  of  Moses,  uttered  an 

racle  of  this  kind,  "  If  the  omnipotent  Lord  had  not  left  us  a 

ed,  we  should  have  been  like  blind  and  barren  people,"t  able 

'ither  to  know  the  truth  nor  to  generate  it.     And  the  Chal- 

i3ans  in  their  native  language  call  blindness  and  sterility 

jdora  and  Gomorrah. 

*  Genesis  vili  11.  f  isaiah  i.  9. 


374  PIIILO  JUD^US. 

Why,  in  the  third  place,  after  seven  other  days,  did  he  again 
send  forth  the  dove,  which  did  not  again  return  to  him  ? 

44.  According  to  the  word,  the  dove  made  no  more  return 
to  him ;  but  what  in  fact  is  meant  is  virtue,  which,  however, 
is  not  an  indication  of  ahenation,  since,  as  I  have  said  before, 
she  was  not  separated  from  him  at  that  time,  but  sent  forth 
like  a  sun-beam  to  pay  a  visit  of  examination  to  the  natures  of 
others,  but  then,  not  finding  any  one  to  listen  to  her  precepts 
of  correction,  she  returns,  and  properly  comes  to  him  alone. 
But  this  time  she  is  no  longer  the  possession  of  one  single 
individual,  but  is  rather  a  common  good  to  all  those  who  have 
been  willing  to  receive  the  emanations  of  wisdom  as  if  coming 
up  from  the  earth,  those  persons,  that  is,  who  from  the  very 
beginning  have  laboured  under  a  great  thirst  of  perfect  wisdom. 

Why  in  the  six  hundred  and  first  year  of  the  life  of  Noah, 
and  on  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,  did  the  waters  of  the 
deluge  cease  from  off  the  earth  ?  * 

45.  The  word  first,  according  to  the  defect  of  time,  is  spoken 
of  with  reference  either  to  the  month  or  the  man,  and  each 
interpretation  has  reason  to  support  it ;  for  if  we  are  bound  to 
maintain  that  the  water  began  to  abate  in  the  first  month,  we 
are  equally  obliged  to  consider  that  the  sacred  historian  in- 
tended also  to  speak  of  the  seventh  month,  that  is,  of  that 
mouth  which  is  the  second  equinox,  since  the  same  month  is 
both  the  first  and  the  seventh ;  that  is  to  say,  the  first  as 
respects  nature  and  virtue,  and  the  seventh  in  point  of  time. 

Therefore  in  another  place  he  says,t  "  This  month  is  unto 
you  the  beginning  of  months,  the  first  among  the  months  oi 
the  year;"  calling  that  the  first  which  is  so  in  respect  oi 
nature  and  virtue,  and  which  as  to  number  is  in  time  the 
seventh  month,  since  the  equinox  has  its  appointed  order  iri 
regular  series,  and  in  point  of  time  is  assigned  the  better 
season  of  the  year.  But  if  you  take  that  word  first  to  have' 
reference  to  the  man,  then  it  will  be  used  with  more  truthi 
and  with  strict  propriety,  for  the  just  man  was  truly  and* 
properly  the  first,  as  in  a  vessel  the  captain  is  the  first  man 
and  in  a  state  the  prince.  But  he  is  first  not  only  in  virtue 
but  also  in  order,  inasmuch  as  in  the  very  circumstances  of  th( 

*  Genesis  viii.  13.  t  Exodus  xii.  2. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  375 

regeneration  of  the  second  sowing  of  the  human  race  he  was 
the  beginning  and  the  first. 

Moreover,  it  is  very  admirably  considered  with  reference  to 
this  passage,  that  the  deluge  took  place  during  the  life  of  the 
first  man,  and  that  again,  when  it  abated,  things  returned  to 
their  former  steadiness,  since  after  the  deluge  took  place  he 
had  to  live  by  himself  with  his  whole  family,  and  after  that 
evil  was  removed  he  alone  was  found  upon  the  earth  during 
the  latter  period  of  his  life  until  the  regeneration  of  mankind 
began. 

But  it  is  not  to  no  purpose  that  this  testimony  is  given  hoth 
of  the  preceding  portion  of  his  life,  and  also  of  the  later 
I  period,  for  he  alone  burnt  with  a  desire  for  that  genuine  life 
'  which  is  in  accordance  with  virtue,  while  all  the  rest  of  the 
world  were  hastening  on  to  death  by  reason  of  their  fatal 
wickednesses.  Therefore  of  necessity  the  evil  ceased  on  the 
six  hundred  and  first  year  of  his  life,  since  in  truth  the 
destruction  came  with  reference  to  the  sixth  number,  and 
safety  was  restored  in  unity,  since  unity  is  more  a  generative- 
ness  of  the  soul,  and  is  the  best  for  giving  life,  wherefore  also 
a  deficiency  of  water  in  the  sea  takes  place  at  the  new  moon, 
in  order  that  the  units  may  be  preferred  in  dignity  both  among 
months  and  years,  when  God  saves  those  things  which  are 
upon  the  earth ;  since  the  man  who  cultivates  just  habits  is 
called  by  the  Hebrews  in  their  native  language  Noah,  but  by 
the  Greeks  he  is  named  A/xa/og ;  however,  he  is  not  exempted 
from  the  laws  affecting  the  body. 

For  although  he  is  not  subordinate  to  the  power  of  others, 

jbut  is  a  prince,  yet  still,  because  he  is  nevertheless  devoted  to 

death,  as  he  is  dead,  the  principle  of  that  number  six  is 

connected  with  unity  ;  since  it  was  not  in  one  year  taken 

separately   that  the   deluge    ceased,    but   together   with    the 

number  six  (as  contained  in  the  number  six  hundred),  which 

is  connected  with  it  according  to  corporeality  and  inequality ; 

jsince  the  other  being  a  long  number  is  in  the  first  place  six 

|(that  is  to  say,  six  hundred)  ;  on  which  account  it  is  said,  in 

the  six  hundred  and  first  year.     But  the  just  man  is  so  in  his 

2;eneration,  not  in  that  which  is  general,  nor  again  in  that 

in  which  he  is  just  by  comparison  with  the  general  corruption, 

but  according  to  some  especial  generation ;  for  his  generation 

l>ears  with  it  a  certain  comparison.     But  that  man  also  is 


376  PIIILO  JUDiEUS. 

deserving  of  praise  whom  God  selected  beyond  all  other  gene- 
rations as  being  considered  worthy  of  life,  placing  a  limit  to 
that  life,  and  to  him  as  being  about  to  be  both  the  end  and  the 
beginning  of  each  generation  and  of  each  age ;  the  end  of  that 
which  is  corruptible,  the  beginning  of  that  which  is  to  follow. 
And  truly  it  is  much  more  proper  to  praise  him  who, 
bending  upwards  with  his  whole  body,  looked  up  by  reason  of 
bis  friendship  with  God. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "And  Noah 
opened  the  roof  of  the  ark?"* 

46,  The  text  stands  in  need  of  no  explanation.  But  with 
reference  to  its  meaning,  because  the  ark  is  symbolically  our 
body,  we  must  consider  that  that  is  spoken  of  as  the  roof  of 
our  body,  which  covers  it  and  for  a  long  time  preserves  its 
strength ;  such  is  concupiscence,  by  which  the  body  is  pre- 
served and  made  to  last,  in  a  moderate  degree,  that  is,  and  in 
accordance  with  the  law  of  nature ;  as  also  it  is  dissolved  by 
pain. 

When  therefore  the  intellect  is  attracted  by  a  desire  for 
heavenly  things  it  wishes  to  spring  upwards,  and  in  that  way 
it  bursts  asunder  every  appearance  of  concupiscence ;  so  that 
that  thing  being  as  it  were  removed  which  threw  a  veil  of 
shade  over  it  and  obscured  it,  it  might  be  able  to  apply  its 
senses  to  undisguised  and  incoi^oreal  natures. 

Why  is  it  that  the  earth  was  dried  up  in  the  seventh  month, 
and  on  the  twenty-seventli  day  ?t 

47.  Do  you  not  see  that  he  here  calls  that  month  the 
seventh,  which  a  little  while  before  he  styles  the  first?  for  the 
seventh,  as  far  as  relates  to  time,  is  the  same,  as  I  have  said 
before,  as  that  which  is  the  first  in  nature,  being  the  beginning 
of  the  equinox.  But  it  is  with  great  propriety  that  the  begin- 
ning of  the  deluge  is  fixed  to  the  seventh  month,  and  the 
twenty-seventh  day  of  the  month;  and  again,  the  end  andt 
cessation  of  the  deluge  is  fixed  to  the  same  seventh  month  and 
the  same  day ;  for,  both  the  deluge  and  the  removal  of  life 
took  place  at  the  equinox ;  the  principle  of  which  we  have 
indicated  a  little  time  ago  ;  for  the  seventh  month  is  found  to 
be  synonymous  with  months  and  days  of  this  time,  and  then 

*  Genesis  viii.  13.  t  Genesis  viii.  14. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  377 

I'^ain,  the  twenty-seventh  day  occurs  with   the  same  meaning, 
when  the  ark  rested  on  the  mountains. 

This  is  the  month  which  by  nature  is  the  seventh,  but  in 
loint  of  time  the  first,  which  in  fact  is  the  month  of  the 
(juinox.  Therefore,  at  the  equinoxes  a  power  of  selection  is 
^nven  for  seven  months  and  twenty-seven  days ;  for  the  deluge 
()i)k  place  in  the  seventh  month,  on  which  the  vernal  equinox 
akes  place  ;  so  that  it  is  in  time  the  seventh,  but  in  nature 
^he  first. 

And  the  cessation  of  the  deluge  and  the  display  of  mercy 
jieiong  to  the  same  measure,  when  the  ark  rested  on  the  tops  of 
he  mountains  ;  again  in  truth  in  the  seventh  month,  but  not 
he  same  month,  but  in  that  in  which  the  autumnal  equinox 
ccurs ;  that  is  to  say,  the  seventh  by  nature,  but  the  first  in 
oint  of  time. 
But  the  most  perfect  cure,  the  fact  of  the  evil  being  wholly 
ried  up,  is  again  fixed  to  the  seventh  month  and  the  twenty- 
eventh  day  of  the  vernal  season ;   in  order  that   both  the 
eginning  and  the  end  of  the  deluge  might  find  its  boundary 
t  the  same  season  ;  and  that  the  middle  season  when  human 
fe  is  repaired,  is  fixed  to  the  intermediate  season. 
In  the  meantime  that  expression  is  more  certainly  to  be 
laserved,  namely,  that  the  whole  year,  by  a  strict  computation 
r  days,  made  the  deluge   equal  to  the  exact  time  of   the 
inedy ;  for  it  began  in  the  six  hundredth  year  of  Noah  s  age, 
1  the  seventh  month,  and  on  the  twenty-seventh  day  ;    so 
lilt  the  whole  space  of  the  intermediate  time  completed  a 
rfect  year,  the  beginning  being  placed  at  the  vernal  equinox, 
d  the  flood  also  ending  equally  at  the  same  epoch  of  the 
Tnal  equinox.     And  in  this  manner,  after  all  things  on  earth, 
ings  full  of  fruit,  had  undergone  destruction,  as  I  have  said 
fore,  now  that  the  persons  who  used  the  fruits  were  also 
>troyed,  the  earth  being  wholly  relieved  of  all  evil  was  again 
md  full  of  seeds  and  fruit-bearing  trees,  according  to  the 
oduction  of  spring ;  for  he  thought  it  reasonable  that,  as  the 
rth  after  it  had  suffered  the  deluge  was  in  a  similar  con- 
ion  when  dried  again  to  that  in  which  it  was  before,  so  it 
'>uld  now  show  itself,  and  pay  the  debt  which  it  owed  to 
lure. 

Nor  ought  any  one  to  wonder  that  in  one  day  the  earth  when 
t  to  itself  produced  every  thing  by  divine  virtue,  both  seeds 


UC 


.^r 


378  PHILO  JUD^US. 

and  trees,  all  complete,  entirely  and  suddenly,  with  perfect  ai 
excellent  herbs,  and  grain,  and  plants,  and  fruits  ;  since  in  tl 
creation  of  the  world  on  one  day  of  the  six  he  finished  ar 
brought  to  perfection  the  whole  generation  of  plants.  But  tl 
present  fruits  were  already  perfect  in  themselves,  and  produc( 
all  kinds  of  fruits  in  a  manner  suitable  and  corresponding 
the  season  of  spring ;  for  all  things  are  possible  to  God,  wl 
scarcely  requires  time  to  effect  any  thing. 

Why  was  it  that  after  the  earth  was  dried,  Noah  did  n* 
depart  out  of  the  ark,  before  he  had  received  a  fresh  commar 
from  God,  for  God  said  to  Noah :  "Go  forth,  thou,  and  tl 
wife,  and  thy  sons,  and  thy  sons'  wives,  together  with  all  tl 
rest  of  the  living  creatures  ?"  * 

48.  Justice  is  commonly  inspired  with  fear,  as  on  the  oth' 
hand  injustice  is  rash  and  self-confident.  But  the  proof  of 
fear  of  God  is  the  not  giving  up  more  to,  or  guiding  one's  s^ 
more  by  one's  own  reason  than  by  God.  And  above  all  oth 
men  it  was  natural  for  that  man  who  had  seen  the  whole  ear 
suddenly  become  an  immense  sea,  to  suspect  that  it  might  I 
possible  that  the  same  misfortune  would  again  return. 

Besides  this,  he  also  gave  a  thought  to  the  correspondii 
consequence,  namely,  that  as  he  had  entered  into  the  arkjJ 
the  command  of  God,  so  it  was  fitting  that  he  should  al" 
leave  it  at  the  command  of  the  same  being  ;  for  let  no  oi 
believe  that  he  can  ever  do  any  thing  perfectly  unless  G< 
himself  guides  him  by  his  preventing  precepts. 

Why,  when  they  entered  into  the  ark  was  the  order  as  f( 
lows  :  first  himself  and  his  sons,  and  after  them  his  wife  ai 
his  sons'  wives,  but  when  they  went  forth  the  order  w 
changed,  for  the  sacred  historian  says,  "  Noah  and  his  wj 
went  forth,  and  after  them  his  sons  and  his  sons'  wives  ?"t 

49.  By  the  literal  statement  the  sacred  writer  gives  i 
obscure  intimation,  in  the  order  in  which  they  entered,  that  tl 
propagation  of  seed  was  taken  away,  but  by  the  order  of  th( 
egress  he  implies  the  continuance  of  the  process  of  generatioi 
since,  while  they  are  entering,  the  sons  are  mentioned  togetb 
with  their  father,  and  the  daughters-in-law  with  their  mothi 
in-law,  but  when  they  are  going  forth  the  wives  are  all  mat 

*  Genesis  viii.  16.  +  Genesis  viii.  18. 


A 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  379 

lin,  the  father  being  accompanied  by  his  wife,  and  each  of 
nis  sons  also  by  his  wife,  since  he  chose  to  show  by  fact 
(rather  than  by  words  everything  which  it  is  fitting  for  his 
friends  to  do. 

Moreover  he  had  in  express  words,  and  not  by  any  vague 

intimations,  commanded  the  men,  as  they  were  about  to  enter 

11  to  the  ark,  that  they  while  there  were  to  keep  themselves 

rom  connection  with  women;  but  now  that  they  were  about 

)  depart  from  it,  he  plainly  intimates  to  them  that  offspring 

s  to  be  begotten  in  accordance  with  nature,  by  the  order  in 

vhich  he  appoints  their  going  forth ;  nor  did  he  employ  words 

'Illy,  in  order  to  make  his  proclamation  about  the  state  of  the 

I'k,  saying,  "  After  a  destruction  of  all  things  on  earth,  of  such 

character  and  of  such  extent,  do  not  indulge  in  pleasures,  for 

hat  is  not  decorous.     It  is  sufficient,  however,  for  you  to  have 

1  ceived  your  lives;  but  while  you  are  actually  in  the  ark,  to 

ilscend  up  into  the  marriage  bed  with  your  wives  would  be  a 

iroof  of  your  being  devoted  to  lasciviousness." 

And,  indeed,  it  was  natural  for  them,  as  being  relations  to 
(iiose  who  were  being  destroyed,  to  be  moved  with  compassion 
l)r  the  perishing  human  race,  especially  because  they  them- 
Ives  also  were  still  in  doubt  whether,  from  some  quarter  or 
ither,  calamity  might  not  fall  also  upon  themselves ;  and  be- 
1  des  these  considerations  it  was  absurd,  while  those  who  were 
live  were  perishing,  for  those  in  the  ark  to  be  contriving  that 
ihers  who  did  not  exist  should  be  born,  being  warm  at  an 
nreasonable  time,  and  burning  with  an   inopportune  desire. 
ut  after  the  anger  of  God  ceased,  then  he  commanded  those 
ho  had  been  delivered  from  the  calamity,  when  they  had  again 
nie  forth  out  of  the  ark  in  order,  to  apply  themselves  to  the 
ocreation  of  a  succeeding  generation,  when  he  tells  us,  that 
10  men  did  not  go  forth  with  the  men,  nor  the  women  with 
10  women,  but  the  wives  with  their  husbands. 
But  with  respect  to  the  inner  meaning  of  this  fact,  we  must 
y  this,  that  when  the  mind  is  about  to  wash  off  and  cleanse 
vay  its  sins,  then  it  is  fit  for  male  to  live  with  male,  that  is 
say,  for  the  intellect,  the  chief  part  of  the  man,  to  be  as  a 
ther,  united  to  each  separate  thought,  as  a  father  to  his  sons, 
^ilhout  any  admixture  of  the  female  race,  which  is  in  accord- 
ice  with  the  outward  sense ;  since  it  is  a  time  of  battle,  in 
liich  it  is  necessary  to  keep  the  order  of  the  cohort  distinct. 


380  PHILO  JUD.EUS. 

and  to  preserve  it  strictly  in  order,  that  the  soldiers  may  no 
be  mingled  in  confusion,  and  so,  instead  of  gaining  a  victor^ 
over  the  enemy,  be  conquered  themselves ;  but  when  the  puri 
fication  is  completed,  and  when  the  soul  is  dried  up  from  al 
ignorance,  and  when  a  complete  deliverance  from  everything 
pernicious  has  taken  place,  then  it  becomes  the  man  to  coUec 
his  scattered  forces  together,  not  in  order  that  masculine  coun 
sels  may  be  rendered  effeminate  by  softness,  but  that  th( 
female  race,  that  is  to  say,  the  outward  senses,  may  clothe  them 
selves  with  the  vigour  of  the  male,  attaining  to  masculine  coun 
sels,  and  from  their  receiving  seed  for  the  production  of  { 
generation ;  so  that,  from  this  time  forth  they  may  cherish,  ir 
all  things,  sentiments  of  wisdom,  and  honour,  and  justice,  ani 
courage,  and,  in  one  word,  of  virtue.  But,  besides  this,  it  wil 
be  reasonable  also  to  take  notice,  that  when  once  a  confusion 
in  tlie  similitude  of  a  deluge,  has  overwhelmed  the  intellect| 
and  when  the  different  senses,  being  perplexed  by  the  affair 
of  this  world,  like  so  many  bulwarks  erected  against  them 
begin  to  quarrel,  it  is  utterly  impossible  that  any  one  shoul 
be  able,  either  to  sow,  or  to  conceive,  or  to  generate  any  goo( 
thing.  But  when  all  the  hostile  attacks  of  various  agitatiou 
and  passions  are  checked,  and  when  the  ceaseless  invasions  o 
lawless  counsels  are  repressed,  then  the  soul  produces  virtU' 
and  excellent  works,  as  the  most  fertile  portion  of  the  earth 
■when  dried,  produces  fruits. 

Why  did  Noah  build  an  altar  without  having  been  com 
manded  to  do  so  ?* 

5vO.  The  requital  of  gratitude  which  is  due  to  God  ought  t" 
be  offered  to  him  without  command,  and  without  any  delay  o 
hesitation,  showing  the  mind  to  be  free  from  vices  ;  for  it  be 
comes  that  man,  who  has  been  endued  with  blessings  by  God 
to  offer  him  his  thanks  with  a  grateful  and  willing  mind ;  bu 
he  who  delays  to  do  so,  waiting  for  an  express  command,  ij 
ungrateful,  being  as  it  were  compelled  by  necessity  to  honou 
his  benefactor. 

Why  is  he  said  to  have  built  an  altar  to  God,  and  not  t 
the  Lord  ?t 

51.  In  passages  of  beneficence  and  regeneration,  as  at  th 
*  Genesis  viiu  20.  +  Ibid 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  381 

|creation  of  the  world,  the  sacred  writer  only  refers  to  the  be- 
jneficent  virtue  of  the  Creator,  by  which  he  makes  everything 
iia  its  integrity,  and  he  implies  this  by  concealing  the  royal 
name  of  Lord,  as  one  which  bears  with  it  supreme  authority ; 
^therefore  now  also,  since  what  he  is  describing  is  the  begin- 
ning of  the  renewed  generation  of  mankind,  he  borrows  for  his 
scription  the  beneficent  virtue,  which  bears  the  name   of 
ij ;   for  he  used  the   kingly  attribute,  which    declares   his 
iiiperial   power,   by  which  he  is  called   Lord,  when  he  was 
scribing  the  punishment  inflicted  by  the  flood. 

What  is  the  meanmg  of  the  statement,  "  He  took  of  the 
■attle  and  of  the  flying  animals,  and  he  ofiered  whole  burnt 
)fferings  on  the  altar  ?"* 

52.  All  this  is  said  with  reference  to  an  inward  meaning, 
ioth  because  he  received  everything  from  God  as  a  favour  and 
[ift ;  and  also  because  he  took  of  the  clean  sorts  of  animals, 
,nd  burnt  those  which  were  unpolluted  and  clean,  as  entire 
,nd  pure  first  fruits ;  for  they  are  proper  victims  for  good  men 

0  offer,  and  ai'e  themselves  entire,  being  full  of  integrity  ;  and 
hey  may  be  classed  as  fruits,  for  fruit  is  the  end,  for  the  sake 
f  which  the  plant  exists. 

This  indeed  is  the  literal  statement;  but  with  respect  to 
he  inner  meaning,  the  clean  cattle  and  the  clean  birds  are 
be  outward  senses  and  intellect  of  the  wise  man,  with  the 
aoughts  which  are  received  in  his  mind ;  all  which  things  it 

1  reasonable  to  offer  in  their  integrity  as  entire  and  perfect 
nit,  in  the  way  of  a  display  of  gratitude  to  the  Father,  and  to 
flfer  them  to  him  as  an  unpolluted  and  clean  oblation  of  a 
ictim. 

Why  does  he  offer  his  sacrifice  to  the  beneficent  virtue  of 
od,  but  the  acceptance  of  it  takes  place  by  means  of  both  the 
mUties  of  the  Lord  and  God,  for  Moses  says,  "And  the 
ord  God  smelled  a  savour  of  sweetness  ?"f 

53.  He  says  this  since,  when  unexpectedly,  after  all  hope 
j  gone,  we  are  preserved  from  dangers  which  are  coming  over 
I,  we  then,  looking  solely  at  the  beneficence  of  him  who  has 
•eserved  us,  do,  on  account  of  our  joy,  display  ingratitude, 
id  refer  the  benefits  which  we  have  received  rather  to  the  be- 

*  Genesis  viiL  20.  t  Ibid. 


382  PHTLO   JUDiEUS. 

neficent  power  than  to  the  Lora.  But  the  beneficent  preserver 
himself,  by  means  of  both  his  attributes,  looks  down  upon  and 
honourably  accepts  grateful  minds,  that  he  may  not  appear  tc 
halt  in  rewarding  them ;  but  he  declares  that  such  a  display  oj 
gratitude  is  pleasing  to  both  attributes  of  the  one  God.* 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  *'And  the  Lord  God 
said,  repenting  him,  I  will  not  again  proceed  to  curse  the 
earth  for  the  works  of  man,  for  the  thoughts  of  the  mind  oJ 
man  are  toward,  and  are  diligently  and  ceaselessly  exercised  in, 
wickedness  from  his  youth  up ;  therefore  I  will  not  now  pro- 
ceed to  smite  all  living  flesh  as  I  have  done  at  other  times  T'-\ 

54.  The  reasons  alleged  appear  to  indicate  a  change  oi 
purpose,  which  is  an  affection  not  usual  nor  akin  to  the  divine 
virtue ;  for  the  dispositions  of  mankind  are  variable  and  incon 
stant,  so  that  all  affairs  among  them  are  altogether  uncertain ; 
but  with  God  nothing  is  uncertain,  nothing  incomprehensible, 
for  he  is  a  being  of  mighty  and  consistent  determination  ;  how 
then,  when  reasons  of  the  same  kind  are  present  to  him,  be- 
cause he  was  forsooth  aware  from  the  very  beginning  that  the 
mind  of  man  was  deliberately  inclined  to  wallow  in  wickedness 
from  his  youth  on,  could  he  have  originally  intended  to  destroy 
the  human  race  by  a  flood;  and  yet  aftei'wards  say,  that  he 
did  not  intend  to  destroy  it  any  more,  when  the  same  evils 
still  exist  in  the  mind  ?  But  we  must  think  that  every  kind  ol 
expression  of  this  sort  is,  by  law,  connected  with  learning  and 
the  utility  of  instruction  rather  than  with  the  nature  of  truth, 
since  there  are,  as  it  were,  two  kinds  which  occur  in  the  whole 
course  of  the  law ;  in  the  first  place,  as  it  is  said,  "  Not  as  a 
man ;"  and  in  the  second  place,  as  it  is  said,  "  As  a  man,"  the 
one  God  is  believed  to  instruct  his  son. 

That  first  expression  relates  to  the  actual  truth ;  for,  in  real 
fact,  God  is  not  as  a  man,  nor  again,  as  the  sun,  nor  as  the 
heaven,  nor  as  the  world,  which  is  perceptible  by  the  outward 
senses,  but  as  God,  if  it  is  justifiable  to  assert  that  also  ;  since 
that  most  happy  and  blessed  being  will  not  endure  similitude, 
or  comparison,  or  enigmatical  description ;  nay,  rather  he  sur- 

*  Or,  "  But  the  one  God  very  much  likes  to  act  by  means  of  both  his 
attributes."' — Note  to  the  Latin  version. 
f  Genesis  viii.  21. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  383 

Msses  even  blessedness  and  felicity  itself,  and  whatever  can  be 

;L,dned  as  better  than  and  preferable  to  them. 

iiut  the  second  expression  relates  to  instruction  and  direc- 

m,  I  mean  the  express  words,  "  As  a  man,"  in  order  that  it 

v  be  observed,  that  he  is  willing  to  impress  us  beings,  born 

I  the  earth,  lest  perchance  we  should  unceasingly  incur  his 

iiger  and  his  chastisement  by  our  implacable  hostility  to  him, 

ithout  any  peace  ;  for  it  is  sufficient  for  him  to  be  roused  and 

iil)ittered  against  us  once,  and  once  to  exact  vengeance  against 

liners;  but  to  inflict  punishment  over  and  over  again  for  the 

me  thing  is  the  conduct  of  a  savage  and  ferocious  dispo- 

jtion :  since,  says  he,  "  when  I  shall  inflict  deserved  retribu- 

^n,  as  is  possible,   on  every  one,  I  will  cause  a   burning 

illection  of  my  design  to  be  preserved." 

Therefore  behold,  the  sacred  historian  has  excellently  ex- 

essed  himself,    saying,  "  That  God  observed  in  his  mind," 

r  his  mind  and  disposition  rejoice  in  a  superior  degree  of 

nstancy ;  but   our  wills    are  found  to  be  inconsistent  and 

.cillating,  on  which  account  we  cannot  be  properly  said  to 

iserve  and  think  with  our  minds,  since  it  is  by  the  thoughts 

at  the  passage  of  the  mind  is  allowed  to  take  place,*  but  the 

iman  intellect  is  unable  to    be  extended  over  everything, 

ice  it  is  incapable  of  penetrating  all  things  in  a  perfect  and 

itable  manner. 

But  that  expression,  "  I  will  not  proceed  any  more  to  curse 

8  earth,"  is  used  with  great  propriety,  for  it  is  not  becoming 

add  more  curses  to  what  has  already  been  done,  because  the 

'ils  that  have  been  inflicted  are  already  complete ;  because, 

liough  they  are  in  some  sense  imperfect,  inasmuch  as  the 

jther  is  kind  and  merciful,  and  most  humane,   still  he  is 

her  inclined  to  alleviate  the  evil   than  to  add  to   men's 

ery.     But  that  is  as  it  were  the  same  thing,  according  to  a 

tjiimon  proverb,  to  wash  a  brick,  or  to  draw  water  properly, 

in  wholly  to  eradicate  wickedness,  with  all  its  deeply  ira- 

ijnted  tokens  from  the  mind  of  man ;  for  if  it  is  implanted  in 

i  it  first,  it  does  not  exist  accidentally,  but  is  engraven  deeply 

c  it  and  clings  to  it. 

)Ut  since  the  mind  is  a  potential  and  principal  part  of  the 

"  If  you  connect  the  Armenian  words  in  a  different  manner,  the 
8  -:e  will  be  '  meditation  is  the  purification  of  the  course  of  the  mind,' 
•  this  is  perhaps  better." — Note  hy  the  Latin  Translator. 


384  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

soul,  lie  introduces  that  word  "  diligently;"  but  that  which 
has  been  weighed  with  diligence  and  care  is  exquisite 
thought,  examined  more  certainly  than  certainty  itself.  But 
this  diligence  does  not  tend  to  any  one  evil,  but  as  is  plain, 
to  mischief,  and  to  all  mischief;  nor  does  it  exist  in  a  per- 
functory manner ;  but  man  is  devoted  to  it  from  his  youth, 
not  only  in  a  manner,  but  from  his  very  cradle,  as  if  he 
were  in  some  degree  united  to,  and  nourished,  and  bred  up 
with  sin. 

But  yet  G-od  says,  "  I  will  not  any  more  smite  all  flesh ;" 
giving  notice  that  he  will  not,  at  any  future  time,  destroy 
every  portion  of  mankind  altogether,  but  only  single  indi-j 
viduals,  in  ever  such  great  numbers,  who  perpetrate  un-' 
speakable  wickednesses ;  for  he  does  not  leave  wickedness 
unpunished,  nor  does  he  grant  it  liberty  or  impunity,  but 
indulging  his  care  for  the  human  race  on  account  of  his, 
original  design,  he  of  necessity  fixes  destruction  as  a  punish-) 
ment  for  sinners. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Sowing-time  and 
harvest,  cold  and  heat,  summer  and  spring,  shall  not  cease 
day  nor  night?"* 

55.  If  taken  literally  this  expression  signifies  the  con- 
tinuation of  the  duration  of  the  annual  seasons,  and  that 
the  earthly  temperature  adapted  to  animals  and  plants  is 
not  again  to  be  destroyed  ;  since  indeed,  if  the  weather 
is  corrupted  it  would  corrupt  them  likewise,  and  if  it  is 
preserved  in  its  existing  state  it  would  preserve  them  also 
safe  and  sound;  for  it  is  according  to  the  weather  and 
temperature  that  all  animals  and  plants  are  preserved  safe 
and  sound,  without  any  infirmity,  being  accustomed,  in 
some  measure,  to  be  produced  separately,  in  an  admirable 
way,  and  to  grow  up  together.  But  nature  is  like  a  har- 
mony, composed  of  opposite  sounds,  both  flat  and  sharp; 
for  thus,  also,  the  world  is  compounded  of  opposite  qualities, 
for  when,  in  the  first  place,  the  mortal  comm.ixtures  of  coid 
and  heat,  of  moisture  and  dryness,  preserve  their  natural 
order,  without  any  confusion,  they  are  themselves  a  cause 
which  prevents  destruction  from  overwhelming  everything 
upon  the  earth. 

•  Genesis  viii.  22. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  385 

But  if  we  regard  the  inward  sense  of  the  passage,  the 
seed  time  is  the  beginning  and  the  harvest  time  is  the  end, 
lud  both  the  beginning  and  the  end  are  concurrent  causes 
4"  safet)^,  for  either  thing  alone  is  by  itself  imperfect,  be- 
cause the  beginning  requires  an  end,  and  the  end  has  a 
natural  inclination  for  the  beginning;  but  cold  and  heat 
hriug  round  winter  and  autumn;  for  the  autumn  is  fiery, 
but  only  in  such  a  degree  as  succeeding  in  its  annual  re- 
volution to  cool  the  fiery  summer. 

And,  symbolically,  with  reference  to  the  mind,  cold 
indicates  fear,  since  it  causes  terror  and  trepidation;  but 
heat  indicates  anger,  because  an  angry  disposition  bears  in 
itself  a  resemblance  to  fiame  and  fire ;  for  it  is  necessary 
that  those  things  should  always  exist  and  always  remain 
irnong  created  and  corruptible  beings;  since  summer  and 
pring  have  been  instituted  for  the  production  of  fruits; 
spring  for  the  perfecting  of  the  seeds,  and  summer  for  the 
perfecting  of  fruits  and  the  buds  of  trees. 

These  things  indeed  are  discerned  symbolically  in  addition 
to  the  inward  sense  of  the  Avords,  producing  a  double  fruit ; 
what  is  necessary  being  computed  in  the  season  of  spring, 
and  what  is  superfluous  in  the  summer.  Therefore  neces- 
sary food  is  for  the  most  part  for  the  body,  being  whatever 
is  produced  freely  from  seeds ;  as  virtues  are  necessary  for 
the  soul.  But  as  many  fruits  as  come  by  way  of  excess 
from  trees  in  summer,  besides  the  advantage  which  they  are 
to  the  body,  do  also  bring  corporeal  goods  to  the  mind,  as 
external  advantages :  for  these  external  advantages  are 
subservient  to  the  body,  and  the  body  is  subservient  to  the 
mind,  and  the  mind  to  Grod.  But  day  and  night  are  tlie 
measures  of  times  and  numbers  ;  and  time  and  number  exist 
without  interruption.  Day  indicates  lucid  wisdom,  and 
night  betokens  obscure  folly. 

Why  was  it  that  God,  blessing  Noah  and  his  sons,  said, 
•  Increase,  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth,  and  rule 
iver  it ;  and  let  your  fear  and  the  dread  of  you  be  upon  all 
)i'asts,  and  upon  flying  fowls,  and  upon  reptiles,  and  upon 
-he  Ushes  which  1  have  placed  under  your  hand?  "  * 

56.  This  devotion  of  the  inferior  animals  to  man,  God 
i  *  Genesis  ix.  1. 

I     VOL.  IV.  C   0 


386  PHILO   JUD/EUS. 

also  at  the  beginning  of  the  creation  bestowed  on  the  sixth 
day  upon  man,  after  he  had  created  him  in  his  own  image ; 
for  the  scripture  saith,  "  And  Grod  made  man ;  in  the  image 
of  God  created  he  him ;  male  and  female  created  he  them. 
And  Grod  blessed  them,  and  said,  Be  fruitful,- and  multiply, 
and  replenish  the  earth  ;  and  be  ye  lords  over  it,  and  be  ye 
rulers  of  the  jBshes,  and  of  the  flying  fowls,  and  of  every 
creeping  thing  that  creepeth  upon  the  earth." 

And  did  he  not  by  these  words  evidently  intimate  that 
Noah,  at  the  beginning  of  what  we  may  call  the  second 
creation  of  mankind,  was  found  equal  in  honour  to  that 
creature  who  in  the  first  instance  was  made  as  to  his  form 
in  the  likeness  of  himself?  Therefore  he  equally  assigned 
both  to  the  one  and  to  the  other  the  principality  and  power 
over  all  the  creatures  that  live  upon  the  earth. 

But  do  thou  diligently  take  notice  that  he  showed  this 
man,  who  at  the  time  of  the  deluge  was  the  only  just  man 
and  the  king  of  all  the  creatures  which  live  upon  the  earth, 
to  be  equal  in  honour,  not  to  the  identical  man  who  was  first 
created  and  formed  out  of  the  earth,  but  to  that  one  who 
was  made  according  to  the  likeness  and  form  of  the  true  in- 
corporeal entity,  to  whom  also  he  gives  power,  making  him 
a  king,  not  the  very  created  man  (or  the  man  formed  out  of 
the  earth),  but  him  who  is  according  to  his  form  and 
similitude,  that  is  to  say,  incorporeal. 

Wherefore  also  the  creation  of  that  man,  who  as  to  his 
form  is  incorporeal,  was  marked  to  have  taken  place  on  the 
sixth  day,  in  accordance  with  the  perfect  number  six ;  but 
the  creation  of  that  man  who  was  created  after  the  com- 
pletion of  the  world  and  subsequent  to  the  generation  of  all 
animals  on  the  seventh  day,  because  it  is  after  that  that  the 
manly  figure  was  fashioned  out  of  clay.  Therefore  after  the 
days  of  generation  he  says,  "on  the  seventh  day  of  the 
world ;"  for  Grod  had  not  yet  rained  upon  the  earth,  and  no 
man  did  exist  who  could  cultivate  the  earth.  And  then  he 
proceeds  to  say,  "  But  God  formed  a  man  out  of  the  clay  of 
the  earth,  and  breathed  into  his  face  the  breath  of  life,  and 
man  became  a  living  soul." 

Therefore  how  he  can  be  made  worthy  of  the  same  kingly 
power  according  to  the  image  of  the  man  thus  formed,  he,  I 
mean,  who  is  the  beginning  of  the  second  creation  of  maii- 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  S87 

kind,  is  indicated  by  the  letter  of  the  history  that  relates 
these  events. 

But  with  reference  to  the  inward  sense  of  the  passage  we 
must  give  an  explanation  in  the  following  manner.  God 
wills  that  the  souls  of  wise  men  should  increase  in  the 
magnitude  and  multitude  of  the  beauty  of  their  virtues,  and 
should  fill  the  mind  as  if  it  were  the  earth  with  those 
beauties,  leaving  no  portion  empty  and  void  so  as  to  become 
occupied  by  folly.  And  he  wills  also  that  they  should  rule 
over,  and  strike  terror  into,  and  inflict  alarm  upon  all 
beasts ;  that  is  to  say,  he  wills  that  all  wickedness  should 
be  subdued  by  their  will,  since  wickedness  is  of  an  untamed 
and  savage  nature.  Also  he  willed  that  they  should  be 
lords  over  all  flying  fowls,  which  by  reason  of  their  lightness 
are  raised  on  high,  being  armed  with  courage  and  empty 
pride,  and  which  thus  cause  the  greatest  mischief,  being 
scarcely  controlled  at  all  by  fear.  Moreover,  he  made  them 
rulers  over  all  creeping  things,  which  are  the  symbols  of 
destructive  vices,  for  they  creep  through  the  whole  soul, 
namely,  concupiscence,  desire,  sadness,  and  cowardice, 
striking  and  goading ;  as  also  they  are  indicated  by  the 
fishes,  which  eagerly  cultivate  a  moist  and  delicate  life,  but 
one  which  is  far  from  being  sober,  wise,  or  lasting. 

Why  does  God  say,  "Every  creeping  thing  which  lives 
shall  be  to  you  for  food  ?  "  * 

57.  Creeping  things  are  of  a  twofold  nature ;  some  being 
venomous,  and  others  domestic.  The  venomous  ones  are 
serpents,  which,  instead  of  feet,  use  their  bellies  and  breasts, 
creeping  upon  the  earth ;  but  the  domestic  ones  are  those 
which  have  legs  above  their  feet.  This  is  the  literal 
meaning  of  the  statement. 

But  if  we  look  to  the  inward  sense  of  it,  then  the  creeping 
things  represent  the  foul  vices,  but  the  clean  ones  repre- 
sent joy ;  for  in  connexion  with  the  passion  of  concupiscence 
there  will  exist  joy  and  pleasure ;  and  in  connexion  with 
desire  there  will  be  will  and  counsel,  and  in  connexion  with 
sorrow  goading  and  compunction,  and  in  connexion  with 
avidity  there  will  be  fear. 

Therefore  such  disordered  perturbations  of  the  passions 
•  Genesis  ix.  3. 

c  c  2 


388  PIIILO   JUDiEUS. 

threaten  souls  with  death  and  destruction ;  but  the  joys  do 
really  live,  as  he  himself  has  warned  us  in  an  allegory ;  and 
they  also  give  life  to  those  who  possess  them. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  As  the  greeu 
herb  I  have  given  you  all  things  ?  "  * 

58.  Some  persons  say  that  by  this  expression,  "As  the 
green  herb  I  have  given  you  all  things,"  the  eating  of  flesh 
w^as  permitted.  But  I  say  that  even  though  Grod  had 
intended  to  give  that  permission,  still  that  before  all  things 
he  must  have  intended  to  establish  by  law  the  necessary  use 
of  herbs,  that  is  to  say  of  vegetables.  And  under  the 
general  name  of  herb  he  includes  all  the  other  additional 
descriptions  of  green  food,  without  mentioning  them  ex- 
pressly in  the  law.  But  now  the  power  of  this  command  is 
adapted  not  to  one  nation  alone  among  all  the  select  nations 
of  the  earth  which  are  desirous  of  wisdom,  among  which 
religious  continence  is  honoured,  but  to  all  mankind,  who 
cannot  possibly  be  universally  prohibited  from  eating  flesh. 

Nevertheless,  perhaps  the  present  expression  has  no  re- 
ference to  eating  food,  but  rather  to  the  possession  of  the 
power  to  do  so ;  for  in  fact  every  herb  is  not  necessarily 
good  to  eat,  nor  again  is  it  the  uniform  and  invariable  food 
of  all  uniform  living  animals ;  since  God  said  that  some 
herbs  were  poisonous  and  deadly,  and  yet  they  are  included  , 
in  the  number  all.  Perhaps  therefore,  I  say,  he  means  to 
express  this,  that  all  brute  beasts  are  subjected  to  the 
power  of  man,  as  we  sow  herbs  and  take  care  of  them  by 
the  cultivation  of  the  land. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  You  shall  not 
eat  flesh  in  the  blood  of  its  life  ?  "  f 

59.  God  appears  by  this  command  to  indicate  that  the 
blood  is  the  substance  of  the  soul ;  I  mean  of  that  soul 
which  exists  by  the  external  senses  and  by  vitality,  not  of 
that  which  is  spoken  of  with  a  certain  especial  pre-eminence, 
being  the  rational  and  intellectual  soul ;  for  there  are  three 
parts  of  the  human  soul ;  one  the  nutritive  part,  another 
that  which  is  connected  with  the  external  senses,  and  the 
third  that  which  exists  in  reason.     Therefore  the  rational 

*  Genesis  ix.  3.  +  Genesis  ix  4. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  389 

part  is  the  substance  of  the  divine  spirit  according  to  the 
sacred  writer  Moses :  for  in  his  account  of  the  creation  of 
the  world,  he  says,  "  God  breathed  into  his  face  the  breath 
of  life,"  as  being  what  was  to  constitute  his  life.  But  of 
that  part  of  the  soul  which  is  connected  with  the  external 
senses  and  with  vitality,  blood  is  the  substance  ;  for  he  says 
in  another  place,  "The  blood  exists  in  every  breath  of  flesh." 

It  is  with  great  propriety  in  fact  that  he  has  called  the 
blood  the  breath  of  all  flesh,  because  there  are  in  the  flesh 
senses  and  passions,  but  not  intellect  nor  thoughts.  But 
again  by  the  expression  "the  spirit  of  blood,"  he  intimates  that 
the  spirit  is  one  thing  and  the  blood  another ;  so  that  the 
essence  of  the  soul  is  truly  and  beyond  all  possible  question 
spirit.  But  that  spirit  has  a  place  not  by  itself  separately, 
apart  from  the  blood  in  the  body ;  but  it  is  interwoven  and 
mingled  with  the  blood. 

As  also  the  veins  which  exhibit  a  pulse,  as  if  they  were 
vessels  to  convey  breathing,  bear  with  them  most  unmixed 
and  pure  air,  but  blood  likewise,  though  perhaps  in  a  less 
degree ;  for  there  are  two  vessels,  the  veins  and  the 
breathing  channels ;  but  the  veins  have  more  blood  than 
breath,  and  the  breathing  channels  have  more  breath  than 
blood.  Therefore  the  proper  admixture  in  each  vessel  is 
distinct,  as  the  greater  and  the  lesser  proportion. 

This  is  the  meaning  of  these  words  when  taken  literally ; 
but  if  we  look  to  their  inner  meaning,  he  calls  the  blood  of 
the  soul  that  warm  and  fiery  virtue  belonging  to  it  which  we 
name  courage.  And  he  who  is  full  of  this  wisdom  despises 
I  all  food,  and  every  pleasure  of  the  belly,  and  of  those  parts 
which  are  below  the  belly.  But  if  any  one  adopts  a  profli- 
gate life,  and  becomes  a  wanderer  like  the  wind,  and 
gradually  inactive  from  laziness  and  a  luxurious  life,  he  in 
fact  does  nothing  else  but  fall  upon  his  belly,  as  a  reptile 
creeping  upon  the  earth,  and  greedily  licking  up  earthly 
things,  closing  his  life  without  ever  tasting  of  that  heavenly 
food  which  the  souls  which  are  desirous  of  wisdom  receive. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  The  blood  of 
your  souls  will  I  require  from  every  beast,  and  from  the 
hand  of  man's  brother  will  I  require  the  life  of  man  ?  "  * 

•  Genesis  ix.  5. 


S90  PIIILO   JUD^US. 

60.  The  multitude  of  creatures  which  do  injuiy  is  two- 
fold ;  some  being  beasts,  and  others  men.  But  beasts  are- 
rather  the  least  injurious  of  the  two,  because  they  have  no 
actual  familiarity"  with  those  whom  they  wish  to  injure, 
principally  because  they  do  not  fall  under  their  power,  but 
destroy  those  who  have  properly  power  over  them.  But 
when  he  speaks  of  brothers,  he  means  men  who  are 
murderers,  intimating  these  three  things.  First  of  all,  that 
all  we  men  are  akin  to  one  another,  and  are  brothers,  being 
connected  with  one  another  according  to  the  relation  of  the 
highest  kind  of  kindred ;  for  we  have  received  a  lot,  as  being 
the  children  of  one  and  the  same  mother,  rational  nature. 

In  the  second  place,  he  intimates  that  very  commonly 
numerous  and  terrible  quarrels  arise,  and  acts  of  treachery 
take  place,  between  relations,  and  rather  between  brothers, 
on  account  of  the  division  of  their  inheritance,  or  on  account 
of  some  superiority  ot*  dignity  in  the  household  ;  since  a 
quarrel  between  those  of  the  same  family  is  worse  and  alto- 
gether unseemly,  because  brothers  who  are  really  so  by  the 
ties  of  nature  meet  in  contest  with  a  great  knowledge  of 
one  another's  internal  circumstances ;  being  therefore  well 
aware  what  kind  of  attack  they  must  employ  in  their 
present  warfare. 

But,  in  the  third  place,  as  it  appears  to  me,  he  employs 
the  appellation  of  brothers  in  order  to  warn  men  of  the  im- 
placable and  severe  punishment  which  is  reserved  for  mur- 
derers ;  that  they,  without  meeting  any  compassion,  shall 
suffer  what  they  have  inflicted ;  for  they  have  not  slain 
strangers,  but  their  own  brothers  in  blood. 

It  is  vdth  exceeding  great  propriety  that  he  calls  God  the 
protector  and  overseer  of  those  who  are  slain  by  man ;  for 
although  men  despise  the  revenge,  yet  let  them  not  behave 
negligently,  but  although  impure  men  of  savage  disposition 
escape  for  the  moment  from  danger,  still  let  them  know 
that  they  are  already  caught  and  brought  before  the  greater 
tribunal  of  justice,  namely,  before  the  divine  judgment- 
seat,  which  rises  up  to  inflict  vengeance  on  the  wicked  for 
the  defence  of  those  who  have  received  shameful  and  un- 
worthy treatment. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words ;  but  if  we  look 
to  the  inward  sense  of  them  they  have  a  regard  to  the  merit  ol 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  391 

the  purity  of  the  soul,  to  which  it  is  suitable  to  avoid  unceas- 
ing destruction  brought  in  from  outward  parts  ;  which  merit, 
that  propitious  and  beneficent  being,  the  most  merciful  and 
only  Saviour,  does  not  despise ;  but  he  expels  and  destroys 
all  its  enemies  who  stand  around  it,  calling  them  beasts,  and 
men  brothers;  for  beasts  are  asymbolical  expressionforfurious 
men  threatening  calamitous  death ;  but  men  and  brothers 
are  both  separate  individual  thoughts,  and  words  uttered  by 
mouth  and  tongue,  because  they  are  akin  to  them,  and,  by 
consequence,  they  bring  on  great  and  destructive  evils, 
leaving  no  stone  unturned,  no  work  or  word  omitted  to  do 
injury. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "Whoso  sheddeth 
man's  blood  by  man  shall  his  blood  be  shed  ?  "* 

61.  There  is  no  excess  in  this  declaration,  but  rather  an 
indication  of  a  still  more  formidable  denunciation,  because  he 
says,  "  He  himself  shall  be  poured  out  like  blood  who  pom's 
out  blood."  For  that  which  is  poured  out  flows  forth  and 
is  lost,  so  that  it  has  no  longer  any  power  or  substance. 
And  by  this  he  shadows  forth  the  fact  that  the  souls  of  those 
who  perpetrate  unworthy  actions  imitate  the  mortal  body 
in  its  corruption,  as  far  as  corruption  is  accustomed  to  come 
upon  individuals  ;  for  the  body  is  then  dissolved  into  those 
parts  of  which  it  was  composed,  returning  into  its  proper 
elements.  But  the  miserable  soul,  labouring  under  distresses, 
is  borne  hither  and  thither  by  the  overflow  of  a  lascivious 
life ;  and  the  very  evils  which  have  grown  up  along  with  it 
are  accustomed  to  suff'er  the  same  overflow,  in  the  manner  of 
the  parts  of  the  limbs. 

Why  is  it  that  he  speaks  as  if  of  some  other  god,  saying 
that  he  made  man  after  the  image  of  God,  and  not  that  he 
made  him  after  his  own  image  ?t 

62.  Veiy  appropriately  and  without  any  falsehood  was 
this  oracular  sentence  uttered  by  God,  for  no  mortal  thing 
could  have  been  formed  on  the  similitude  of  the  supreme 
Father  of  the  universe,  but  only  after  the  pattern  of  the 
second  deity,  who  is  the  Word  of  the  supreme  Being; 
since   it   is  fitting   that  the  rational  soul  of  man  should 

*  Geuesis  ix.  6.  f  Ibid. 


392 


PHILO   JUD.>EUS. 


bear  before  it  the  type  of  tbe  divine  "Word ;  since  in  bis 
first  AVord  Grod  is  superior  to  the  most  rational  possible 
nature.  But  he  who  is  superior  to  the  Word  holds  his  rank 
in  a  better  and  most  singular  pre-eminence,  and  how  could 
the  creature  possibly  exhibit  a  likeness  of  him  in  himself  ? 
Nevertheless  he  also  wished  to  intimate  this  fact,  that  Grod 
does  rightly  and  correctly  require  vengeance,  in  order  to  the 
defence  of  virtuous  and  consistent  men,  because  such  bear 
in  themselves  a  familiar  acquaintance  with  his  "Word,  of 
which  the  human  mind  is  the  similitude  and  form. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "There  shall  not  agaia 
be  a  deluge  to  destroy  all  the  earth?  "* 

63.  By  his  last  saying  he  declares  sufficiently  that  there 
may  be  various  inundations,  but  that  there  shall  never  be 
one  of  such  a  character  as  to  be  able  to  change  the  whole 
earth  into  a  lake  or  sea. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  this  sajdng. 

But  if  we  look  to  its  inward  sense,  there  a  divine  kindness 
is  intimated,  according  to  which,  although  it  is  not  every 
part  of  the  soul  which  is  allowed  to  make  proficiency  in 
every  virtue,  still  some  are  adorned  in  a  considerable  degree. 
So  that,  supposing  any  one  is  not  able  to  display  excellence 
in  his  whole  body,  he  still  may  labour  with  all  diligence  to 
acquire  all  the  means  in  his  power  to  display  excellence ; 
and  that  exertion  is  Avithin  liis  reach.  And  it  does  not 
follow  that  if  any  one  is  less  highly  endowed,  or  is  unable 
to  make  every  portion  of  his  life  altogether  perfect,  that  he 
is  on  that  account  to  despair  of  those  things  which  he  is 
able  to  do  and  to  attain  to. 

Since  as  there  is  power  in  every  individual,  he  who 
does  not  exert  himself  in  accordance  with  it  is  both  idle 
and  ungrateful ;  idle  because  of  his  laziness,  and  ungrateful 
because,  though  he  has  received  most  excellent  means,  he. 
still  sets  himself  in  opposition  to  the  essential  qualities  of 
things. 

Why  does  Grod  say  that,  as  a  sign  that  he  will  never  again 
bring  a  deluge  over  the  whole  earth,  he  will  place  his  bow 
in  the  clouds  ?t 

*  Genesis  ix.  11.  f  Geuesia  ix.  13. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  393 

04.  Some  persons  imagine  that  bj  the  bow  he  means  that 

iiig  which  by  some  is  called  Jupiter's  belt,  from  its  figure, 

\  elling  on  its  continual  similitude  to  the  rainbow  ;  but  I  do 
ot  pei^ceive  that  that  has  been  positively  asserted.  In  the 
i  rst  place,  because  the  bow  aforesaid  ought  to  have  a  pe- 
iiliar  and  essential  nature  of  its  own,  because  it  is  called 
ho  bow  of  God  ;  for  he  says,  "  I  will  set  my  bow  in  the 
•louds."  But  that  which  belongs  to  God  and  is  said  to  have 
)oen  set  in  any  place  as  his,  indicates  plainly  that  it  is  not 
■void  of  essence  or  of  substance. 

But  the  belt  of  Jupiter  has  not,  properly  speaking,  any 

parate  nature  of  its  own,  but  is  merely  an  appearance  of 
lie  solar  rays  on  a  wet  cloud,  all  the  phsenomena  of  which 
re  non-existent  and  incorporeal.  And  moreover,  this  is  a 
iirther  proof  of  that,  that  it  is  never  seen  at  night,  though 
louds  exist  by  night  as  well  as  by  day. 

In  the  second  place,  we  must  also  say  that  even  in  the 
ay-time,  when  clouds  obscure  the  whole  face  of  heaven, 
he  belt  of  Jupiter  is  never  at  all  seen  in  them.  But  what 
emains  may  also  be  affirmed  without  any  falsehood,  when 
he  Maker  of  the  law  says,  "I  will  set  my  bow  in  the  clouds;" 
)r,  behold,  while  clouds  are  present  there  is  no  appear- 
nce  of  the  belt  of  Jupiter  visible.  But  he  said,  "  "Where 
lere  is  a  collection  of  clouds  let  there  be  a  bow  seen  in  the 
louds."  Still  it  often  happens,  when  the  clouds  are  col- 
;cted  and  when  the  air  is  obscured  and  thickened,  that  no 
ppearance  of  a  rainbow  is  seen  anywhere. 

"We  must  consider,  therefore,  whether  haply  the  sacred 
istorian  indicates  something  else  by  this  mention  of  the 
3w,  namely,  that  in  the  very  exercise  of  the  mercy  of  God, 
id  also  ill  the  moment  of  his  bitterness  towards  men  on 
irth,  there  still  shall  not  be  any  ultimate  destruction  of 
lem,  in  the  fashion  of  a  bow,  which  is  too  soft  and  unfit 
r  such  a  purpose,  nor  shall  there  fee  any  violence  added,  so 

to  cause  a  rapid  destruction,  but  there  shall  be  a  mode- 
te  determination,  each  attribute  being  carefully  measured; 
r  the  great  deluge  took  place  with  a  breaking  asunder  and 
sruption  of  the  clouds  and  of  all  things  ;  as  he  himself 
serts,  when  he  says,  "  The  fountains  of  the  deep  were 

oken  up."    And  yet  it  was  not  an  unmeasured  vehemence. 

Moreover,  a  bow  is  not  itself  a  weapon,  but  only  an  m- 


394  PHILO   JUD/EUS. 

strument  for  the  use  of  weapons,  namely,  for  the  arrow 
which  strikes ;  and  the  arrow  being  sent  forth  by  means  of 
the  bow  strikes  a  part  which  is  at  a  distance,  while  the  parta 
which  are  nearest  to  it  remain  unhurt.  And  this  is  given  as  a 
proof  that  the  whole  earth  shall  never  for  the  future  suflfer 
any  deluge,  since  no  one  arrow  ever  hits  all  places,  but  only 
those  which  are  at  a  distance.  I 

Therefore  the  divine  virtue,  being  invisible,  is  symbolically 
indicated  by  the  bow  in  the  cloud ;  being  in  truth  dissolved 
according  to  the  figure  of  tranquillity,  and  condensed  in  ac- 
cordance with  a  cloud ;  so  that  it  does  not  permit  all  the 
clouds  to  be  altogether  dissolved  into  water,  so  that  the 
earth  may  not  be  made  a  lake  by  an  inundation,  which  it 
carefully  forbids,  and  arranges  the  condensation  of  air. 
checking  it  as  by  a  bridle,  though  it  is  at  that  time  the  more 
accustomed  to  exhibit  itself  as  rebellious  by  reason  of  itt 
excessive  fulness.  For  by  reason  of  the  clouds  it  also  shows 
itself  to  be  replenished,  dripping,  and  saturated. 

Why  is  it  that  after  the  sons  of  the  just  man  have  beeB 
named  Shem,  Ham,  and  Japhet,  he  relates  only  the  genera- 
tions of  the  middle  one,  saying,  "  And  Ham  was  the  father  ol 
Canaan  ;"  and  afterwards  he  adds, "  These  are  the  three  sone 
of  Noah?"* 

C5.  Mentioning  four  men,  Noah  and  his  sons,  he  says  thai' 
these  were  obedient.  Because  the  grandson  Canaan  was  ir 
his  habits  like  his  father  who  begat  him,  on  that  account 
instead  of  mentioning  only  one,  he  includes  both  in  hii 
enumeration,  so  that  they  are  four  in  number,  three  ir. 
virtue.  But  in  the  meantime  in  the  scripture  he  mentions 
only  the  generations  of  the  middle  one,  on  account  of  the 
just  man  whom  he  is  going  to  speak  of  subsequently,  because 
although  he  was  his  father,  since  Ham  is  the  father  o! 
Canaan,  still  he  does  not  mention  the  father  with  blamei 
but  with  respect  to  the  man  with  whom  he  thought  it  hn 
that  the  son  should  be  a  partaker,  he  yet  did  not  give  th^ 
father  a  participation  with  him.  i 

In  the  second  place,  perhaps  he  thus  gives  a  premonitory 
warning  also  to  those  persons  who  by  the  acuteness  of  theii 
mental  vision  can  see  a  long  way  off  what  is  at  a  distance 

Genesis  ix  18. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  395 

•namely,  that  he  designs  to  take  away  the  land  of  the  Canaan- 
iLes  from  them  after  the  lapse  of  many  ages,  and  to  give  it 
to  his  chosen  people  who  are  thoroughly  devoted  to  God. 
Therefore  he  chooses  to  designate  the  chief  inhabitant 
of  that  region,  namely  Canaan,  and  to  show  that  he  both 
practised  singular  and  peculiar  wickedness  of  his  own,  and 
also  all  the  wickedness  of  his  father,  so  that  in  every  part 
lie  might  be  convicted  of  an  ignoble  slavery  and  submission. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  these  words.  But  if  we 
have  a  regard  to  the  inward  sense,  he  does  not  say  that  Ham 
had  a  son  named  Canaan,  but  he  predicates  oflfspriiig  of  him 
alone,  saying, "Ham  was  the  father  of  Canaan."  Since  such 
a  disposition  as  that  of  Ham  is  always  the  father  of  such 
designs  as  those  of  Canaan,  and  that  the  very  names 
themselves  intimate  this.  Por  if  we  translate  them  into 
another  language,  Ham  means  heat  or  hot ;  and  Canaan 
means  merchants,  or  buyers,  or  causes,  or  recipients. 

Accordingly,  he  is  not  now  speaking  manifestly  of  genera- 
tions, nor  is  he  saying  that  one  man  is  the  father  or  the  son 
of  another  man,  but  he  is  evidently  demonstrating  the  connec- 
tion between  one  counsel  and  another,  by  reason  of  its 
alienation  from  all  familiarity  with  virtue. 

About  the  cultivation  of  tJie  earth. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement, "  Noah  began  to  be 
t  cultivator  of  the  earth  ?  "* 

6G.  He  is  here  comparing  Noah  to  the  first  created  man 
who  was  formed  out  of  the  earth  ;  for  in  that  manner  also 
does  he  speak  of  him  when  he  came  forth  out  of  the  ark  ; 
since  both  then  and  now  there  took  place  a  first  beginning 
3f  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  each  being  after  a  deluge. 
iFor  also,  at  the  time  of  the  original  creation  of  the  world 
bhe  earth  was,  as  it  were,  a  lake,  being  covered  by  an  inunda- 
tion of  water,  for  the  sacred  historian  could  not  tell  us  that 
&od  said,"  Let  the  waters  be  gathered  together  into  one  body, 
md  let  the  dry  land  appear,"  unless  it  had  previously  been 
nundatod  with  waters  which  now  returned  into  certain 
lepths  of  the  earth. 

Nor  again  is  the  expression  a  purposeless  one, "  He  began 
o  be  a  tiller  of  the  earth,"  for  in  the  second  generation  he 

*   Genesis  ix.  20. 


890  pniLO  JUDiEUS. 

was  himself  the  beginning  of  men,  and  also  of  seed,  and  o 
the  cultivation  of  the  land,  and  of  the  life  of  all  other  things- 
This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words. 

But  if  we  look  to  their  inner  sense,  a  distinction  is  mad 
between  being  a  cultivator  of  the  earth  and  a  tiller'  of  it 
as  the  murderer  of  his  brother  is  represented  as  tilling  th 
earth,  but  not  as  cultivating  it.  For  by  the  earth  our  body  i 
symbolically  represented,  which  is  by  its  nature  earthly,  ani 
which  the  unjust  and  wicked  man  tills  like  a  lazy  hireling 
but  which  the  man  endued  with  virtue  cultivates  like 
skilful  manager  of  plants  and  an  agriculturist  of  good  work 
appointed  to  superintend  it.  Because  the  workman  of  th 
body,  the  mind,  as  being  carnal,  procures  carnal  pleasurest 
but  the  cultivator  of  the  earth  is  careful  to  produce  useful 
fruits,  those,  namely,  which  are  to  be  obtained  by  the  stud 
of  continence,  and  modesty,  and  sound  wisdom ;  and  h' 
prunes  away  all  superfluous  excesses  and  bad  habits  whicl 
spring  up  around,  like  the  thin  and  misplaced  branches  v 
trees. 

AVhy  does  the  just  man  first  plant  a  vineyard  ?  * 

It  was  very  natural  for  it  to  be  a  subject  of  anxiety  ant 
doubt  to  him  in  what  quarter  he  was  to  find  any  plants  afte: 
the  deluge,  when  everything  upon  the  earth  was  destroyed 
Therefore  it  appeared  natural,  as  was  said  a  little  while  ago 
that  the  earth  was  made  dry  in  the  spring  season ;  therefon 
when  the  spring  produced  the  buds  of  trees,  the  roots  an( 
stems  of  the  vine  could  easily  be  found  by  the  just  man  stil 
alive,  and  might  thus  be  collected  by  him. 

But  we  have  to  consider  why  the  first  thing  he  did  was  tc 
plant  a  vineyard,  and  why  he  did  not  rather  sow  wheat  am 
barley,  since  the  latter  are  necessary  productions  of  th( 
earth,  without  which  life  cannot  be  supported,  but  th^ 
former  is  only  a  material  for  superfluous  pleasure,  Thd 
answer  is  that  Noah,  adopting  a  salutary  design,  consecrateo 
and  offered  up  to  God  those  things  which  are  necessary  U 
support  life  and  which  require  no  co-operation  for  the 
production  of  the  fruit ;  but  the  superfluous  plants  he  devotee 
to  men ;  for  the  use  of  wine  is  superfluous  and  not  necessary 
As  therefore  Grod  ordered  fountains  of  water  fit  to  drink  tc 

*  Genesia  ix.  20. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  397 

rst  up  from  the  earth  without  the  co-operation  of  man, 
he  also  of  his  own  accord  granted  to  man  in  a  similar 
iianner  wheat  and  barley,  in  order  that  he  himself  might  be 
1 10  sole  giver  of  each  kind  of  food  which  serves  for  necessary 
:iting  and  drinking.  But  he  did  not  take  away  the  power 
lor  grudge  them  providing  for  themselves  by  their  own 
iidustry  those  things  which  contribute  to  pleasure. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  He  drank  of  the 
vine  and  was  drunken  ?"  * 

08.  In  the  first  place,  the  just  man  did  not  drink  the 

Ivine,  but  a  portion  of  the  wine,  not  the  whole  of  it ;  in  which 

|;ase  an  incontinent  and  debauched  man  does  not  quit  his 

aeans  of  debauchery,  till  he  has  first  swallowed  all  the  wine 

hat  there  is  before  him  ;  but  by  the  religious  and  sober  man 

verything  necessary  for  food  is  used  in  a  moderate  degree. 

jLnd  the  expression,  "he  was  drunken,"  is  here  to  be  taken 

imply  as  equivalent  to  "he  used  the  wine." 

,,  But  there  are  two  modes  of  getting  drunk,  the  one  is  that 

If  an  intemperate  sottishness  which  misuses  wine,  and  this 

liTence  is  peculiar  to  the  depraved  and  wicked  man ;   the 

jther  is  the  use  of  wine,  and  this  belongs  to  the  wise.     It  is 

herefore  in  the  second  of  these  meanings  that  the  consistent 

nd  wise  Noah  is  here  called  drunken,  not  as  having  misused 

ut  as  having  used  wine. 


'O 


What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  He  was  naked  in 
is  house  ?  "f 

69.  This  is  a  praise  of  the  wise  man  both  in  the  literal 
3nse  of  the  words,  and  also  in  their  hidden  meaning,  that  his 
Inhibition  of  nakedness  took  place  not  out  of  doors  but  in 
is  house,  being  concealed  by  the  roof  and  walls  of  his 
ouse ;  for  the  nakedness  of  the  body  is  concealed  by  a 
buse  which  is  made  of  stones  and  beams  of  wood :  but  the 

voringand  clothing  of  the  soul  is  the  discipline  of  wisdom. 

Therefore  there  are  two  kinds  of  nakedness,  one  which 
'kes  place  by  accident,  which  is  the  result  of  an  involuntary 
fence,  because  the  just  man,  using,  if  I  may  say  so,  his  honesty 
?  if  it  were  a  garment  with  which  he  is  clothed,  stumbles 

it  of  his  own  accord  like  men  who  are  intoxicated,  or  who 
•  Genesis  ix.  '-'1.  f  Ibid. 


398  PiiiLO  JUD^us. 

are  afflicted  with  insanity  ;  for  in  such  men  their  offence 
are  not  deliberately  committed  :  but  it  is  his  task  and  pleasini 
duty  to  clothe  himself,  as  with  a  garment,  with  the  disciplin 
and  study  of  honesty. 

There  is  also  another  kind  of  nakedness  of  the  soul  whic 
is  caused  by  perfect  virtue,  which  expels  from  itself  th 
whole  carnal  weight  of  the  body,  as  if  it  were  flying  frdm 
tomb,  as  indeed  it  has  long  been  buried  in  it  as  in  a  tomb 
as  also  it  avoids  pleasures,  and  also  a  great  number  ( 
miseries  arising  from  the  different  passions  and  manyanxietif 
arising  from  misfortunes,  and  indeed  all  the  evil  effects  ( 
these  different  circumstances.  He  therefore,  who  has  bee 
able  with  distinction  to  pass  through  such  various  and  grec 
dangers,  and  to  escape  such  injuries,  and  to  emancipat 
himyelf  from  such  evils,  has  attained  to  the  destiny  of  haj 
piness,  without  any  stain  or  disgrace  ;  for  I  should  pronounc 
this  to  be  the  ornament  and  badge  of  beauty  in  the; 
individuals  who  have  been  rendered  worthy  to  pass  the 
existence  in  an  incorporeal  manner. 

Why  is  it  that  the  sacred  writer  has  not  simply  sai^ 
Ham  saw  his  nakedness,  but  Ham  the  father  of  Canaa 
saw  the  nakedness  of  his  father  ?  * 

70.  By  stating  the  fact  thus,  he  both  blames  the  son  intl, 
father  and  the  father  in  the  son,  as  performing  together  i 
common  the  deed  of  folly,  and  iniquity,  and  impiety,  and  evei 
other  kind  of  wickedness.  This  is  the  literal  meaning  • 
the  statement ;  and  as  to  the  inner  sense,  we  must  look  ; 
that  in  the  same  manner  in  which  we  have  hitherto  treatt 
these  subjects. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  He  told  it  to  b 
two  brothers  out  of  doors  ?  "  f 

71.  The  sacred  historian  is  here  adding  to  the  gravity 
the  transaction.  In  the  first  place,  because  he  did  not  repo 
the  involuntary  evil  of  his  father  to  one  brother  only,  but  t 
both  of  them  ;  and  no  doubt  if  he  had  had  any  more  he  wou 
have  told  it  to  them  all,  as  he  did  in  fact  to  every  one  1 
could ;   and  he   did   so   with   ridicule  in  his    very  wore 

*  Genesis  ii.  22.  t  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  399 

making  a  jest  of  what  ought  not  to  have  been  treated  with 
laughter  and  derision,  but  rather  with  shame  and  fear  min- 
gled with  reverence. 

In  the  second  place,'  when  the  historian  says  he  told  it 
them,  not  in  the  house  but  out  of  the  house,  he  evidently 
points  out  that  he  displayed  his  father  when  naked,  not  only 
to  his  brothers,  but  also  to  the  bystanders  with' whom  they 
were,  both  men  and  women. 

This  is  the  literal  information  conveyed  by  the  words. 
But  if  we  look  to  their  inward  meaning,  then  we  shall  see 
I  j  that  a  depraved  and  malignant  habit  of  life  is  full  of  derision 
and  contempt :  and  it  is  a  bad  thing  to  judge  of  the  miseries 
of  others  even  by  one's  self  like  a  chastising  judge.  But  in 
this  case  what  has  happened  is  worse  than  this,  for  any  man 
with  a  joyful  mind  to  ridicule  the  involuntary  misfortune  of 
a  devoted  disciple  of  M'isdom,  and  to  make  a  song  of  and 
proclaim  abroad  his  misery,  is  the  part  of  a  thoroughly  hostile 
laccuser,  who  ought  rather  to  have  pardoned  such  an 
pccurrence  than  to  have  added  accusation  or  vituperation 
to  it. 

Moreover,  because  these  three  things  are,  as  I  have  said 
before,  as  it  were  brothers  together  ;  namely,  good,  bad,  and 
ndifferent,  being  all  the  offspring  of  one  parent  thought : 
u  accordance  with  each  of  these  principles,  they  have  been 
bund  to  be  overseers,  some  celebrating  virtues  with  praise, 
)thers  upholding  acts  of  malignity,  and  others  supporting 
■iches  and  honours  and  other  good  things  which,  however,  are 
hot  attached  to  and  which  are  external  to  the  body. 

The  overseers  who  emulate  wickedness  rejoice  at  the  fall 
I'f  the  wise  man,  and  ridicule  and  disparage  him,  as  if  he  had 
!lone  no  good  by  the  part  which  he  adopts  and  to  which  he 
l)plies  himself  as  better  for  the  mind,  or  for  his  body,  or  for 
is  external  circumstances,  to  his  internal  virtues  or  to  any 
f  the  good  things  which  are  around  and  exterior  to  his  body. 
Inless  indeed  that  man  alone  is  eminently  able  to  attain  his 
bject,  who  applies  himself  to  iniquity,  as  that  alone  is  ac- 
ustomed  to  confer  advantages  on  human  life. 

Pronouncing  these  and  similar   precepts,  those  who  are 

jverseers  of  iniquity  ridicule  those  Mho  devote  themselves 

)  virtue,  and  to  those  things  by  which  virtue  is  produced 

ad   consolidated :    as    some  look  upon  those  things  to  be 


400  PIIILO  JUD^US. 

which  are  around  the  body,  and  outside  it,  and  which  may  b 
regarded  in  the  light  of  instruments  serving  to  that  end. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement, "  Shem  and  Japhef 
taking  a  garment,  laid  it  upon  both  their  shoulders  and  wen 
backwards,  and  covered  the  nakedness  of  their  father,  an( 
they  thems^elves  did  not  see  it  ?  "  * 

72.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  statement  is  evident ;  bu 
with  respect  to  the  inner  sense  contained  in  it,  we  must  saj 
that  the  light  man  who  is  in  too  great  haste  only  sees  thosj 
things  which  are  before  his  eyes  and  exposed  to  his  sight 
but  that  the  evil  man  also  sees  those  things  which  are  a 
his  back,  that  is  to  say,  the  future. 

And  since  what  is  posterior  is  postponed  to  what  is  an 
terior,  so  is  what  is  future  to  what  is  present,  the  sight  o 
which  is  peculiar  to  the  virtuous  and  wise  man,  whointrutl 
is  a  second  Lynceus,  being  according  to  the  fables  giftec 
with  eyes  in  every  part. 

Therefore  every  wise  man,  who  is  not  so  much  man  a 
actual  intellect,  walks  backward,  that  is  to  say,  he  see 
what  is  behind  him  or  future,  as  if  it  were  placed  in  brillian 
light ;  and  seeing  every  thing  on  all  sides  of  him  with  j 
perfect  sight,  and  looking  all  around  him,  he  is  found  to  bi 
armed,  and  protected,  and  fortified,  so  that  no  part  of  hi 
soul  is  ever  found  naked  or  in  an  unseemly  plight,  on  ac 
count  of  any  accidents  which  occur  unfortunately. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "And  Noal 
became  sober  after  the  wine  ?  "f 

73.  The  literal  meaning  is  too  notorious.  Therefore  wi 
need  only  here  speak  of  what  concerns  the  inner  sense  o 
the  words.  "When  the  intellect  is  strengthened,  it  is  abL 
by  its  soberness  to  discern  with  a  certain  accuracy  al 
things,  both  before  and  behind  it,  both  present,  I  mean,  an(^ 
future ;  but  the  man  who  can  see  neither  what  is  presen 
nor  what  is  future  with  accuracy,  is  afflicted  by  blindness 
but  he  who  sees  the  present,  but  who  cannot  also  forese- 
the  future,  and  is  not  at  all  cautious,  such  a  man  is  over 
come  by  drunkenness  and  intoxication ;  and  he,  lastly,  who  i 
found  to  be  able  to  look  all  around  him,  and  to  see,  am 

*  Genesib  ix.  23.  f  Genesis  ix.  24. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  401 

discern,  and  comprehend  the  different  natures  of  things, 
both  present  and  future,  the  watchfulness  of  sobriety  is  in 
that  man. 

Why  is  it  that  after  the  sacred  historian  has  enumerated 
Ham  in  the  middle  of  the  offspring  of  Noah,  or  has  placed 
him  in  the  middle  between  his  brethren,  he  nevertheless 
points  out  that  he  was  the  younger,  saying,  "Noah  saw 
what  his  younger  son  had  done  to  him  ?  "  * 

74.  This  is  a  manifest  allegory,  because  he  here  takes  as 
the  younger,  not  him  who  was  so  in  age  and  in  point  of 
I  time,  but  him  who  was  younger  in  mind;  since  wickedness 

I  is  unable  to  attain  to  a  perception  of  the  learning  which  is 
[proper  to  the  elder ;  but  the  elder  thoughts  belong  to  a  will 
which  is  truly  growing  old,  not  indeed  in  body,  but  in  mind. 

Wliy  did  Noah  when  praying  for  Shem  speak  thus : 
l"  Blessed  is  the  Lord  God,  the  God  of  Shem :  and  Canaan 
shall  be  his  servant  ?"  f 

75.  The  names  Lord  and  God  are  here  used  together  on 

account  of  his  principal  attributes,  both  of  benevolence  and 

of  kingly  power  by  which  the  world  was  created ;  for  as  king 

lie  created  the  world  according  to  his  beneficence ;  but  after 

he  had  completed  it  then  the  world  was  arranged  and  set  in 

3rder  by  his  attribute  of  kingly  power.     Therefore  he  at 

:hat  time  rendered   the  wise  man  worthy  of  a  common 

lonour,  which  the  whole  world  also  received,  all  the  parts  of 

he  world  being  formed  in  an  admirable  manner  with  the 

ittributes  of  the  Lord  and  God,  doing  so  by  his  especial 

)rerogative,   munificently   pouring   forth    the   favour    and 

iberality  of  his  beneficent  power. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  the  beneficent  power  of 
^od  is  mentioned  twice.  Once,  as  has  been  already  stated, 
•eing  placed  in  opposition  to  his  kingly  power;  and  a 
econd  time  without  any  such  connexion,  in  order,  forsooth, 
hat  the  wise  man  having  been  rendered  worthy  of  his  gifts, 
oth  such  as  are  common  to  him  with  others  and  such  as 
to  peculiar  to  himself,  he  might  also  be  rendered  acceptable 
loth  to  the  world  and  to  God ;  to  the  world  on  account  of 

*  Genesis  ix.  25.  t  Genesis  ix.  28 

TOL.  IV.  D    D 


402  PHILO   JUD.^US. 

the  excellence  imparted  to  him  in  common  with  it,  and  to 
God  for  such  as  was  peculiar  to  himself. 

Why,  when  Noah  prayed  for  Japhet,  did  he  say,  "  God 
shall  enlarge  Japhet,  and  bid  him  to  dwell  in  the  house  of 
Shem :  and  Canaan  shall  be  their  servant  ?  "  * 

76.  Without  examining  the  literal  statement,  for  the 
meaning  of  that  is  plain,  we  had  better  approach  the  inner 
sense  contained  in  it,  and  examine  that,  in  which  the 
second  and  third  blessings  mentioned  are  capable  of  an 
enlarged  and  ample  extension.  As,  for  instance,  good  health, 
and  a  vigorous  state  of  the  outward  senses,  and  beauty,  and 
strength,  and  opulence,  and  nobleness  of  birth,  and  friends, 
and  the  power  of  a  prince,  and  numbers  of  other  things. 
And  on  this  account  he  said,  "  God  shall  enlarge,"  &c. 

Because  taken  separately,  the  abundant  possession  of 
such  numerous  and  great  blessings  has  of  itself  been 
injurious  to  many  persons  who  have  scarcely  dwelt  with 
justice,  or  wisdom,  or  any  other  virtues,  the  complete  pos- 
session of  which  dispenses  to  man  in  an  admirable  manner  the 
advantages  which  are  external  to  and  which  surround  the , 
body ;  but  the  deprivation  or  absence  of  them  leaves  him 
without  the  enjoyment  or  use  of  them ;  and  man,  if  deprived 
of  all  good  protectors,  and  of  the  use  of  these  enjoyments,  is  • 
exposed  to  as  much  suffering  as  he  is  capable  of.  Therefore 
he  prays  on  behalf  of  the  man  who  has  those  things  which 
are  around  and  exterior  to  the  body,  that  he  may  dwell  in 
the  house  of  the  wise  man ;  so  that  attending  to  the  rules  of 
all  good  men  he  may  see  and  regulate  his  own  course  by 
their  example. 

Why  because  Ham  had  sinned  did  God  pronounce  that 
his  son  Canaan  should  be  the  servant  of  Ham  and  Japhet  ?  t 

77.  In  the  first  place,  God  pronounced  this  sentenca 
because  both  father  and  son  had  displayed  the  same  wicked- 
ness, being  both  united  together  and  not  separated,  and 
both  indulging  in  the  same  disposition. 

But  in  the  second  place,  he  did  so  because  the  father 
would  be  exceedingly  afflicted  at  the  curse  thus  laid  upon 
the  son,  being  sufficiently  conscious  that  he  was  punished 
*  Genesis  ix.  27.  +  Ibid- 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  403 

not  so  much  for  his  own  sake  as  for  that  of  his  father.  And 
so  the  leader  and  master  of  the  two  suffered  the  punishment 
of  his  wicked  counsels,  and  words,  and  actions. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  statement.  But  if  we 
look  to  its  inward  meaning,  then  in  reality  they  are  no  more 
two  different  men  than  two  different  dispositions.  And 
this  is  made  plain  by  the  names  given  to  them,  which 
manifestly  denote  the  nature  of  the  facts ;  for  Ham  being 
interpreted  means  heat  or  hot ;  and  Canaan  means  mer- 
chants or  causes. 

Why  was  it  that  Noah  lived  after  the  deluge  three 
hundred  and  fifty  years  ?  * 

78.  It  is  now  declared  that  in  two  periods  of  seven  years 
'the   form  of  the   world   was   originally  created   and   now 

renewed  under  Noah.  But  the  wise  man  lives  for  a  period 
of  fourteen  quarters  of  a  century ;  and  fourteen  times 
twenty-five  is  equal  to  seven  times  fifty,  or  fifty  times 
seven.  And  it  is  the  principle  of  the  seventh  year  and  also 
of  the  fiftieth,  which  has  an  especial  order  of  its  own 
explained  and  ordained  in  Leviticus. 

"Wby  among  the  three  sons  of  Noah  does  Ham  appear 
always  to  occupy  the  middle  place,  but  the  two  extremities 
are  varied  ;  for  when  their  birth  is  mentioned,  Shem  is 
placed  in  the  first  rank,  in  this  manner,  Shem,  Ham,  and 
Japhet ;  but  when  they  are  syjoken  of  as  fathers,  then 
Japhet  is  mentioned  first,  and  the  beginning  of  the  enume- 
ration of  the  nation  is  derived  from  Japhet  himself  ?  f 

79.  Those  who  inquire  into  the  literal  nature  of  the 
divine  writings  think  thus  of  the  order  in  which  these  men 
are  mentioned,  looking  upon  him  who  is  the  first  named, 
[that  is  Shem,  as  the  younger ;  and  upon  him  who  is  named 
the  last,  that  is  Japhet,  as  the  elder.  However  they  may 
choose  to  think  of  this  let  them,  being  guided  by  the 
principle  of  mere  opinion.  But  we  who  look  to  the  real 
Gleaning  of  these  statements  think  that  there  is  here  a 
reference  to  the  three  things,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent ; 
«fhich  last  are  called  secondary  goods ;  and  we  must  there- 
ore  think  that  the  sacred  writer  always  puts  the  bad  in  the 

*  Genesis  ix.  28.  f  Genesis  x.  14. 

D    D    2 


404  PIIILO   JUD.EUS. 

middle,  so  that  being  confined  at  either  extremity  it  may  be 
subdued  on  oue  side  by  the  one,  and  on  the  other  side  by 
the  other ;  so  that,  being  confined,  it  may  be  kept  in  and 
subdued. 

But  the  good  and  the  indifferent,  or  secondary  good, 
change  the  order  with  one  another ;  for  when  there  is  such 
great  evil  present,  and  yet  not  wholly  and  altogether,  the 
good  rejoices  in  the  first  place,  having  the  position  of  the 
dispenser  and  chief  of  the  whole.  But  when  it  is  placed  in 
the  position  of  the  will  in  a  state  of  conspiracy,  and  injustice 
remains  not  only  in  the  intellect  but  is  also  conducted  to  its 
end  by  unjust  works,  then  that  first  good  is  changed  from 
its  original  order  into  another  place,  together  with  all  the 
good  habits  which  depend  upon  it,  rejecting  all  education 
and  all  arrangement,  as  being  wholly  unable  to  attain  its 
proposed  end,  just  as  a  physician  does  when  he  sees  an  in- 
curable disease. 

But  the  elder  good  manages  that  virtue  which  is  around 
the  body  and  exterior  to  it ;  therefore,  by  observing  the 
extremities  with  greater  caution,  and  closing  in  the  beast 
within  its  toils,  it  is  sufficiently  demonstrated  that  it  does 
not  dare  to  bite  or  injure  any  more.  But  while  it  feels  that , 
it  has  done  no  injury,  it  is  transferred  into  a  more  secure 
and  more  permanent  position,  and  then,  a  higher  and  better 
fortified  place  being  assigned  to  it,  it  easily  retains  the  lower 
position  too  as  one  easy  to  be  preserved ;  for,  in  con- 
sequence of  the  superior  power  of  its  guardian,  it  is  always 
practicable  to  watch  it  closely,  since  nothing  is  more  mighty 
than  virtue. 

Why  do  the  people  of  Ceos,  and  of  Ehodes,  and  the  isles 
of  the  Gentiles,  spring  from  Japhet  ?* 

80.  Since  he  has  the  name  denoting  breadth  (namely 
Japhet),  being  expanded  in  his  growth  and  increase, 
that  part  of  the  things  of  the  world  which  have  been 
assigned  by  nature  for  the  use  of  mankind,  that  is  to  say,  I 
the  earth,  can  no  longer  hold  him,  therefore  he  passes  over 
into  the  other  part,  that  is  to  say,  the  sea  and  the  islands 
belonging  to  it. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  statement. 
*  Genesis  xvi.  4. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  405 

But  if  we  look  to  its  inner  sense,  all  the  external  bless- 
I  ings  which  are  bestowed  by  nature,  such  as  riches,  and 
j  honour,  and  principalities,  are  lavished  and  poured  forth  in 
I  every  direction  on  those  men  into  whose  hands  they  come, 
I  and  are  also  extended  widely  to  others  who  are  not  so  much 
within  reach ;  so  that  in  a  greater,  or  at  all  events,  in  no  less  a 
degree  do  they  surround  and  hem  the  man  in,  in  accordance 
\  with  the  greediness  of  the  lovers  of  riches  and  glory,  since 
(  they  are  eager  for  principalities,  and  are  never  satisfied  be- 
j  cause  of  their  insatiable  desires. 

Why  the  eldest  son  of  Ham  is  Chus.* 

81.  The  sacred  historian  has  here  produced  a  word  most 

I  completely  in  accordance  with  nature,  saying  that  Chus  was 

the  eider  son  of  evil,  Chus  being  the  dissolved  and  loose 

nature  of  the  earth,  for  the  earth,  when  dense  and  fertile, 

.uid  moist,  is  full  of  herbs,  and  hills,  and  trees,  and  is  well 

ranged  for  the  production  of  different  fruits ;  but  when 

issolved  and  reduced  to  dust  and  dry,  it  is  unfruitful  and 

barren  ;  and  besides  it  is  tossed  about  in  the  air,  when  it  is 

raised  from  the  ground  by  the  wind,  by  its  dust  making 

the  air  all  alive. 

Such  as  this  is  the  first  origin  and  the  first  shoots  of  evil 
being  destitute  of  the  generation  of  good  pursuits,  and  the 
3ause  of  barrenness  to  the  soul  and  to  all  its  parts. 

Why  was  Chus  the  father  of  Nimrod,  who  began  to  be  a 
^iant  and  a  hunter  before  the  Lord :  on  which  account  they 
'^aid,  "  Like  Nimrod  the  mighty  hunter  before  the  Lord  ?  "t 
The  father  in  this  case,  having  a  nature  truly  dissolute, 
jioes  not  at  all  keep  fast  the  spiritual  bond  of  the  soul,  nor 
)f  nature,  nor  of  consistency  of  manners,  but  rather  like  a 
{\i.mt  born  of  the  earth,  prefers  earthly  to  heavenly  things, 
lid  thus  appears  to  verily  the  ancient  fable  of  the  giants 
lid  Titans  ;  for  in  truth  he  who  is  an  emulator  of  earthly 
nd  corruptible  things  is  always  engaged  in  a  conflict  with 
iivenly  and  admirable  natures,  raising  up  earth  as  a  bul- 
wark against  heaven  ;  and  those  things  which  are  below  are 
Idverse  to  those  which  are  above. 
On  which  account  there  is  much  propriety  in  the  expres- 
on,  he  was  a  giant  against  God,  which  thus  declares  the 
*  Genesis  x.  6.  t  Genesis  x.  8. 


406  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

opposition  of  such  beings  to  the  deity  ;  for  a  wicked  man  is 
nothing  else  than  an  enemy,  contending  against  God :  on 
which  account  it  has  become  a  proverb  that  every  one  who 
sins  greatly  ought  to  be  referred  to  him  as  the  original  and 
chief  of  sinners,  being  spoken  of  "  as  a  second  Nimrod." 

Therefore  his  very  name  is  an  indication  of  his  character,  for 
it  is  interpreted  Ethiopian,  and  his  art  is  that  of  hunting, 
both  of  which  things  are  detestable  :  an  ^Ethiopian  because 
unmitigated  wickedness  has  no  participation  in  light,  but 
imitates  night  and  darkness :  and  the  practice  of  the  hunts- 
man is  as  much  as  possible  at  variance  with  rational  nature, 
for  he  who  lives  among  wild  beasts  wishes  to  live  the  life  of 
a  beast,  and  to  be  equal  to  the  brutes  in  the  vices  of  wicked- 
ness. 


QUESTIONS,  AND  SOLUTIONS  TO  THOSE  QUESTIONS, 
WHICH  ARISE  IN  GENESIS. 

BOOK  III. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  I  am  the  Lord 
thy  God  who  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  Chaldaeans 
to  give  thee  this  land  for  an  inheritance  ?  "  * 

1.  As  the  literal  statement  is  plain  enough,  we  need  only 
consider  the  inner  meaning,  which  was  meant  to  be  inter- 
preted in  this  manner. 

The  law  of  the  Chaldaeans  taken  symbolically  is  mathema- 
tical speculation,  one  part  of  which  is  recognised  to  be 
astronomy,  which  the  ChaldsBans  study  with  great  industry 
and  with  great  success.  Therefore  God  is  here  honouring 
the  wise  man  with  a  gift ;  in  the  first  place,  by  taking  men 
out  of  the  sect  of  the  astrologers,  that  is  to  say,  away  from 
the  hallucinations  of  the  Chaldaeans,  which,  as  they  are  diflB- 
cult  to  detect  and  refute,  are  found  to  be  the  cause  of  gre.it 
evils  and  wickedness,  since  they  ascribe  the  attributes  of  the 
Creator  to  created  things,  and  persuade  men  to  worship  and 
to  venerate  the  works  of  the  world  as  God. 

In  the  second  place,  God  honours  him  by  granting  to  him 
the  wisdom  which  bears  fruit,  which  he  has  here  symboh- 

*  Genesis  xv.  7. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  407 

cally  called  the  earth  ;  but  the  Father  of  the  universe  shows 
that  wisdom  and  virtue  are  invariable  and  immutable,  since 
it  is  not  consistent  with  his  character  that  God  should  show 
to  any  one  that  which  can  undergo  any  variation  or  change, 
for  that  which  is  shown  by  the  being  who  is  immutable  and 
consistent  must  be  so  too  ;  but  that  which  is  liable  to 
change,  as  being  incessantly  in  the  habit  of  suffering  varia- 
tion, admits  of  no  proper  or  divine  demonstration. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  Lord,  by  what  shall  I  know  that  I 
shall  inherit  it  ?"  * 

2.  He  here  is  seeking  a  sign  for  a  ratification  of  the 
promise ;  but  two  things  only  are  described  deserving  of 
study  ;  one  that  which  is  an  affection  of  the  mind,  namely, 
the  belief  in  Grod  according  to  his  literal  word ;  the  other 
a  being  borne  on  with  the  most  exceeding  desire  not  to  be 
left  in  want  of  some  signs,  by  which  the  hearer  may  feel,  to 
the  conviction  of  his  outer  senses,  a  confirmation  of  the 
promise  :  and  to  him  who  has  given  the  promise  he  offers 
worthy  veneration  by  the  appellation,  "  Lord." 

For  by  this  title  he  says,  I  know  thee  to  be  the  Lord  and 
prince  of  all  things,  who  art  also  able  to  do  all  things,  and 
there  is  no  disability  with  thee.  But  in  truth,  if  I  have 
already  given  credence  to  thy  promise,  still  I  nevertheless 
wish  to  obtain  speedily  if  not  a  completion  of  it,  yet  at  all 
events  some  evident  signs  by  which  its  consummation  may 
be  indicated  ;  in  truth  I  am  thy  creature,  and  even  if  I  were 
to  arrive  at  the  highest  degree  of  excellence,  I  am  not 
always  able  to  restrain  the  violence  of  my  desire,  so  as  not, 
when  I  have  seen  or  heard  anything  good,  to  be  contented 
with  obtaining  it  slowly  and  not  immediately ;  therefore  I 
entreat  that  thou  wilt  give  me  some  means  of  knowledge, 
by  which  I  may  comprehend  those  future  events. 

Why  is  it  that  he  says,  "  Take  for  me  a  heifer  of  three  years 
old,  and  a  goat  of  three  years  old,  and  a  raven  of  three  years 
old,  and  a  turtle  dove  and  a  pigeon  ?  "  t 

3.  He  here  mentions  five  animals,  which  are  offered  on  the 
sacred  altar ;  for  these  are  divided  into  classes  of  victims, 

•  Genesis  xv.  8.  t  Genesis  xv.  9. 


408  PHILO  JUD^US. 

three  kinds  of  terrestrial  animals,  the  ox,  the  goat,  and  the 
sheep ;  and  two  kinds  of  birds,  the  turtle  dove  and  the 
pigeon ;  for  the  sacred  writer  constantly  tells  us  that  the 
everlasting  reverence  of  victims  derived  its  origin  from  the 
patriarch,  who  was  also  the  origin  of  the  race  :  but  instead 
of  the  expression,  "  Bring  to  me,"  he  has  very  admirably  used 
the  words,  "  Take  for  me ;  "  since  there  is  nothing  especi- 
ally and  peculiarly  belonging  to  the  creature,  but  everything 
is  the  gift  of  and  blessing  bestowed  by  Grod,  who  is  altoge- 
ther willing  that  when  any  one  has  received  anything  he 
should  offer  thanks  for  it  with  all  his  heart. 

But  he  orders  him  to  take  every  animal  at  the  age  of 
three  years  ;  since  three  is  a  full  and  perfect  number,  con- 
sisting of  a  beginning,  a  middle,  and  an  end ;  but  still  we 
may  raise  the  question,  why  of  these  three  animals,  he  takes 
two  females,  the  heifer,  and  the  she-goat,  and  one  male,  the 
ram ;  may  it  not  be  perhaps  because  the  heifer  and  the  she- 
goat  are  offered  as  an  atonement  for  sin ;  but  the  sheep  is 
not,  as  sin  arises  from  frailty,  and  the  female  is  frail  ? 

This  much  I  have  thought  fit  to  say  with  especial  appo- 
siteness  to  this  question ;  but  I  am  not  however  ignorant 
that  all  things  of  this  kind  offer  a  handle  to  those  who  wish 
to  cavil,  to  disparage  the  sacred  scriptures ;  therefore  in  this 
instance  they  say  that  there  is  nothing  here  described  and 
indicated  but  a  command  to  sacrifice,  by  the  division  of  the 
animals  and  an  examination  of  their  entrails  ;  and  what  is 
visible  in  them  they  affirm  to  be  an  indication  of  what  is 
convenient,  and  of  the  similitude  which  arises  from  things 
visible. 

But  those  men,  as  it  appears  to  me,  are  of  that  class 
which  forms  a  part  alone  from  a  judgment  of  the  whole,  but 
which  on  the  contrary  does  not  from  a  judgment  of  a  part 
ibrm  the  whole,  which  last  is  the  better  way  of  coming  to  an 
opinion,  as  being  that  by  which  both  the  name  and  the  fact  , 
are  altogether  established.  i 

Therefore  the  giving  of  the  law,  that  is  to  say  the  sacred 
scriptures,  that  I  may  so  express  myself,  is  a  sort  of  living 
unity,  the  whole  of  which  one  ought  to  examine  carefully  i 
with  all  one's  eyes,  and  so  discern  with  truth,  and  certainty, 
and  clearness,  the  universal  intention  of  the  whole  of  the 
scripture  without    dissecting   or  lacerating   its    harmony, 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  409 

or  disuniting  its  unity ;  by  any  other  mode  everything 
!  would  appear  utterly  inconsistent  and  absurd,  being  disso- 
I  ciated  from  all  community  or  equity. 

I     What  then  is  the  intention  of  the  delivery  of  the  law  as 
j  exhibited  to   us  ?     It  is  scientific,  and  so   is   everything 

which  describes  scientific  species  ;  since  the  offering  of 
1;  sacrifice  and  all  science  admits  of  a  consistent  usage,  and  of 
I  expressions  well  adapted  to  them,  and  of  various  opinions, 
i  by  which  not  only  the  footsteps  of  truth  are  occupied,  but 

I  sometimes  are  even  darkened,  as  affection  is  by  flattery  ;  but 
in  such  way  that  the  very  things  which  are  genuine  and 

II  established  by  experiment  are  perverted  by  things  which 
;are  both  inconsistent  and  unproved. 

\    And  the  natures  of  the  animals  above  mentioned  have  an 

lintimate  connection  with  the  parts  of  the  universe  ;  the  ox 

lis  connected  with  the  earth,  as  being  an  animal  employed  in 

[drawing  the  plough  and  in  tilling  the  earth  ;  the  goat  again 

is  connected  with  the  water  (it  is  called  in  Greek  and  Arme- 

aian  df^,  or  ajx),  being  an  animal  deriving  its  name  from 

driving  and  rushing  on  (from  ayu  or  dtaaoj)  ■    since  water 

8  an  impetuous  thing,  and  the  course  of  rivers,  and  the 

?xtent  of  the  breadth  of  the  sea,  and  the  sea  itself  agitated 

IS  it  is  by  its  ebb  and  flow,  are  witnesses  of  the  propriety  of 

ihe  name  and  of  the  closeness  of  the  connection. 

And  the  ram  {aries)  is  connected  with  the  air,  as  being  a 
ery  violent  and  vivacious  animal,  on  which  account  too  the 
j'am  is  more  useful  to  mankind  than  any  other  animal  as 
!.ffording  them  raiment. 

Therefore,  on  account  of  these  reasons,  as  I  think,  God 
rders  him  first  to  take  these  two  female  animals,  the  cow 
nd  the  she-goat ;  since  both  these  elements,  earth  and  water, 
re  material,  and  for  the  most  part  feminine.  But  the  third  he 
ill  have  a  male,  namely  the  ram  ;  becaues  the  air  or  wind 
as  been  explained  as  masculine ;  since  the  natures  of  all 
lings  are  divided  into  bodies  or  into  earth  and  water,  and 
male  animals  exist  by  nature.  But  that  which  exhibits  a 
inilitude  to  the  soul  is  arranged  under  the  head  of  air  and 
le  breath  of  life.  And  this,  as  I  have  said,  is  masculine. 
'  therefore  we  are  to  call  that  masculine  which  is  the  moving: 
id  active  cause  we  must  call  that  feminine  which  is  moved 
id  passive. 


410  PHILO   JUD^US. 

But  the  whole  heaven  is  found  to  be  familiarly  connectec 
with  flying  birds  such  as  the  pigeon  and  turtle  dove,  beinj 
distributed  as  it  is  into  the  rotatory  path  of  the  planets  an( 
fixed  stars. 

Therefore  be  dedicates  the  pigeon  to  tbe  planets,  for  tha 
is  a  tame  and  domestic  animal,  as  also  the  planets  are  mon 
familiarly  connected  with  us  as  being  nearer  to  the  earth 
and  as  having  sympathies  with  us ;  but  he  consecrates  th( 
turtle  dove  to  the  fixed  stars,  for  that  animal  is  a  lover  o 
solitude,  and  flees  from  the  conversation  of  the  multitude 
and  from  all  connection  of  every  kind.  And  so  also  the 
globe  itself  is  remote,  and  a  thing  which  wanders  into  th( 
furthest  extremities  of  the  world. 

Therefore  both  the  species  of  these  two  birds  are  assimi- 
lated to  the  divine  attributes,  since  as  Plato,  the  disciple  o1 
Socrates,  says  it  is  fitting  that  the  heaven  should  have  a  swifl 
chariot  by  reason  of  its  very  swift  rotatory  motion,  which  in 
fact  surpasses  even  the  birds  themselves  in  the  velocity  ol 
their  course.  But  the  birds  above  mentioned  are  singers ; 
the  prophet  indicating  by  an  enigmatical  expression  that 
perfect  music  which  exists  in  heaven  harmoniously  adapted 
from  the  motion  of  the  stars,  since  it  is  a  proof  of  human 
art  when  the  corresponding  music  of  the  voices  of  animals 
and  of  living  instruments  is  adapted  together  by  the  industry 
of  genius.  But  this  heavenly  music  has  been  abundantly 
extended  over  the  earth  by  the  Creator,  as  he  has  also 
extended  the  rays  of  the  sun,  being  always  prompt  to  exer- 
cise his  beneficent  care  for  the  human  race. 

For  such  music  excites  frenzy  in  the  ears,  and  brings  un- 
restrained pleasure  to  the  mind ;  and  so  causes  men  to 
forget  even  their  meat  and  drink,  and  even  when  hunger 
brings  death  to  the  door  to  be  willing  even  to  die  out  of  a 
desire  to  hear  music. 

And  if  the  song  of  the  Sirens,  *  as  Homer  tells  us,  invites 
the  heavens  so  forcibly^  that  they  forget  while  listening  to 

*  He  alludes  here  to  the  description  in  Homer  : 

^tipfjvag  fikv  TTQuiTov  CKpi^eai,  ai  pd  ts  iravTaq 
'AvOpojTTOVQ  OkXyovaiv  '6,tiq  a(p'iaQ  ei(Ta<piKT]Tai 
"0(TTiQ  aiSptii^  TrtXdcry  Kal  cpdoyyov  OKOvcry 
J^upriVdiv,  Tip  d'  OVTL  yvvTj,  Kai  vijTria  TSKva 
OiKade  vocrrjrravn  Trapiararaiy  ovOk  yavvvTai 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  411 

it,  their  country,  their  houses,  their  friends,  and  necessary 
food;  how  much  more  must  that  most  perfect  and  consum- 
'mate  music,  so  truly  heavenly  and  endowed  with  the  highest 
i  degree  of  harmony,  when  it  touches  the  organs  of  the  ear, 
j compel  men  to  go  mad  and  to  yield  to  rapture. 

'AXXa  r£  'S,£ipfjvtg  Xiyvpy  9sXyov(Tiv  aoi^y, 
'Hfiivai  iv  Xti^uivf  ttoXvq  S'  a.ii(f  6aTt6<piv  Qi(, 
AvSpCJv  TTvOoiisvujv,  TTtpl  dk  pivot  fXLvvQovaiv. 

Od.  xii.  39—47. 
As  translated  by  Pope  : — 

*'  Next,  where  the  Sirens  dwell,  you  plough  the  seas ; 
Their  song  is  death,  and  naakes  destruction  please. 
Unblest  the  man,  whom  music  wins  to  stay 
Nigh  the  curst  shore,  and  listen  to  the  lay ; 
No  more  that  wretch  shall  view  the  joys  of  life, 
His  blooming  offspring,  or  his  beauteous  wife  ! 
In  verdant  meads  they  sport,  and  wide  around 
Lie  human  bones  that  whiten  all  the  ground ; 
The  ground  polluted  floats  with  human  gore, 
And  human  carnage  taints  the  dreadful  shore." 

And  further  on  in  the  same  book,  the  poet  describes  the  effect  of  these 
Bongs  upon  Ulysses. 

Kt.yvpf}v  d""  tvTvvov  aoidrjv 
Atvp'  ay*  itjjv,  TCoXvaiv   'O^ucrtu,  jtxfya  kv^oq  ^K\aiu)Vt 
N/jct  KaTaarrjaov  iva  vuj'iT(pr)v  bir  cLKOvayg. 
Ov  yap  TTw  TiQ  rySe  TraprjXaae  vr)X  niXaivy, 
Tipii>  y'  rifisojv  jUiXiyi/pvv  dirb  OTOixciTiov  bir'  aKovaai 
'AW  oye  Tep-il/cLfxivog  vtlrai,  Kal  TrXeiova  tidu>g. 
'iSfitv  yap  TOi  7rdv9*  off'  Ivi  Tpoiy  tiipeiy 
'ApyeToi  TpCJiQ  re,  Qtuiv  i6ti]ti  fioyqaav 
"Idfitv  9'  oa<Ta  ysvrjToi  IttI  x^ovl  ■KovXv^orupr]. 

"Qg  <pd(TaVf  tfiffai  bira  koXXihov,  avrdp  ifibv  Krjp 
'H0f\*  ciKOvifiivai,  Xvoai  t  tKiXtvov  iraipovQ, 
'  'Ocppvai  vtvaToJ^iaV  ot  ^6  TrpoTrtcrovrtg  'iptaaov. 

Od.  xii.  183—194 

translated  by  Pope  : — 

"  0  stay,  0  pride  of  Greece  !  Ulysses,  stay  .' 
0  cease  thy  course  and  listen  our  to  lay  ! 
Blest  is  the  man  ordained  our  voice  to  hear. 
The  song  instructs  the  soul,  and  charms  the  ear. 
Approach  !  thy  soul  shall  into  raptures  rise  ! 
Approach  !  and  learn  new  wisdom  from  the  wise  ! 
We  know  whate'er  the  kings  of  mighty  name 
Achieved  at  Ilion  in  the  field  of  Fame ; 
Whate'er  beneath  the  sun's  bright  journey  lies. 
0  stay  and  learn  new  wisdom  from  the  wise  !" 


412  PHILO   JUD^US. 


But  the  reason  on  account  of  which  every  one  of  tb 
animals  to  be  offered  is  to  be  three  years  of  age  has  already 
been  explained  ;  and  we  must  now  discuss  it  under  another 
form  of  mystery,  since  it  has  been  seen  that  every  one  of  those 
things  which  were  called  into  existence  and  subsequently  to 
the  moon,  such  as  the  earth,  water,  and  air,  rejoice  in  an  order 
connected  with  the  number  three. 

In  the  divisions  of  earth  there  is  a  vast  quantity  of  dry 
continent,  islands  and  peninsulas.  AVater  is  divided  into  sea, 
rivers,  and  lakes ;  and  the  air  into  the  two  equinoxes,  the 
vernal  and  the  autumnal ;  and  they  may  be  taken  as  one,  for 
they  have  an  equal  proportion  of  day  and  night,  and  accord- 
ingly the  equinoxes  are  neither  hot  nor  cold.  Add  to  these  the 
changes  of  summer  and  winter,  for  the  sun  is  borne  through 
those  three  circles  into  the  seasons  of  summer,  winter,  and 
the  equinoxes.  Therefore,  in  the  first  place,  the  natural 
arrangement  will  be  of  this  kind ;  and  the  moral  arrange- 
ment is  properly  thus. 

In  every  one  of  us  there  are  three  things  flesh,  the  outward 
sense,  and  reason ;  therefore  the  calf  exhibits  a  familiarity  with 
the  corporeal  substance,  since  our  flesh  is  subdued  by,  and  kept 
in  subservience  to,  and  in  connection  with  the  ministrations 
of  life  ;  also  their  nature  is  female  according  to  matter,  being 
calculated  rather  to  be  passive  and  to  be  subject  rather  than 
to  be  active. 

But  the  similitude  of  the  she-goat  is  connected  with  the  com- 
niunion  of  the  outward  senses,  either  because  all  the  objects 
of  those  outward  senses  are  each  borne  towards  their  ap- 
propriate sensation,  or  because  each  impulse  and  motion  of 
the  soul  takes  place  in  consequence  of  an  imagination 
formed  of  the  objects  received  through  the  medium  of  the 
external  senses.  And  this  is  followed,  in  the  first  place,  by  a 
certain  inflexion  or  alienation,  which  by  some  is  called  an 
occasion,  that  is  to  say,  an  impulse  affecting  each  kind  of 
sense.  But  since  the  female  is  the  outward  sense,  as  being 
passive  in  consequence  of  what  is  subjected  to  the  outward 
senses,  therefore  God  has  adapted  to  it  a  female  animal,  the 
she-goat. 

But  the  ram  is  akin  to  the  word,  or  to  reason.  In  the 
first  place,  because  it  is  a  male  animal ;  secondly,  because  it 
is  a  working  animal ;  and  thirdly,  because  it  is  the  cause  of 


I 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  413 

fthe  world,  and  of  the  firmament ;  that  is  to  say,  the  ram  is 
'so  by  means  of  the  clothing  which  it  suppHes ;  and  reason, 
or  the  word,  is  so  in  the  arrangement  of  life  ;  for  whatever 
is  not  irregular  and  absurd  immediately  exhibits  reason. 
And  there  are  two  species  of  reason ;  the  one  derived  from 
ithat  nature  by  which  the  affairs  of  the  world  subjected  to 
tthe  outward  senses  are  finished  ;  the  other  from  that  of  those 
ithings  which  are  called  incorporeal  species,  by  which  the 
.^affairs  of  that  world  which  is  the  object  of  the  intellect  are 
Ibrought  to  their  accomplishment.  Therefore  the  pigeon 
jand  the  turtle  dove  are  found  to  resemble  these. 
\  The  pigeon,  forsooth,  resembles  speculation  in  natural  phi- 
i  osophy ;  for  it  is  a  more  familiar  bird,  as  the  objects  of  the 
mtward  sense  are  exceedingly  familiar  to  the  sight :  and  the 
joul  of  the  inquirer  into  natural  science  flies  upward  as  if  it 
vere  furnished  with  wings  ;  and  being  borne  aloft  is  carried 
•ound  the  heaven,  discerning  every  part  of  everything,  and  the 
)rinciples  of  every  separate  thing;  for  the  turtle  dove  imitates 
hat  species  which  is  the  subject  of  intellect  and  incorporeal ; 
or  as  that  animal  is  fond  of  solitude,  so  it  is  superior  to  the 
iolent  species  which  come  under  the  outward  sense,  associat- 
ng  itself  as  it  does  with  the  invisible  species  by  its  essence. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  And  he  took  unto  him  all  these 
hings  ?  "  * 

4.  He  has  added  also  that  expression,  "  And  he  took  unto 
lira,"  with  especial  propriety ;  for  it  is  the  sign  of  a  soul 
horoughly  imbued  with  the  love  of  God  to  ascribe  whatever 
cod  and  noble  theories  and  feelings  it  receives,  not  unto 
iself,  but  wholly  to  God  who  is  the  giver  of  all  benefits. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  He  divided  them  in  the  middle 
jnd  laid  the  pieces  opposite  to  one  another  ?  "  t 

T).  Also  the  whole  structure  of  the  body,  as  of  flesh,  is  to 
.c  looked  at  in  such  a  light  as  this  according  to  its  whole 
jpeation ;  for  the  parts  are  brothers ;  not  as  they  are  divided 
nd  placed  opposite  to  one  another;  but,  being  naturally 
icHned  to  one  another,  and  having  a  mutual  regard  to  one 
Qother,  on  account  of  their  natural  co-operation;  the 
riginal  Creator  who  gave  them  life  making  this  division  for 
Genesis  xv.  10.  f  Ibid. 


414  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

the  sake  of  usefulness,  so  that  one  part  should  be  opposed  to 
the  other  part,  and  again  that  both  should  reciprocally  seek 
one  another  in  all  necessary  ministrations. 

In  this  way  he  has  directly  separated  the  sense  of  sight, 
distributing  it  equally  to  two  eyes  by  placing  the  nose 
between  them  and. thus  turning  each  eye  to  the  other ;  for  the 
pupils,  if  I  may  so  say,  lean  both  in  one  direction  so  as 
mutually  to  behold  the  same  thing,  scarcely  ever  straying 
beyond  the  position  in  which  they  are  placed,  but  only 
looking  towards  one  another,  especially  when  anything 
comes  across  their  sight. 

And  in  similar  manner  the  faculty  of  hearing  is  distributed! 
between  the  two  ears,  which  are  both  reciprocally  turned  to 
one  another,  both  tending  to  one  and  the  same  operation. 
And  the  sense  of  smell  is  divided  between  the  two  nostrils, 
beingturned  towards  the  two  tubesof  the  nostrils,  which  are  not 
revolving  around  or  inclined  towards  the  cheeks,  so  as  being 
drawn  in  two  different  directions  to  look  the  one  towards  the 
right  and  the  other  towards  the  left,  but  being  both  collected 
together  and  turned  inwards  they  await  all  smells  with  a 
common  action. 

So  also  the  hands  are  not  made  of  an  appearance  contrary  to 
that  of  one  another,  but  being  like  brothers  and  like  divisible 
parts,  looking  to  one  another  mutually,  and  being  prepared  by 
nature  for  an  operation  and  employment  suitable  to  them, 
they  thus  act  in  the  operations  of  receiving,  giving,  and 
working.  And  the  feet  are  not  constituted  differently  from 
the  hands ;  as  each  of  them  behaves  in  such  a  manner  that 
they  both  yield  the  one  to  the  other,  and  progress  is  effected 
by  the  motion  of  both  together,  so  that  nothing  can  be 
accomplished  by  one  alone,  Nor  is  it  only  the  feet  and 
shins,  but  also  the  legs  and  knee-pans,  and  hips,  and  the 
breasts,  and  in  fact  every  part  on  the  right  or  left  of  the 
body,  being  divided  in  a  similar  manner,  indicate  one  gene-i 
ral  harmony  and  correspondence  and  union  as  it  were  ofj 
connatural  parts ;  that  is  to  say,  of  all  of  those  different! 
members  enumerated  according  to  their  separate  species,      j 

And  generally,  whoever  considers  together  and  in  an  equals 
manner  all  the  above  mentioned  parts  thus  subdivided,  in 
reference  to  their  joint  operation,  will  find  one  nature  com- 
bined of  the  two  parts.     As  the  hands,  united  and  connected 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  415 

■together  witli  the  fingers,  are  seen  when  in  union  with  them  to 
iexhibit  a  harmony;  and  the  feet,  when  re-united  in  operation, 
i  are  seen  to  tend  to  union;  and  the  ears,  when  similarly  combined 
jin  the  figure  of  an  amphitheatre,  are  seen  to  unite  themselves, 
lln  efiect  extending  across  the  space  which  separates  them. 
}|  Therefore  our  nature,  continually  making  in  this  manner  a 
Jiivision  of  those  parts  which  exist  in  us  according  to  each 
Separate  species,  has  first  of  all  separated  and  arranged  the 
riifferent  sections,  placing  them  as  it  were  opposite  to  one  ano- 
,:her  in  the  same  way  in  which  it  has  arranged  the  world ; 
ind  it  has  also  arranged  them  with  reference  to  the  easy  dis- 
ijharge  of  their  several  duties.  And  again  it  has  combined  each 
l)f  these  members  according  to  each  species  into  one  action, 
imd  into  the  same  operation,  collecting  together  all  of  them 
'vhen  considered  generally. 

Nor  is  it  only  the  parts  of  the  body  which  any  one  may 

i.ee  thus  united  and  in  pairs,  separated  in  their  union,  and 

jigain  united  in  their  division,  but  the  parts  of  the  soul  are 

0  too.    But  since  the  two  superior  sections  of  this  are  so 

nany  separate  clasFes,  namely  the  rational  and  the  irrational, 

0  also  the  separate  parts  of  each  section  have  their  own 

ppropriate  division ;  as  for  instance,  the  rational  part  is 

livided  into  the  intention  and  into  the  uttered  word  ;  and 

hat  part   which   exists   in   accordance  with   the    outward 

cnses  is  divided  into  the  four  senses ;  for  the  fifth  sense, 

ouch,  is  common  to  the  other  four,  two  of  which,  those  with 

v'hich  we  see  and  hear,  are  philosophical  senses,  so  that  it  is  by 

leans  of  them  that  the  power  of  living  well  is  acquired  for 

18 ;  the  others  are  non-philosophical,  namely  smell  and  taste, 

I'ut  are  servile,  being  created  only  for  living ;  for  the  sense 

f  smell,  by  means  of  its  exercise,  contains  many  things 

hich  awaken  it,  and  receives  a  continual  breathing  which 

>  as  it  were  the  continual  food  of  living  creatures ;  there- 

3re  smell  and  taste  support  this  mortal  body,  but  sight  and 

earing  aff'ord  service  to  the  immortal  soul. 

Therefore  these  divisions  of  our  members,  according  to  our 

ody  and  soul,  were  made  and  separated  by  the   Creator ; 

owever,  we  must  know  that  the  parts  of  the  world  also  are 

rranged  in  two   divisions  and  are  placed  opposite  to  one 

uother ;  the   earth   being    divided  into   mountainous  and 

hampaign  districts ;  the  water  into  sweet  and  salt,  sweet 


416  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

being  that  which  is  supplied  by  springs  and  rivers,  and  salt 
being  that  which  comes  from  the  sea;  as  also  the  atmo- 
sphere is  divided  into  summer  and  winter,  and  also  into 
spring  and  autumn. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  Heraclitus  wrote  his  books 
about  nature,  having  borrowed  his  theory  of  contraries  from 
our  sacred  historian,  with  the  addition  of  an  infinite  number 
of  laborious  arguments. 

Why  is  it  said,  "  But  he  did  not  divide  the  birds  ?"  * 

6.   He  is  shadowing  forth  a  fifth  and  periodical  nature, 
from  which  the  ancients  say  that  the  heaven  was  made ;  for 
the  four  elements  are  mixtures  rather  than  elements:  by 
which  he  subdivides  those  things  which  are  already  divided 
into  those  materials  of  which  they  were  originally  composed, 
as  the  earth  includes  within  itself  a  portion  of  the  elements 
of  water,  and  also  of  air,  and  also  of  fire,  which  however 
obtains  the  appellation  not  so  much  in  accordance  with  our 
apprehension  of  it,  as  with  our  sight ;  and  again  the  water 
is  not  so  clear  or  pure,  as  not  to  have  some  participation  in 
wind  and  earth ;  and  so  also  in  each  of  the  other  elements 
there  is  a  certain  tempering  and  combination ;  but  the  fifth 
substance  is  the  only  one  which  has  been  made  unmixed 
and  pure,  on  which  account  it  was  not  accustomed  to  be 
mentioned  at  all. 

Therefore  it  is  well  said,  he  did  not  divide  the  birds; 
since  the  heavenly  nature,  both  of  the  planets  and  also  of 
the  fixed  stars,  is  raised  on  high  like  that  of  birds,  in  the 
similitude  of  both  kinds,  that  is  to  say,  of  clean  birds,  the 
turtle  dove  and  the  pigeon,  which  scarcely  admit  of  being 
divided  or  cut  up ;  for  the  indivisible  nature  is  of  a  fifth 
essence,  more  unmixed  and  pure  than  the  others,  and  there- 
fore it  more  closely  resembles  unity. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  And  the  birds  descended  on  the  | 
bodies  which  were  divided  ?" 

7.  Since  the  three  animals,  the  heifer,  and  the  she-goat, 

and  the  ram,  were  divided  in  a  symbolical  manner,  they  are 

signs,  as  we  have  already  said,  of  the  earth,  and  water,  and 

air ;  still  it  is  necessary  to  give  now  a  reason  for  this,  ex- 

*  Genesis  xv.  10.  t  Genesis  xv.  11. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  417 

amining  the  truth  carefully  under  the  mystery  of  a  simili- 
tude. 

Perhaps  therefore  he  designs  and  intimates  by   the  de- 
scent of  the  birds  on  the  cut  pieces   an  invasion   of  ene- 
mies;  for  all  the  nature  of  the  world  beneath  the  moon  is 
full  of  battles  and  ill  will,  both  domestic  and  external ;  and 
the  birds  in  truth  appear  to  fly  down  on  the  divided  bodies 
for  the  sake  of  meat  and  drink  ;  naturally  indeed  it  is  the 
1  stronger  which  descend  upon  the  weaker  animals,  as  upon 
^dead  bodies,  attacking  them  in  general  unexpectedly,  but 
!  they  do  not  fly  down  on  the  turtle  dove  and  pigeon,  since 
fthe  heavenly  bodies  are  free  from  desires  and  unconscious 
of  suff*ering  wrong. 

Why  is  it  that  he  says,  "  Abraham  passed  over  and  sat 
upon  them  ?"* 

8.  Those  who  think  that  sacrifice  is  indicated  by  the 
matters  about  which  we  are  at  present  speaking  will  say 
that  the  virtuous  man,  sitting  as  it  were  in  a  synagogue,  has 
examined  into  the  entrails  of  the  divided  animals,  as  if  that 
were  looked  upon  as  an  unerring  symbol  for  the  declaration 
of  the  truth ;  but  we,  who  adhere  to  Moses  and  who  are 
thoroughly  acquainted  with  the  views  of  that  teacher,  one 
who,  turning  away  his  face  from  every  sophistical  appearance 
md  prognostic,  trusted  in  God  alone,  will  rather  say,  that 
le  has  here  introduced  the  just  man  who  is  endued  with 
artue  with  the  birds  themselves,  who  were  congregated 
together  and  flying  about  over  him,  intending  to  denote 
lothing  else  by  this  parabolical  presentation,  but  that  he  is 
lesirous  of  hindering  injustice  and  covetousness,  and  is 
nost  hostile  to  quarrels  and  wars,  and  a  lover  of  consistency 
nd  peace  ;  for  he  himself  is  truly  a  guardian  of  peace. 

Since  no  one  state  has  ever  rested  in  tranquillity  owing  to 
I  he  conduct  of  the  wicked,  but  kingdoms  have  become  fixed 
'teadily  when  one  or  two  men  endued  with  virtue  have 
risen,  whose  virtue  has  put  an  end  to  civil  disturbances, 
■  od  granting  to  those  who  are  earnest  in  the  pursuit  of 
iitue  good  habits  calculated  to  procure  them  honour; 
lul  not  to  them  only,  but  to  those  also  who  approach  near 
I  the  production  of  general  advantage. 

*  Genesis  xv.  11. 
VOL.  IT.  E   E 


418  .  PHILO   JUDvEUS. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  words,  "  About  the  time  of 
the  setting  of  the  sun  a  trance  fell  upon  Abraham ;  and  lo, 
a  great  horror  of  darkness  came  over  him  ?  "* 

9.  A  certain  divine  excess  was  suddenly  rendered  calm  to 
the  man  endued  with  virtue ;  for  the  trance,  or  ecstacy  as 
the  w^ord  itself  evidently  points  out,  is  nothing  else  than  a 
departure  of  the  mind  wandering  beyond  itself  f 

But  the  class  of  prophets  loves  to  be  subject  to  such 
influences ;  for  when  it  is  divining,  and  when  the  intellect  is 
inspired  with  divine  things,  it  no  longer  exists  in  itself, 
since  it  receives  the  divine  spirit  within  and  permits  it  to 
dwell  with  itself;  or  rather,  as  he  himself  has  expressed  it,  a 
spirit  falls  upon  him ;  since  it  does  not  come  slowly  over 
him,  but  rushes  down  upon  him  suddenly. 

Moreover,  that  which  he  has  added  afterwards  applies 
admirably,  that  a  great  horror  of  darknes^  fell  upon  him. 
For  all  these  things  are  ecstacies  of  the  mind ;  for  he  also 
who  is  in  a  state  of  alarm  is  not  in  himself ;  but  darkness  is 
a  hindrance  to  his  sight ;  and  in  proportion  as  the  horror  is 
greater,  so  also  do  his  powers  of  seeing  and  understanding 
became  more  obscured. 

And  this  is  not  said  without  reason  :  but  as  an  indication 
of  the  evident, knowledge  of  prophecy  by  which  oracles  and 
laws  are  given  from  Grod. 

Why  was  it  said  to  him,  "  Thou  shalt  know  to  a  certainty 
that  thy  seed  shall  be  a  stranger  in  a  land  that  is  not  theirs, 
and  shall  be  reduced  to  slavery,  and  shall  be  grievously 
afflicted  for  forty  years  ?"J 

10.  That  expression  is  admirably  used, "  It  was  said  to 
him,"  since  a  prophet  is  supposed  to  utter  something,  but 
yet  he  is  not  pronouncing  any  command  of  his  own,  but  is 
only  the  interpreter  of  another  who  sends  something  into 
his  mind ;  and  moreover  whatever  he  does  utter  and  deliver* 
in  words  is  all  true  and  divine.  And  in  the  first  place,  hd 
declares  that  a  family  of  the  human  race  is  to  dwell  in  a  land 
belonging  to  another ;  for  all  things  which  are  beneath  the| 

*  Genesis  xv.  12. 

t  tKaraaiQ,  derived  from  i^ioTaiiai,  in  2nd  aor.  act.  tUarrjVf  "I  was 
beside  myself." 
1  Genesis  xv.  13. 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  419 

heaven  are  tlie  possession  of  God,  and  those  living  creatures 
which  exist  on  the  earth  may  more  properly  and  truly  be  said 
to  be  sojourners  in  a  foreign  land  than  to  be  dwelling  in  a 
country  of  their  own  which  by  nature  they  have  not  got. 

In  the  second  place,  he  thus  declares  to  us  that  every 
mortal  is  a  slave  after  his  kind.  But  no  man  is  found  to  be 
free,  but  every  one  has  many  masters  who  vex  and  afflict  him 
both  within  and  without ;  for  instance,  without  there  are 
the  winter  which  affects  him  with  the  cold,  the  summer  which 
scorches  him  with  heat,  and  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  many 
other  calamities  ;  and  within  there  are  pleasures  and  con- 
cupiscences, and  sorrows,  and  fears.  But  his  servitude  is 
hmited  to  a  period  of  four  hundred  years,  during  which  the 
aforesaid  pleasures  shall  rise  up  against  him.  On  which 
account  it  has  been  said  above,  that  Abraham  passed  over 
and  sat  upon  them,  hindering  and  repelling  them  ;  as  far  as 
1  lie  literal  words  go,  repelling  those  carnivorous  birds  which 
\\  ere  hovering  over  the  divided  animals,  but  in  fact  repelling 
the  afflictions  which  come  upon  men.  Since  a  man  who  is 
in  his  own  proper  nature  a  lover  of,  and  also  by  diligent 
practice  a  studier  of  virtue,  is  a  most  humane  physician  of 
our  race,  and  a  true  protector  of  it,  and  guardian  of  it  from 
evil.  For  all  these  things  have  an  allegorical  reference  to 
the  soul. 

For  while  the  soul  of  the  wise  man,  descending  from  above 
from  the  sky,  comes  down  upon  and  enters  a  mortal  and  is 
sown  in  the  field  of  the  body,  it  is  truly  sojourning  in  a  land 
which  is  not  his  own.  Since  the  earthly  nature  of  the  body 
is  wholly  alien  from  pure  intellect,  and  tends  to  subdue  it 
and  to  drag  it  downwards  into  slavery,  bringing  every  kind 
,  of  affliction  upon  it,  until  the  sorrow,  bringing  the  attractive 
:  multitude  of  vices  to  judgment,  condemns  them  ;  and  thus 
it  last  the  soul  is  restored  to  freedom.  And  it  is  on  this 
;  account  that  he  subsequently  adds  the  sentence,  "  Neverthe- 
less the  nation  which  they  shall  send  I  will  judge  :  and  after- 
wards they  shall  go  forth  with  great  substance  ;"  namely,  with 
the  same  measure,  and  still  better.  Because  then  the  mind  is 
released  from  its  mischievous  colleague,  departing  out  of  the 
body  and  being  transferred  not  only  with  freedom  but 
also  with  much  substance ;  so  as  to  leave  nothing  good  or 
useful  behind  to  its  enemies. 

E  E  2 


4i?0  PHILO   JUD^US. 

Since  every  rational  soul  is  productive,  but  lie  who  thinks 
himself  loaded  and  endued  with  virtue  in  his  own  counsel, 
is  unable  to  preserve  his  fruit  unto  the  end.  Por  it  becomes 
a  virtuous  man  to  attain  to  the  objects  which  he  has  intended 
of  his  own  accord,  as  also  the  counsels  of  wisdom  correspond 
to  those  objects.  Since,  as  some  trees,  although  they  appear 
productive  at  the  first  season  of  the  budding  of  their  fruits, 
are  yet  unable  to  bring  them  to  maturity,  so  that  the  whole 
fruit  before  it  becomes  ripe  is  shaken  off  by  every  trifling 
cause  ;  in  the  same  manner  the  souls  of  inconstant  men  feel 
many  influences  which  contribute  to  their  productiveness, 
but  nevertheless  are  unable  to  keep  them  sound  till  they 
arrive  at  perfection,  as  a  man  studious  of  virtue  ought  to  do 
in  order  eventually  to  gather  them  as  his  own  possessions. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  But  thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers 
in  peace,  being  nourished  in  a  fair  old  age  ?  "* 

11.  He  here  clearly  indicates  the  incorruptibility  of  the 
soul :  when  it  transfers  itself  out  of  the  abode  of  the  mortal 
body  and  returns  as  it  were  to  the  metropolis  of  its  native 
country,  from  which  it  originally  emigrated  into  the  body. 
Since  to  say  to  a  dead  man,  "  Thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers," 
what  else  is  this  but  to  propose  to  him  and  set  before  him  a 
second  existence  apart  from  the  body  as  far  as  it  is  proper 
for  the  soul  of  the  wise  man  to  dwell  by  itself  ? 

But  when  he  says  this  he  does  not  mean  by  the  fathers  of 
Abraham  his  father,  and  his  grandfather,  and  his  great-grand- 
fathers after  the  flesh,  for  they  were  not  all  deserving  of 
praise  so  as  to  be  by  any  possibility  any  honour  to  him 
who  arrived  at  the  succession  of  the  same  order,  but  he 
appears  by  this  expression  to  be  assigning  to  him  for  his 
fathers,  according  to  the  opinion  of  many  commentators,  all 
the  elements  into  which  the  mortal  man  when  deceased  is 
resolved. 

But  to  me  he  appears  to  intend  to  indicate  the  incorporeal 
substances  and  inhabiters  of  the  divine  world,  whom  in  other 
passages  he  is  accustomed  to  call  angels.  Moreover  the 
words  which  follow  are  not  by  any  means  without  an  object, 
that  he  is  nourished  in  peace  and  in  a  fair  old  age.  Por  the 
wicked  and  depraved  man  is  nourished  in  battle,  and  hves 

*  Genesis  xv.  15. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  4Q1 

and  departs  in  a  very  bad  old  age.  But  the  good  man,  in 
both  phases  of  existence,  both  in  that  which  is  in  connection 
with  the  body  and  in  that  which  is  apart  from  the  body, 
cultivates  peace,  and  is  alone  completely  virtuous,  such  as 
no  foolish  person  is  found  to  be,  even  though  he  should  live 
longer  than  an  elephant ;  on  which  account  he  here  carefully 
said,  "  Thou  shalt  go  to  thy  fathers,  being  nourished — not  in 
an  advanced  old  age,  but — in  a  fair  old  age."  For  many 
foolish  persons  also  have  their  lives  extended  to  a  greatly 
lengthened  period,  but  it  is  only  the  man  who  is  desirous  of 
'  virtue  who  enjoys  a  good  old  age  and  one  endued  with  virtue. 

Why  is  it  that  he  says,  "  And  in  the  fourth  generation 
S  they  shall  return  again  hither  ?"* 

12.  The  number  four  is  more  fit  than  any  other  number, 
:  for  this  reason,  that  as  it  is  more  perfect,  and  is  the  root  and 
j  foundation  of  the  perfect  number  ten ;  and  it  is  according 
to  the  principle  of  the  number  four  that  all  collected  are  to 
return  hither,  as  he  himself  has  said.  But  as  he  by  himself 
is  perfect,  so  also  those  of  whom  he  is  the  father  are 
evidently  perfect. 

But  what  is  it  that  I  am  saying  ?     In  the  generation  of 
animals  the  sowing  of  the  seed  has  the  first  place  ;  in  the 
second  place,  comes  the  fact  of  each  instrument  being,  in 
some   manner,   impressed   by   something  akin    to    nature ; 
thirdly,  there  is  the  growth  after  the  first  formation  of  the 
creature ;  fourthly,  after  everything  else  comes  the  perfec- 
tion, that  is  to  say,  the  birth.  And  the  same  principle  and 
order  prevail  in  plants ;  the    seed  is  cast  into  the   earth, 
then  it  pushes  its  way  both  upwards  and  downwards,  partly 
in  roots  and  partly  in  branches  ;  after  that  it  increases ;  and 
I  fourthly,  it  produces  fruit ;  and  in  the  same  manner  again 
the  trees,  when  made,  first  of  all  produce  fruit,  which  sub- 
sequently grows ;  then,  as  it  becomes  ripe,  it  changes  colour ; 
land,  fourthly,  and  this  is  the  last  operation,  it  completes  and 
I  perfects  its  work,  the  consequence  of  which  is  the  use  and 
■enjoyment  of  it  by  men. 

j     What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  For  the  sins  of  the  Amorites 
were  not  as  yet  completed  ?"t 

I  •  Genesis  xv.  16  +  Ibid. 


422  PHILO  JUD^US. 

13.  Some  persons  have  said,  tbat  by  this  expression  of 
the  principle  of  Moses  fate  is  expressly  introduced,  as  if,  in 
truth,  everything  was  to  be  accomplished  according  to  some 
particular  hour  and  appointed  period  of  time. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  And  when  the  sun  was  in  the 
west  a  flame  arose  ?"* 

14.  It  means  either  that  the  sun  himself  appeared  in  the 
west  in  the  similitude  of  a  flame,  or  that  some  other  flame 
appeared  at  eventide,  not  lightning,  but  some  fire  like  it, 
which  descended  from  above.  The  manifest  interpretation 
of  the  oracle  is  this ;  but  we  must  now  discuss  that  which 
regards  the  inner  sense. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  Behold  there 
was  a  smoking  furnace  and  torches  of  fires,  which  passed 
through  the  middle  of  those  divisions  ?"t 

15.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  statement  is  plain,  for  the 
fountain  or  root  of  the  divine  word  will  have  the  victims 
consumed,  not  by  that  fire  which  is  given  for  our  use,  but 
by  that  which  descends  from  above,  out  of  heaven,  in  order 
that  the  purity  of  the  essence  of  heaven  may  bear  witness  to 
the  sanctity  of  the  victims. 

But  if  we  regard  the  inward  meaning  of  the  words,  all 
things  which  are  done  beneath  the  moon  are  here  com- 
pared to  a  smoking  furnace,  on  account  of  the  vapour  which 
rises  up  out  of  the  earth  and  water.  As  also  the  divisions 
of  nature  are,  as  has  been  already  shown,  every  portion  of 
the  world  being  divided  into  two  parts ;  and  by  these  there 
are  kindled,  as  it  were,  torches  of  fire,  being  powers  which 
are  more  rapid  in  motion  and  more  efficacious,  being  burn- 
ing, in  truth,  like  divine  fiery  discourses,  at  one  time  keeping 
the  whole  universe  in  a  state  of  integrity  reciprocally  with 
themselves,  and  at  another  cleansing  away  the  superfluous 
darkness. 

But  the  following  interpretation  may  also  be  given  with  f 
propriety  in  a  more  familiar  manner.     Human  life  is  like  i 
unto  a  smoking  furnace,  because  it  has  not  a  pure  fire  and  ^ 
an  unalloyed  brilliancy,  but  a  great  deal  of  smoke,  smoking 
darkly  through  the  flame,  which  causes  mist  and  darkness, 
*  Genesis  xv.  17.  +  Genesis  xv.  18. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  423 

I  and  an  obscuration,  not  of  the  "body  but  of  the  soul,  so  that 
[  this  last  cannot  discern  things  clearly,  until  God  the  re- 
deemer commands  the  heavenly  lamps  to  arise,  I  mean  those 
I  more  pure  and  more  holy  radiations  which  unite  those  parts 
'  previously  divided  in  two,  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the  leffc, 
and,  at  the  same  time,  illuminate  them,  being  the  causes  of 
harmony  and  of  lucid  clearness. 

Why  did  he  say,  "  On  that  day,  God  made  a  covenant  with 
Abraham,  saying,  To  thy  seed  will  I  give  this  land,  from 
the  river  of  Egypt  to  the  great  river  Euphrates  ?"* 

16.  The  literal  expression  describes  the  boundaries  of  the 

space  which  lies  in  the  middle,  between   the   two  rivers 

[Egyptus  and  Euphrates,  for  anciently  the  river  was  also 

[called  by  the  same  name  as  the  district,  Egypt,  as  the  poet 

also  testifies  when  he  says — 

"  And  in  the  river  Egypt  did  I  fix 
My  double-oared  ships."  + 

But  if  we  look  to  the  inner  meaning  of  the  expression,  it 
intimates  happiness,  which  is  the  perfect  fulness  of  three 
good  things,  namely,  of  spiritual,  and  corporeal,  and  ex- 
ternal blessings,  as  some  of  those  men  describe  it  in  their 
panegyrics,  who  were  afterwards  called  philosophers,  such 
as  Aristotle  and  the  Peripatetics  ;  nevertheless,  such  a  giving 
of  the  law  as  this  is  called  Pythagorean. 

Therefore  the  Egypt  is  a  symbol  of  corporeal  and  external 
blessings,  and  the  Euphrates  of  spiritual  advantages,  in 
which  alone,  it  is  plain,  their  real  joy  consists,  which  has 
wisdom  and  all  the  other  virtues  for  its  foundation ;  and  the 
boundaries  of  this  happiness  are  very  rightly  described  as 
beginning  with  the  Egyptus  and  ending  with  the  Euphrates ; 
for  the  things  affecting  the  soul  come  at  the  end,  which  we 
usually  approach  with  difficulty  after  we  have  passed  through 
corporeal  and  external  things,  in  such  a  manner  that,  by 
this  progress,  we  have  felt  our  unity,  the  integrity  of  our 
outward  senses,  and  the  beauty  and  strength  which  existed 
in  our  youth,  advance,  increase,  and  come  to  maturity.  And 

•  Genesis,  xv.  19. 

*  The  line  is  in  Odyssey  xiv.  258. 


424  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

in  a  similar  manner,  those  things  which  relate  to  acquiring 
gain  and  to  trafficking,  as  the  management  of  ships,  and 
agriculture,  and  commerce ;  for  it  is  well  said,  that  all 
things,  especiallj  those  above-mentioned,  become  a  young 
man. 

"Who  are  the  Kenites,  the  Kenezites,  and  the  Kadmon- 
ites,  and  the  Hittites,  and  the  Perizzites,  and  the  Eephaims, 
and  the  Amorites,  the  Canaanites,  the  Girgashites,  and  the 
Jebusites  ?* 

17.  Ten  nations  of  wickedness  are  here  enumerated,  which 
he  here  destroys  because  of  their  neighbourhood,  since  the 
number  ten,  when  false  and  improperly  stamped,  is  very 
near  to  that  which  is  good  and  an  object  of  affection ;  but 
the  complete  perfection  of  the  number  ten  is  exceedingly 
fit,  as  being  the  measure  of  infinite  numbers,  since  the  world 
is  arranged  in  accordance  with  it,  and  so  likewise  is  the 
mind  of  the  wise  man,  the  substance  of  which,  nevertheless, 
wickedness  perverts  and  overthrows,  despising  all  very 
necessary  powers,  so  that  that  alone  remains  which  the 
sacred  writer  has  said,  namely,  that  the  pursuit  of  virtue  is 
a  blessing,  for  the  wicked  man  is  such  that  he  embraces 
vague  opinions  rather  than  truth,  and  of  such  is  Ishmael, 
though  the  seed  of  the  prophets. 

Why  it  was  that  Sarah,  the  wife  of  Abraham,  bore  him 
no  children  ?t 

18.  The  mother  of  opinion  is  here  spoken  of  as  barren. 
In  the  first  place  in  order  that  the  son  of  generation  might 
appear  more  wonderful,  as  being  born  by  a  miracle.  In  the 
second  place  in  order  that  his  conception  and  nativity  might 
appear  to  be  owing  not  more  to  the  marriage  of  the  man 
than  to  divine  providence.  For  it  is  not  owing  to  the 
faculty  of  conception  that  a  barren  woman  should  bear  a 
son,  but  rather  to  the  operation  of  divine  power.  This  is  i 
the  literal  meaning  of  the  statement. 

But  if  we  look  to  its  inward  sense,  then  we  shall  say,  in 

the  first  place,  that  to  bring  forth  is  peculiar  to  the  female 

sex,  as  to  beget  is  the  office  of  the  male  :  therefore  God 

wills  in  the  first  place  to  render  the  mind,  which  is  filled 

*  Genesis  xv.  20.  f  Genesis  xvi.  1. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  425 

i  .     . 

with  virtue,  like  to  the  male  sex  rather  than  to  the  female, 
thinking  it  suited  to  its  character  to  be  active,  not  passive. 
;In  the  second  place  both  do  generate,  both  the  virtuous 
mind  and  the  wicked  one :  but  they  generate  in  a  different 
manner,  and  they  produce  contrary  offspring,  the  virtuous 
mind  producing  good  and  useful  things,  but  the  depraved  or 
'cricked  mind  producing  base  and  useless  things. 
\  In  the  third  place  he  who  is  still  advancing  and  making 
brogress  is  to  be  incited  to  the  summit  itself,  and  is  near  to 
';he  light  which  by  some  persons  is  said  to  be  delivered  to 
oblivion,  and  to  be  made  unknown.  He  therefore,  as  he  is 
snaking  progress,  does  not  generate  bad  things,  nor  yet 
•^ood  things,  because  he  is  not  yet  perfect ;  but  he  resembles 
jhat  man  who  is  neither  sick  nor  yet  thoroughly  well,  but 
Irho,  after  a  long  sickness,  is  at  last  proceeding  to  con- 
alescence. 

What   is   the   meaning   of  the   statement,   she   had   an 
Egyptian  handmaid  whose  name  was  Hagar  ?* 

19.  Hagar  is  interpreted  travelling,  and  she  is  the  servant 
f  a  more  perfect  nature,  being  by  nature  an  Egyptian  less 
atiu-ally ;  for  the  study  of  encyclical  learning  loves  an 
bundance  of  knowledge,  and  abundant  knowledge  is,  as  it 
ere,  the  handmaid  of  virtue,  since  the  whole  course  and 
Dnnection  of  sciences  and  arts  is  subservient  to  his  use 
ho  is  able  to  profit  by  their  acquisition  so  as  to  attain  to 
irtue,  for  virtue  has  the  soul  for  its  abode  ;  but  the  course 
r  arts  and  sciences  stands  in  need  of  bodily  instruments. 
But  the  body  is  symbolically  Egypt ;  therefore  the 
Mjred  writer  here  properly  asserts  the  likeness  of  encyclical 
aowledge  to  Egypt.  Nevertheless  he  has  also  given  it  a 
ime  by  reason  of  its  travelling  abroad,  since  sophistry  is  a 
reign  thing,  unconnected  with  the  acquisition  of  that 
iisdom  which  alone  is  native,  and  which  alone  is  necessary, 
'hieh  is  the  mistress  of  intermediate  wisdom,  and  which 
'uducts  itself  in  a  beautiful  course  through  the  guidance 
encyclical  studies. 

Why  did  Sarah  say  to  Abraham,  Behold  the  Lord  has 
*  Genesis  xvi.  1 . 


426  PHILO  JUD^US. 

shut  me  up  so  that  I  shall  not  bring  fortli :  go  in  now  unto 
my  handmaid  so  as  to  beget  a  son  by  her?* 

20.  In  the  actual  letter  of  this  statement  it  is  the  same 
thing  to  feel  no  envy,  and  also  to  provide  for  the  welfare  of 
the  wise  man  who  is  her  husband  and  her  genuine  brother ; 
so  that  she,  wishing  to  find  a  remedy  for  her  own  barrenness 
by  means  of  her  handmaid  of  whom  she  was  mistress,  gives 
her  as  a  concubine  to  her  husband.  But  there  is  a  still 
greater  abundance  of  her  affection  towards  her  husband 
indicated  by  this  ;  for  as  she  herself  was  accounted  barren, 
she  did  not  think  it  reasonable  that  the  family  of  her 
husband  should  be  left  entirely  without  offspring,  but 
preferred  his  advantage  to  her  own  dignity.  This  is  what 
is  indicated  by  this  statement  taken  literally. 

But  if  we  look  to  the  inner  sense  of  the  passage  it  bears 
such  an  interpretation  as  this  :  it  becomes  those  persons 
who  are  unable  in  respect  of  their  virtue  to  bring  forth 
beautiful  works  deserving  of  praise,  to  apply  themselves  to ' 
the  intermediate  kind  of  study,  and,  if  I  may  so  express 
myself,  to  procure  themselves  children  from  the  encyclical 
branches  of  knowledge;  for  an  abundance  of  knowledge 
is  as  it  were  the  whetstone  of  the  mind  and  of  the  in- 
tellect. 

And  it  is  with  great  propriety  that  she  says,  The  Lord 
has  shut  me  up  ;  for  that  which  is  shut  up  is  generally 
opened  again  at  a  seasonable  time.  Therefore  she  was  not 
destitute  of  hope,  nor  was  her  wisdom  fixed  in  the  belief 
that  she  should  be  for  ever  without  offspring,  but  she  knew 
that  some  day  or  other  she  should  bring  forth.  Neverthe- 
less she  will  not  bring  forth  at  present,  but  when  the  soul 
displays  the  purity  of  its  perfection.  But  inasmuch  as  it  is 
at  present  imperfect  it  is  satisfied  with  using  a  milder  kind 
of  learning,  such  as  is  attainable  by  encyclical  studies.  On 
which  account  it  is  not  without  a  purpose  that  in  the  sacred 
contests  at  Olympia  also,  those  who  are  unable  to  attain  toi 
the  first  prize  of  victory  are  contented  to  be  thought 
worthy  of  the  second;  for  there  is  offered  to  the  com4 
petitors  a  first,  and  a  second,  and  a  third  prize  by  the| 
presidents  of  the  games,  who  are  representatives  of  nature. 

*  Genesis  xvi.  2.  fl 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  427 

'  So  now  to  her  the  sacred  writer  attributes  the  first  prize  of 
virtues,  and  the  second  prize  of  encyclical  study. 

j  "Why  has  he  called  Abraham's  wife  Sarah,  for  he  says, 
1  Sarah  the  wife  of  Abraham,  taking  her  handmaid  Hagar  the 
(Egyptian,  gave  her  into  his  hand  ?* 

21.  The  sacred  writer  here  sums  up  with  his  approbation 

the  marriage  of  the  good  on  account   of  those  who   are 

i  incontinent  and  lascivious  ;  for  those  persons  despise  their 

;wise  wives  for  the  sake  of  concubines,  whom  they  love  with 

j  a  frantic  passion:  on  which  account  he  here  introduces  the 

man  endued  with  virtue,  the  constant  husband  of  one  wife, 

!at  that  time  in  which  it  was  lawful  for  him  to  make  use  of 

her  handmaid  ;  and  his  wife  in  fact  indicates  that  he  is  wise, 

I  that  is  to  say  temperate,  when  he  enters  into  the  bed  of 

; another  woman,  since  his  connection  with  his  concubine 

'was  only  a  connection  of  the  body  for  the  sake  of  propagat- 

;ing  children  ;  but  his  union  with  his  wife  was  that  of  two 

I  souls  joined  together  in  harmony  by  heavenly  affection. 

This  is  the  literal  effect  of  the  statement. 

But  if  we  look  to  the  inner  meaning  of  it,  then  he  who 
'has  truly  entrusted  all  his  secret  wishes  to  wisdom,  and 
ijustice,  and  the  other  virtues,  when  once  he  has  received 
the  counsel  of  wisdom,  and  has  tasted  the  joys  of  a  matri- 
monial connection  with  it,  remains  constant  to  it  as  the 
partner  and  companion  of  his  life ;  although  encyclical 
education  would  lead  him  in  a  beautiful  course,  since  when 
jthe  man  eminent  in  virtue  has  become  master  of  the 
sciences  of  geometry,  and  arithmetic,  and  grammar,  and 
rhetoric,  and  the  other  exercises  of  the  mind,  he  is  not  the 
less  on  that  account  mindful  of  the  pursuit  of  honesty,  but 
is  borne  on  towards  the  one  as  to  a  necessary  aim,  to  the 
other  as  an  accessory. 

But  it  is  altogether  fair  that  that  fact  also  should  meet 
with  our  approbation, — the  fact  I  mean  of  his  calling  his 
handmaid  also  by  the  name  of  wife,  because  he  went  up  to 
her  bed  out  of  complacency  to  and  at  the  exhortation  of  his 
real  wife,  and  not  of  his  own  genuine  inclination  ;  on  which 
jaccount  he  no  longer  calls  her  his  handmaid,  that  even  if  it 

*  Genesis  xvi.  2. 


428  PHILO   JUD^US. 

were  not  wholly  deserved  still  his  handmaid  having  been 
given  to  him  to  wife  might  at  least  obtain  the  same  title. 

But  those  who  study  allegory  may  be  allowed  to  say  that 
the  exercise  of  the  middle  discipline  also  stands  in  the  place 
of  a  concubine,  having  nevertheless  the  shape  and  orna- 
ments of  a  wife,  for  all  encyclical  learning  re-produces  in 
itselt  and  imitates  genuine  virtue. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  When  she  saw  that  she  had 
conceived  her  mistress  was  despised  before  her  ?"* 

22.  The  sacred  writer  now  carefully  calls  Sarah  the 
mistress  when  it  might  else  have  been  thought  that  her 
dignity  was  diminished,  and  that  she  was  surpassed  by  her 
handmaid,  that  she,  that  is,  who  had  no  children,  was  sur- 
passed by  her  who  was  gifted  with  offspring. 

But  this  kind  of  language  is  extended  to  nearly  all  the 
necessary  affairs  of  human  life  :  for  a  poor  man  who  is  wise 
is  more  approved  of  and  is  superior  in  authority  to  a 
rich  man  who  is  destitute  of  wisdom  and  reputation,  or 
than  a  boasting  man ;  and  even  a  sick  man  who  is  wise  is 
better  than  a  foolish  man  who  is  well;  for  whatever  is 
united  with  wisdom  is  genuine,  and  is  endued  with  an 
authority  of  its  own,  but  whatever  is  combined  with  folly  is 
found  to  be  slavish  and  inconstant. 

But  it  has  been  excellently  said  not  that  she  despised  her 
mistress,  but  that  her  mistress  was  despised;  for  the  one 
statement  woiild  imply  an  accusation  of  the  person,  but  the 
other  contains  only  a  declaration  of  an  event.  The  scrip- 
ture forsooth  does  not  intend  here  to  impute  blame  to 
any  one  while  praising  another,  but  only  to  hand  down  in 
an  intelligible  manner  the  pure  truth  of  the  facts. 

This  is  what  is  indicated  by  the  literal  statement.  But  if 
we  seek  the  inner  meaning  of  the  words,  whoever  honours 
and  embraces  rank  before  genius  and  wisdom,  and  whoever 
esteems  and  considers  the  external  senses  of  more  im- 
portance than  prudence  and  counsel,  is  departing  from  the 
real  character  of  things,  thinking  that  they  have  brought 
forth  much  offspring,  and  that  having  produced  a  great 
generation  of  visible  things  they  are  great  and  perfect 
goods,  and  in  a  singular  degree  noble,  but  that  barrenness 

*  Genesis  xvi.  4. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  429 

I 

jin  this  respect  is  evil,  and  deserving  of  disapprobation, 
[because  they  do  not  see  that  invisible  seed  and  that 
ioffspring  which  is  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  which 
jtbe  mind  is  accustomed  to  generate  in  itself  and  by  itself. 

I    Why  does  Sarah  as  it  were  repent  of  what  she  has  done, 
paying  to  Abraham,  I  am  receiving  injury  from  you  :  I  gave 
jny  handmaid  into  your  bosom,  and  now,  because  she  sees 
;hat  she  has  conceived,  I  am  despised  before  her  ?* 
;    23.  This  language  indicates  her  anxiety  and  hesitation ; 
jlisplaying  them  first  in  the  expression,  "  since,"  that  is  to 
jiay  from  the  time  that  I  gave  my  handmaiden,  and  in  the 
J;ecoud  place  it  betokens  a  regard  to  the  person  of  whom 
j'omplaint  is  made,  for  she  says,  "  I  am  receiving  injury  from 
I'ou,"  a  statement  which  in  fact  is  a  reproof,  since  she  thinks 
jhat  her  husband  ought  always  to  be  preserved  without  any 
tain,  or  any  liability  to  blame,  always  virtuous  and  true, 
nd  in  no  respect  forgetful  of  her,  for  she  always  introduces 
im,  honouring  him  with  all  possible  veneration,  and  calling 
im  lord. 
Nevertheless,  the  first  fact  stated  by  her  is  true ;   for 
'om  the  time  that  she  gave  her  handmaiden  to  him  to  be 
is  concubine,  she  herself  was  looked  upon  as  despised, 
his  is  the  literal  meaning  of  her  words. 
But  if  we  look  to  their  inner  sense,  when  any  one  bestows 
Q  another  the  handmaid  of  wisdom,  she  being  influenced 
the  counsels  of  sophistry,  will,  because  she  is  ignorant 
I  propriety,  despise  her  mistress ;  for  as  she  herself  pos- 
pses  encyclical  knowledge,  and  is  delighted  with  its  bril- 
pncy,  where  every  one  of  the  separate  branches  of  education 
'  by  itself  very  attractive  to  the  soul,  as  if  it  popsessea 
le  power  of  drawing  it  by  force  to  itself,  then  she,  the 
mdmaiden,  can  no  longer  agree  with  her  mistress,  that  is 
•  say,  with  the  image  of  wisdom  and  its  glorious  and  admi- 
ble  beauty,  until  that  acute  judge  of  all  things,  the  word 
God,  coming  in,    separates   and   distinguishes   what  is 
obable  from  what  is  true,  and  the  middle  from  the  ex- 
amities,  and  what  is  second  from  what  is  placed  in  the 
j'st  rank.     On  which  account  Sarah  says,  at  the  end  of  her 
'monstrance,  "  Let  God  judge  between  me  and  thee." 
*  Genesis  xvi.  5. 


430  PHILO  JUD^US. 

Wl\y  does  Abraliam  saj,  "  Behold  thy  handmaid  is  in  thj 
hand,  do  unto  her  what  seems  good  to  thee  ?"* 

24.  The  literal  expression  used  by  the  wise  man  con- 
tains a  panegyric;  for  he  does  not  call  the  woman  whc 
had  conceived  by  himself,  his  wife,  or  his  concubine,  but  th( 
handmaiden  of  his  wife.  But  since  he  saw  that  she  als( 
was  a  mother,  he  did  not  indulge  in  anger  and  embitter  the 
feelings  of  her  mind,  but  rather  tranquillised  her,  and  made 
her  prudent. 

But  the  passage  contains  an  allegory  in  the  expression 
"  In  thy  hand :"  as  if,  if  I  may  so  say,  sophistry  lives  undei 
the  dominion  of  wisdom,  which  indeed  does  spring  fortl 
from  the  same  fountain,  but  only  in  one  part,  and  not  di 
rectly ;  nor  does  it  preserve  the  whole  of  its  emauationj 
pure,  but  draws  up  with  its  waters  many  fetid  things,  anc 
many  others  of  a  similar  character.  Since,  therefore,  it  i.' 
in  thy  hand  and  in  thy  power  (for  to  whomsoever  wisdon 
belongs,  he  is  possessed  also  of  all  the  branches  of  encycHca 
learning),  do  with  it  whatsoever  pleases  thee,  for  I  an 
quite  persuaded  that  you  vdll  judge  with  not  more  severity 
than  justice;  because  that  very  thing  is  especially  agreeable 
to  you :  I  mean  the  distributing  to  every  one  according  t( 
his  deserts,  and  giving  to  no  one  more  than  is  just,  eithe 
in  the  way  of  honouring  or  despising  him. 

Why  does  he  say,  Sarah  afflicted  her  ?  t 

25.  The  literal  meaning  of  the  words  is  plain  :  but  if  w< 
look  to  the  inner  sense  of  them,  they  contain  a  priacipl 
of  this  kind.  It  is  not  every  affliction  that  is  injurious,  bu 
there  are  even  some  occasions  when  they  are  salutary ;  am 
this  is  experienced  by  sick  men  at  the  hands  of  physiciam 
and  by  boys  under  their  tutors,  and  by  foolish  people  froD 
those  who  correct  them  so  as  to  bring  them  to  wisdom 
And  this  I  can  by  no  means  consent  to  call  affliction,  bu 
rather  the  salvation  and  benefit  of  both  soul  and  body. 

Now  a  part  of  such  benefit  wisdom  aflfords  to  the  circl 
of  encyclical  knowledge ;  rightly  admonishing  the  sou 
which  is  devoted  to  an  abundance  of  discipline,  and  whic. 
is  pregnant  with  sophism,  not  to  rebel  as  if  it  had  acquire^ 

*  Genesis  xvi.  6.  t  Ibid. 


QUESTIONS   AND  SOLUTIONS.  431 

some  great  and  excellent  good,  but  to  acquiesce  and  vene- 
Irate  that  superior  and  more  excellent  nature  as  its  genuine 
'mistress,  in  whose  power  is  constancy  itself,  and  authority 
Dver  all  things. 

Why  did  Hagar  flee  from  her  face  ?* 

I  26.  It  is  not  every  soul  which  is  capable  of  proper 
respect  and  of  submitting  to  salutary  discipline,  but  the 
miud  which  is  gentle,  and  good-tempered,  and  consistent 
^.oves  reproof,  and  becomes  more  and  more  attached  to  those 
■vvho  correct  it.  But  the  stubborn  soul  becomes  malignant 
md  hates  them,  and  turns  from  them,  and  flees  away  from 
i:hem,  preferring  those  discourses  which  are  agreeable  rather 
j}han  those  which  tend  to  his  advantage,  and  looking  upon 
j;hem  as  more  excellent. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  The  angel  of  the 
Lord  found  her  sitting  by  a  fountain  of  water  in  the  desert 
n  the  way  to  Sur  ?"t 

27.  All  these  statements  are  as  it  were  symbols  by 
vhich  the  sacred  writer  indicates  that  the  well-instructed 
!Oul,  w^hich  is  the  possession  of  virtue,  is  nevertheless  not 
^et  able  to  discern  the  beauty  of  her  mistress.  They  are,  I 
iay,  symbols ;  I  mean  the  statements  that  she  was  found,  and 
;hat  she  was  found  by  an  angel  in  the  desert,  and  in  no 
)ther  way  than  that  leading  to  Sur.  However  we  must 
)egin  with  what  is  plain. 

Now  the  too  subtle  sophist  and  the  real  lover  of  dispu- 
;ations  is  commonly  unable  to  be  detected  by  reason  of  his 
irtifices  and  sophistical  persuasions,  with  which  he  is  ac- 
;ustomed  to  deceive  and  perplex  men.  But  he  who,  being 
ree  from  bad  habits,  has  only  an  eager  desire  for  obtaining 

traction  by  the  course  of  encyclical  training,  although  he 
-  difficult  to  be  detected,  is  yet  not  altogether  incapable  of 
)cing  so ;  for  perdition  is  near  at  hand  to  him  who  cannot 
)e  detected,  but  safety  to  him  who  can  be  discovered, 
;specially  when  he  is  sought  for  and  found  by  a  more  holy 
jmd  more  excellent  spirit.  And  who  is  more  holy  and  more 
xcellent  than  the  angel  of  the  Lord  ?  For  it  is  to  him 
hat  it  has  been,  entrusted  to  seek  out  the  erring  soul,  the 

♦  Genesis  xvi.  6.  t  Genesis  xvi,  7. 


432  PHILO  JUD^US. 

soul  which,  on  account  of  its  presumed  erudition,  is  conl 
tinually  ignorant  of  her  whom  it  ought  to  respect,  but  stil 
she  could  be  susceptible  of  correction  and  amendment ;  fo^ 
which  object  she  was  sought  out.  Nor  was  she  foum, 
imperfect,  but  ready  to  the  hand,  since  the  soul  was  foum 
which  had  fled  from  perfect  virtue,  not  being  able  to  submi* 
to  discipline. 

But  the  third  symbol  takes  place  after  she  is  found  anc 
after  the  discovery  has  been  made  by  an  angel,  namely,  ii 
the  fact  of  her  being  found  by  a  fountain,  that  is  to  say,  b] 
nature  ;  for  it  is  nature  which  bestows  on  clever  peoph 
abilities  in  proportion  to  the  industry  of  each  individual 
effacing  unseasonable  learning,  which  is  no  learning  at  aU 
and  praise  is  implied  in  the  very  place  in  which  the  soul  h 
found,  which  is  thirsting  after  genius  and  after  its  placic 
law,  wishing  to  draw  water  while  in  the  society  of  those  wh( 
drink  wine ;  for  thus  it  associates  with  those  who  feed  upoi 
and  are  delighted  with  the  exercise  of  proper  training 
where  nature  itself  aff'ords  sufficient  nourishment,  namely 
education  and  instruction  as  if  from  a  fountain. 

The  fourth  symbol  is  contained  in  the  fact  that  th< 
discovery  took  place  in  the  desert ;  since  difficulty  cominj 
over  each  of  the  outward  senses,  together  with  an  influx  o 
each  separate  desire,  represses  the  mind,  and  does  no 
permit  it  to  drink  pure  water :  but  when  it  cannot  avoi( 
these  things  as  in  the  desert,  it  acquiesces,  and,  abandoning 
the  thoughts  which  agitated  and  perplexed  it,  it  become; 
convalescent,  so  as  to  receive  a  hope  not  only  of  life,  bu 
even  of  eternal  life. 

The  fifth  symbol  is  contained  in  the  fact  that  she  wa; 
found  in  the  way ;  for  dispositions  which  ara  incorrigibli 
are  led  by  devious  paths  ;  but  that  one  which  can  be  changec 
for  the  better,  lo  !  it  proceeds  along  the  road  which  leads  t( 
virtue,  and  that  road  is  like  a  fortified  wall  and  guardian  t( 
the  souls  which  are  capable  of  being  saved,  for  Sur  mean; 
a  fortified  wall. 

Do  you  not  see,  then,  that  the  whole  is  a  symbolical,  o: 
indeed  a  legitimate,  figure  of  an  improving  soul  ?  And,  n 
fact,  the  soul  which  is  improving  does  not  perish  as  on( 
which  is  wholly  foolish  does ;  for  if  the  divine  word  b( 
found  by  it,  then  again  it  seeks  it ;  and  he  who  is  not  pur* 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  433 

and  clean  in  his  habits  and  disposition,  flees  from  the  divine 
word;  but  yet  he  has  a  fountain  of  water  in  which  he 
washes  away  his  vices  and  wickednesses,  drawing  from 
thence  the  fertility  of  the  law. 

Besides  this,  it  loves  the  desert,  to  which  it  has  fled  from 
its  vices  and  wickednesses,  and  when  it  has  once  beheld  the 
way  of  virtue  it  returns  from  the  devious  paths  of  wicked- 
ness. And  all  these  things  are  fortified  walls  and  bulwarks 
to  it,  so  as  to  protect  it  from  being  ever  injured  by  any 

ids  or  circumstances  which  attack  it,  and  from  sufiering 

any  damage. 
i! 

Whj  did  the  angel  say  to  her,  "  Hagar,  the  handmaid  of 
\irah,  whence  comest  thou,  and  whither  goest  thou  ?"* 

28.  The  plain  letter  of  the  question  requires  no  explana- 

iou,  for  it  is  exceedingly  clear ;  but  with  reference  to  the 

Inner  meaning  contained  in  it,  there  is  some  asperity  ex- 

irf^ssed;  since  the  divine  word  is  full  of  instruction,  and 

I  physician  of  the  infirmity  of  the  soul.     Therefore  the 

,ngel  says  to  her,  "Whence  comest  thou?"  knowest  thou 

lot  what  good  thou  hast  abandoned  ?  Art  thou  not  al  together 

ame  and  blind  ?     For  thou  df>st  not  see  at  all ;  and  though 

Indowcd  with  the  outward  senses,  dost  not  feel,  and  dost 

ot  appear  to  me  to  have  any  portion  whatever  of  intellect, 

s  if  thou  wert  quite  senseless. 

I  But  "  whither  goest  thou  ?"    From  what  excellence  to 

'hat  misery  ?     Why  have  you  so  erred  as  to  cast  away  the 

hissings  which  you  had  in  your  power,  and  to  pursue  good 

iiings  which  are  more  remote  ? 

Do  not,  do  not,  I  say,  act  thus  ;  but,  quitting  your  insane 

iipetuosity,  go  back  again,  and  return  into  the  same  way  as 

3fore,  looking  upon  wisdom  as  thy  mistress,  her  whom  you 

id  before  as  your  governess  and  directress  in  all  the  things 

hieh  you  did. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  answer,  "  I  am  fleeing  from 
'  fiice  of  Sarah,  my  mistress  ?  "  t 

-0.  It  is  reasonable  to  praise  a  sincere  disposition,  and  to 
ink  it  friendly  to  truth.  And  moreover  it  is  reasonable 
)w  to  admit  the  veracity  of  a  mind  which  confesses  what  it 

*  Genesis  xvi.  8.  t  Ibid. 

VOL.  IV.  F   I" 


434  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

has  suffered ;  for  she  says,  "  I  am  fleeing  from  the  face," 
that  is  to  say,  I  have  recoiled  at  the  outward  appearance  of 
wisdom  and  virtue ;  since,  beholding  its  royal  and  imperial 
presence,  she  trembled,  not  being  able  to  endure  to  look 
upon  its  majesty  and  sublimity,  but  rather  thinking  it  an 
object  of  avoidance ;  for  there  are  some  people  who  do  not 
turn  from  virtue  from  any  hatred  of  it,  but  from  a  reve- 
rential modesty,  looking  upon  themselves  as  unworthy  to  live 
with  such  a  mistress. 

Why  did  the  angel  say  to  her,  "  Eetum  to  thy  mistress 
and  be  humbled  beneath  her  hands  ?  "  * 

30.  As  the  letter  is  plain,  we  must  rather  investigate  its 
inner  meaning.  The  word  of  God  corrects  that  soul  which 
is  able  to  be  lured,  and  instructs  it,  and  converts  it,  leading 
it  to  wisdom  as  its  mistress,  that  it  may  not,  through  being 
abandoned  by  its  mistress,  rush  at  once  into  absurd  folly. 
But  it  warns  it,  not  only  to  return  to  virtue,  but  also  to  be 
humbled  beneath  its  hands,  that  is  to  say,  beneath  its 
several  excellencies. 

But  there  are  two  kinds  of  humiliation ;  one,  in  accord- 
ance with  defect,  which  arises  from  spiritual  infirmity,  which 
it  is  easy  to  overcome,  seize  upon,  and  reprove.  But  there 
is  another  kind  which  the  word  of  the  Lord  enjoins,  pro- 
ceeding from  reverence  and  modesty ;  such  as  that  humility 
which  children  exhibit  to  their  fathers,  pupils  to  their 
masters,  and  young  men  to  the  aged ;  since  it  is  very 
advantageous  to  be  obedient,  and  to  be  subject  to  those  who 
are  better  than  one's  self;  for  he  who  has  learnt  to  be  under 
authority  is  in  a  moment  imbued  with  a  power  which  he 
alone  may  exercise ;  for,  although  any  one  were  to  be 
clothed  with  the  authority  of  all  the  earth  and  sea,  yet  he 
would  not  be  able  to  possess  the  royal  supremacy, of  virtue, 
unless  he  had  first  been  instructed  and  taught  to  obey. 

"Why  did  the  angel  say  to  her,  "  I  will  multiply  thy  seed, 
and  it  shall  not  be  numbered  for  multitude  ?  "  f 

It  is  the  honour  of  the  docile  mind  not  to  be  pre- 
sumptuous or  rebellious  on  account  of  its  progress  in 
knowledge,  or  because  of  the  very  useful  seed  which  it  has 

*  Genesis  xvi.  8.  t  Genesis  xvi.  9. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS,  435 

received  from  various  kinds  of  erudition ;  for  it  does  not  any 
more,  as  word-catchers  and  cavillers  do,  employ  all  the 
i  arguments  of  encyclical  learning  to  establish  any  whimsical 
object,  but  to  prove  the  truth  which  is  contained  in  them. 
And  when  it  has  begun  to  prosecute  that  by  diligent  in- 
vestigation, it  is  then  rendered  worthy  to  behold  the  sight  of 
its  mistress,  free  from  all  acceptance  of  persons,  and  from 
all  reproof. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  The  angel  said  to 
her.  Behold,  thou  hast   conceived,  and  thou  shalt   bring 
forth  a  son,  and  shalt  call  his  name  Ishmael,  because  the 
\  Lord  has  heard  the  voice  of  thy  affliction  ?  "  * 

32.  The  literal  sense  of  the  words  admits  of  no  question 
1  except  this  allegorical  explanation.  Erudition,  which  is 
'  acquired  and  trained  by  the  dispensation  of  virtue  as  a 

mistress,  is  found  not  to  be  barren,  but  it  has  conceived  the 
I  seed  of  wisdom  ;  and  when  it  has  conceived  it  brings  forth  ; 
'  but  it  brings  forth  a  work  which  is  not  perfect  but  im- 
perfect, like  an  infant  which  has  need  of  care,  and  aliment, 
1  and  nourishment ;  for  in  truth,  it  is  quite  plain  that  the 
■  offspring  of  a  perfect  soul  is  perfect,  that  is  to  say,  its  words 
and  works  ;  but  that  of  the  soul  of  the  second  class,  which  is 
still  lying  in  servitude  and  subordination,  is  more  imperfect. 
On  which    account   it   had   a   certain   name   given   to   it, 
Ishmael,  which  is  interpreted  "the  hearing  of  God."     But 
hearing  is  honoured  with  the  second  dignity  among  the 
outv/ard    senses,   being    next    to    sight ;    for   nature    has 
arranged  a  succession  of  ranks  in  the  contests  of  the  senses, 
giving  the  tirst  place  to  the  eyes,  the  second  to  the  ears, 
the  third  to  the  nostrils,  and  the  fourth  to  that  sense  by 
which  we  taste. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  He  shall  be  a 
wild  man  ;  his  hand  shall  be  upon  every  one,  and  every  one's 
I  land  shall  be  upon  him,  and  he  shall  dwell  over  against  all 
his  brethren  ?"  t 

33.  If  we  look  to  the  letter  of  the  statement,  up  to  this 
time  Ishmael  has  not  any  brothers,  for  he  was  the  first 
child  of  his  parents.     But  the  sacred  writer  is  here  figuring 

*  Genesis  xvi.  11.  f  Genesis  xvi.  1 2 . 

F    F    2 


43fi  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

a  certain  nature,  too  secret  to  be  thoroughly  investigated ; 
for  he  has  set  forth  the  figure  of  his  future  character.  And 
such  a  figure  evidently  represents  the  sophist  whose  mother 
is  erudition  or  wisdom.  But  the  sophist  hunself  is  a  man 
of  wild  opinions ;  since  the  wise  man  as  being  civilized  is 
fitted  for  living  in  cities,  and  for  urbanity,  or  for  statesman- 
like and  political  companionship  ;  but  he  who  is  wild  and  a 
man  of  wild  opinions  is  immediately  also  quarrelsome. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  the  sacred  writer  makes  an 
addition,  saying,  "  His  hand  shall  be  upon  every  one,  and 
every  one's  hand  shall  be  upon  him ;"  for  the  abundance  of 
science  and  the  use  of  erudition  is  able  to  contradict  all 
men.  As  those  men  of  the  present  day  who  are  called 
academicians  and  inquirers,  consistently  setting  no  bounds 
to  the  determinations  of  their  will  and  resolution,  and 
among  the  difi'erent  opinions  which  they  investigate  pre- 
ferring neither  this  nor  that  one,  admit  those  men  to  be 
philosophers  who  attack  the  opinions  of  every  sect;  and 
those  whom  it  has  been  usual  to  call  opposers  of  will,  as  if 
they  called  them  k\r,,a,a-xoi  or  &i'>^'r]ijAijjayj)i,  because  they  in 
the  first  place  raise  contentions  and  declare  themselves  the 
champions  of  their  national  sect,  not  to  be  convinced  or  put 
down  by  those  who  oppose  them.  But  they  are  all  kinsmen, 
and  as  it  were  brothers  of  the  same  womb,  being  the  off- 
spring of  one  mother,  namely,  of  philosophy. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  he  says,  "And  he  shall 
dwell  over  against  all  his  brethren;"  for  in  good  truth  the 
academician  and  the  inquirer  are  diametrically  opposed  to 
sects,  finding  fault  in  each  of  them  with  their  certain  limi- 
tation of  the  resolution. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  But  Hagar  called  on  the  name  of  the 
Lord,  who  spoke  to  her,  saying,  '  Thou  God  who  hast  had 
regard  unto  me.'  Because  he  said,  '  In  truth  I  have  beheld 
thee  appearing  before  me.'  "  * 

34.  In  the  first  place,  take  notice  carefully  that  the 
angel,  after  the  manner  of  the  handmaiden  of  wisdom,  was 
a  minister  to  her  on  the  part  of  God.  But  still  why  is  he 
here  called  Lord  or  God  who  ought  only  to  have  been  styled 
his  angel  ?     It  was  in  order  to  adapt  the  fact  to  the  proper 

*  Genesis  xvi.  13. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  437 

I  person ;  for  it  was  right  that  the  Lord  and  chief  of  all  the 
universe  should    appear  to  wisdom  as  God,  and   that    his 
'word   sliould  appear  as  a  minister  to  the  handmaid  and 
servant  of  wisdom. 

But  we  may  not  suppose  that  she  mistakenly  looked  upon 
the  angel  as  God ;  for  those  who  are  unable  to  behold  the 
llrst  cause  may  easily  be  deceived  and  look  upon  the  second 
as  the  first ;  in  the  same  manner  as  he  who  has  but  weak 
sight,  not  being  able  to  behold  the  sun  which  is  in  heaven 
HI  its  real  appearance,  thinks  that  the  ray  which  falls  upon 
^tlie  earth  is  the  sun  itself;  and  those  who  have  never  seen 
"the  king  attribute  frequently  the  dignity  of  the  supreme 
jsovereign  to  his  ministers. 

'  And  in  truth  mild  and  rustic  men  who  never  have  beheld 
i  city,  not  even  from  the  summits  of  the  hills  where  they 
Rive,  think  every  country  house  or  farm-yard  a  mighty  city, 
md  look  upon  the  people  who  dwell  there  as  citizens  of  a 
j^eat  city,  out  of  ignorance  of  what  a  city  really  is. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  On  this  account  she  called  that 
NeW  the  w-ell  of  him  whom  I  have  seen  face  to  face  ?  "  * 

35.  The  well  has  both  a  spring  and  depth.  But  the 
earning  of  the  students  of  encyclical  science  is  neither  all 
)n  the  surface,  nor  is  it  destitute  of  first  principles ;  for  it 
las  for  its  source  corrective  discipline.  Thereiore  it  is  with 
)erfect  correctness  that  she  says  that  the  angel  appeared 
)efore  the  well  as  God ;  since  the  erudition  of  the  encyclical 
raining  possessing  the  second  rank  is  supposed  to  rejoice  in 
he  first  authority,  though  it  is  in  reality  separated  from 
jhat  first  wisdom  which  it  is  permitted  to  wise  men  to 
ehold,  biit  not  to  sophists. 

1  Why  is  the  well  said  to  have  been  between  Cadesh  and 
'haran  ?  f 

8G.  Cadesh  is  interpreted  holy,  but  Pharan  is  translated 
ail,  or  corn. 

What  is  the  meaning  of  the  statement,  "  Hagar  brought 
)rth  a  son  to  Abraham  ?''  X 

37.  It  is  made  in  perfect  accordance  with  nature ;  for  no 
*  Geneda  xvi.  14.  -I-  Il)id.  .t  Gcuesis  xvi.  1   . 


438  PHILO  JUD^US. 

habit  of  possession  brings  forth  for  itself,  but  for  him  who 
possesses  it ;  as  grammar  does  for  the  grammarian,  and 
music  for  the  musician,  and  mathematical  science  for  the 
mathematician ;  because  it  is  a  part  of  him,  and  stands  in 
need  of  him.  And  the  habit  is  not  received  as  a  thing  in 
need  of  something,  just  as  fire  has  no  need  of  heat,  for  it  is 
heat  to  itself;  and  it  gives  a  portion  of  the  participation  in 
it  to  those  who  approach  it. 

Why  is  Abraham  said  to  have  been  eighty  and  six  years 
old  when  Hagar  bore  Ishmael  to  him  ? 

38.  Because  the  number  which  follows  eighty,  that  is  to 
say  six,  is  the  first  perfect  number,  being  equal  to  its  parts, 
and  being  the  first  number  which  is  composed  of  the  multi- 
plication of  an  odd  and  an  even  number ;  receiving  also 
something  from  its  efiicient  cause  according  to  the  odd  or 
redundant  number,  and  from  its  material  and  effective 
cause  according  to  the  even  number.  On  which  account,  '^ 
among  the  most  ancient  of  our  ancestors,  some  persons  have 
called  it  matrimony,  and  others  harmony;  and  our  sacred 
historian  too  has  divided  the  creation  of  the  world  into  six 
days. 

But  among  numbers,  eighty  rejoices  in  perfect  harmony, 
since  it  is  composed  of  two  generous  diameters  in  a  double 
and  treble  proportion,  according  to  the  figure  of  a  square  of 
four  sides.  And  it  contains  within  itself  all  the  four 
inferences ;  the  arithmetical,  and  the  geometrical,  and  the 
harmonious  one. 

Being  in  the  first  place  composed  of  double  numbers,  as 
of  six,  eight,  nine,  twelve,  the  union  of  which  makes  thirty- 
five  ;  in  the  second  place  of  triple  numbers,  six,  nine,  twelve, 
eighteen,  the  sum  of  which  amounts  to  forty-five.  And 
from  these  two  numbers  thirty-five  and  forty-five,  the  whole 
number  eighty  is  completed. 

Again,  when  the  sacred  historian  Moses  himself  began  by 
divine  inspiration  to  utter  the  oracular  precepts  which  he 
was  commissioned  to  deliver,  he  was  eighty  years  old.  And 
the  first  man  who  existed  of  our  nation  according  to  the  law 
of  circumcision,  being  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day,  being* 
eminent  for  virtue,  bears  that  name  of  joy,  being  called  Isaac 

*  Genesis  xvi.  16. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  439 

in  the  Chaldaic  tongue,  and  Isaac  means  laughter;  being 
naturally  called  so  because  nature  rejoices  or  laughs  at 
(everything,  being  never  vexed  at  any  thing  which  is  done  in 
the  world,  but  rather  looking  with  complacency  on  every 
thing  v-^hich  occurs  as  being  done  well  and  profitably. 

"WTiy  when  he  was  ninety  and  nine  years  old  does  the 
sacred  writer  say,  "  The  Lord  God  appeared  to  him  and  said, 
I  am  the  Lord  thy  God?" ^• 

39.  He  here  makes  use  of  both  the  titles  of  each  superior 
virtue,  applying  them  in  the  case  of  his  address  to  the  wis- 
man,  because  it  was  by  them  that  all  things  were  created, 
and  by  them  that  the  world  is  regulated  after  it  had  been 
created.  By  one  of  them  therefore  the  wise  man,  just  in 
i  he  same  manner  as  the  world  itself,  was  fashioned  and  made 
according  to  the  likeness  of  God;  and  God  is  the  name  of 
j  creative  virtue ;  and  by  the  other  of  them  that  he  was  made 
according  to  the  Lord,  as  falling  under  his  authority  and 
Hupreme  power. 

Therefore  he  designs  here  to  show  that  the  man  who  is 
conspicuous  in  virtue  is  both  a  citizen  of  the  world,  and  also 
equal  in  dignity  to  the  whole  world,  declaring  that  both  the 
virtues  of  the  world,  the  divine  and  the  royal  attributes,  are  in 
a  singular  manner  appointed  to  and  set  over  him  as  protectors. 
And  it  was  with  great  correctness  and  propriety  that  this 
1  appearance  took  place  when  he  was  about  ninety  and  nine 
years  old,  because  that  number  is  very  near  the  hundred. 
And  the  number  a  hundred  is  composed  of  the  number  ten 
multiplied  by  itself,  which  the  sacred  historian  calls  the 
holy  of  holies. 

Since. the  first  court,  the  first  ten,  is  simply  called  holy, 
and  that  is  permitted  to  be  entered  by  the  sweepers  of  the 
IcMiiple ;  but  the  ten  of  tens,  which  he  again  enjoins  the 
sweepers  of  the  temple  to  pay  above  all  things  to  the  exist- 
^ng  high  priest,  is  the  number  ten  computed  aloug  with 
the  number  a  hundred,  for  what  else  is  the  tenth  of  the 
Tenths  but  the  hundredth  ? 

However  the  number  ninety  and  nine  has  been  set  forth 
I  and  adorned  not  only  by  its  affinity  to  the  number  a  hundred, 
Ibut  it  has  also  received  a  particular  participation  in  a  wonder- 

*  Genesis  xvii.  1. 


440  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

ful  nature,  since  it  consists  of  the  number  fifty,  and  of  seven 
times  seven.  Tor  the  fiftieth  year,  as  the  year  of  Pentecost 
or  the  Jubilee,  is  called  remission  in  the  giving  forth  of  the 
law,  as  then  all  things  are  given  their  liberty,  whether  living 
or  inanimate. 

And  the  mystery  of  the  seventh  year  is  one  of  quiet  and 
profound  peace  to  both  body  and  soul.  Tor  the  seventh 
is  the  recollection  of  all  the  good  things  which  come  of  their 
own  accord  without  industry  or  labour,  which  at  the  first 
creation  of  the  world  nature  produced  of  herself ;  but  the 
number  forty-nine,  consisting  as  it  does  of  seven  times  seven, 
indicates  no  trifling  blessings,  but  rather  those  which  have 
virtue  and  wisdom,  in  such  a  degree  as  to  contribute  to  in- 
vincible and  mighty  constancy. 

"What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  Do  thou  please  me,  and  keep 
thyself  from  stain,  and  I  will  make  my  treaty  between  me  and 
thee,  and  I  will  multiply  thee  exceedingly  ?  * 

40.  God  here  lays  down  a  law  for  the  human  race  in  a 
somewhat  familiar  manner ;  for  he  who  has  no  participation 
in  wickedness  and  is  free  from  evil,  will  be  perfectly  good, 
which  is  peculiar  to  incorporeal  natures.  But  those  who  are 
in  the  body  are  called  good  in  proportion  to  the  measure  in 
which  wickedness  and  the  practice  of  sin  are  removed  from 
them.  Therefore  the  life  of  those  men  has  appeared  honour- 
able, not  that  of  those  who  have  been  free  from  sickness 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  but  that  of  those  who  from  a 
state  of  infirmity  have  advanced  to  sanity ;  on  which  account 
he  says  directly  and  plainly,  "  Keep  thyself  free  from  stain," 
for  it  is  sufficient  to  conduct  a  mortal  nature  to  felicity  not 
to  be  blamed,  and  neither  to  do  nor  say  anything  deserving  of 
reproof;  and  such  conduct  is  at  once  pleasing  to  the  Father. 

Therefore  it  is  that  he  said,  "  Do  thou  please  me,  and  keep 
thyself  free  from  stain."  Where  the  form  of  expression 
implies  a  mutual  conversion ;  since  the  habits  which  please 
God  do  not  deserve  reproof,  and  he  who  keeps  himself  free 
from  stain  and  avoids  reproof  in  all  things  is  altogether 
pleasing  to  God.  Therefore  he  promises  to  bestow  a  double 
blessing  on  him  who  keeps  himself  free  from  all  reproof;  in 
the  first  place,  to  make  him  the  guardian  of  the  deposits  of 

*  Genesis  xvii.  1. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  441 

tBe  divine  covenant :  and  in  the  second  place  to  cause  him 
to  increase  to  a  multitude  without  any  limit. 
j  For  that  expression,  "  I  will  make  my  treaty,  or  covenant, 
between  me  and  thee,"  shows  the  office  of  guardianship  of  the 
truth  which  is  entrusted  to  an  honest  man  ;  for  the  whole 
(treaty  of  God  is  the  incorporeal  word ;  which  is  the  form 
and  measure  of  the  universe  according  to  which  this  world 
'was  made.  And  then  repeating  the  expression,  "  I  will 
imultiply  thee  exceedingly,"  twice  manifestly  shows  the 
llramense  numbers  to  which  the  multitude  promised  shall 
"2:row,  I  mean  the  increase  which  shall  take  place  in  the 
)L'ople,  not  in  human  virtue. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  Abraham  fell  on  his  face  ?"  * 

41.  The  present  expression  is  the  interpretation  of  what 
ins  already  been  promised  ;  for  God  had  said,  "  Keep  thyself 
ice  from  stain,"  but  there  is  no  other  cause  of  a  man  leading 
life  which  is  disapproved  but  the  outward  sense,  because 
lat  is  the  origin  and  source  of  the  passions  ;  on  which 
ecount  he  rightly  and  properly  falls  on  his  face,  that  is  to 
ay,  tVie  offences  caused  by  the  outward  senses  fall  to  the 
ottom,  showing  that  the  man  is  now  devoted  to  all  good 
^orks. 

This  is  enough  to  say  in  the  first  place.  But  in  the  second 
lace  we  must  say  that  he  was  so  struck  by  the  manifest 
ppearance  of  the  living  God  that  he  was  scarcely  able  to 
ehold  him  through  fear,  but  fell  to  the  ground  and  offered 
deration,  being  overwhelmed  with  awe  at  the  appearance 

hich  presented  itself  to  him. 

In  the  third  place,  he  fell  to  the  ground  on  account  of  the 

velation  thus  made  to  him,  at  the  form  of  his  appearance 
V  the  living   God  w^ho  exists  alone,  whom  he  knew  and 

i^arded  as  truth  opposed  to  created  nature  ;  since  the  one 
\ists  in  unvarying  constancy  and  the  other  vacillates  and 

lis  into  its  proper  place,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  earth. 

What  13  the  meaning  of, "  And  God  conversed  with  him, 
\  ing,  And  I,  behold,  my  covenant  is  with  thee,  and  thou 
alt  be  the  father  of  a  multitude  of  nations  ?"t 
42.  Since  he  had  previously  used  the  expression,  "  treaty," 
*  Genesis  xvii.  3.  +  Genesis  xvii.  4. 


442  PHILO  JUD^US. 

he  now  proceeds  to  say,  do  not  seek  tliat  treaty  in  letters, 
since  I  myself,  in  accordance  with  what  has  been  said  before, 
am  myself  the  genuine  and  true  covenant. 

For  after  he  has  shown  himself  and  said,  "  I,"  he  makes 
an  addition,  saying,  "Behold,  my  covenant,"  which  is  nothing 
but  I  myself ;  for  I  am  myself*  my  covenant^  according  to 
which  my  treaty  and  agreement  are  made  and  agreed  to,  and 
according  to  which  again  all  things  are  properly  distributed 
and  arranged.  Now  the  form  of  this  prototypal  treaty  is 
put  together  from  the  ideas  and  incorporeal  measures  and 
forms  in  accordance  with  which  this  world  was  made.  Is  it 
not  therefore  a  climax  to  the  benefits  which  the  Father  be- 
stowed on  the  wise  man,  to  raise  him  up  and  conduct  him  not 
only  from  earth  to  heaven,  nor  only  from  heaven  to  the 
incorporeal  world  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  but  also 
to  draw  him  up  from  this  world  to  himself,  showing  himseK 
to  him,  not  as  he  is  in  himself,  for  that  is  not  possible  but 
as  far  as  the  visual  organs  of  the  beholder  who  beholds  virtue 
herself  as  appreciable  by  the  intellect  are  able  to  attain  to. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  he  says,  "  Be  no  more  a 
son  but  a  father  ,•  and  the  father,  not  of  one  individual  but 
of  a  multitude ;  and  of  a  multitude,  not  according  to  a  part, 
but  of  all  nations ;  therefore  of  the  revealed  promises  two 
admit  of  a  literal  interpretation,  but  the  third  of  one  which 
is  rather  spiritual.  One  of  those  which  admit  of  a  hteral 
interpretation  is  to  be  construed  in  this  way :  in  truth  thou 
shalt  be  the  father  of  nations,  and  shalt  beget  nations,  that 
is  to  say,  each  individual  among  thy  sons  shall  be  the 
founder  of  a  nation. 

But  the  second  is  of  this  kind ;  like  a  father  you  shall  be 
clothed  with  power  over,  and  authority  to  rule,  many  na- 
tions ;  for  a  lover  of  Grod  is  necessarily  and  at  once  also  a 
iover  of  men ;  so  that  he  will  diligently  devote  his  attention, 
not  only  to  his  relations  but  also  to  all  mankind,  and 
especially  to  those  who  are  able  to  go  through  the  discipline  \ 
of  strict  attention,  and  who  are  of  a  disposition  the  reverse 
of  anything  cruel  or  hard,  bat  of  one  which  easily  submits 
to  virtue,  and  willingly  gives  obedience  to  right  reason. 

But  the  third  we  may  explain  under  this  allegory:  the 
multitude  of  nations  spoken  of  indicates  as  it  were  the 
multifarious  inclination  of  the  will  in  each  of  our  minds. 


■I 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  443 

botli  those  inclinations  which  it  is  accustomed  to  form  with 
reference  to  itself,  and  also  those  others  which  it  admits  by 
the  agency  of  the  senses,  as  they  enter  clandestinely  through 
i  the  intervention  of  the  imagination,  and  if  the  mind  pos- 
■sesses  the  supreme  authority  over  all  these,  it,  like  a  com- 
mon father,  turns  them  to  better  objects,  cherishing  their 
infant  opinions,  as  it  were,  with  milk,  exhorting  those  which 
are  older  and  more  mature,  though  still  imperfect,  to  im- 
])rovement,  and  honouring  with  commendation  those  which 
perform  their  duty  aright ;  and  again,  putting  a  bridle,  by 
means  of  discipline  and  reproof,  on  those  which  rebel  and 
act  rashly ;  since,  wishing  to  imitate  the  Deity,  it  receives  a 
;  twofold  influx  from  the  virtues  of  that  same  being,  one  from 
'his  beneficent  attributes  and   another  from   his   avenging 
might,  as  if  from  two  sources ;  therefore  the  docile  receive 
jhis  kindness,  and  towards  the  rebellious  he  uses  reproof;  sc 
I  that  some  are  led  to  improvement  by  praise  and  others  by 
chastisement :  in  truth,  he  who  is  eminent  for  virtue  is  able 
I  to  be  of  great,  and  extensive,  and  just  service  to  all,  accord- 
)ing  to  his  power. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  Thy  name  shall  not  be  called 
Abram,  but  Abraham  shall  thy  name  be  ?"* 

43.  Some  of  those  who  are  destitute  of  all  knowledge  of 

!  music  and  dancing,  some  indeed  being  wholly  foolish  and 

'  keeping  aloof  from  the  divine  company,  mock  the  one  exist- 

ing  or  only  wise  Being,  immaculate  by  nature,  saying,  in  a 

tone  of  vituperation,  "  Oh  the  great  gift,  the  governor  and 

Lord  of  the  whole  universe  has  given  one  letter,  by  which 

j  the  name  of  the  patriarch  was  to  be  increased  and  become 

'  of  great' importance,  so  as  to  be  made  a  trisyllable  instead 

of  a  dissyllable !"   Oh  the  great  misery,  and  wickedness,  and 

I  impiety,  of  such  men !  If  some  persons  dare,  in  any  respect, 

to  endeavour  to  detract  from  God,  being  deceived  by  the 

outward  appearance  of  a  name,  when  they  ought  rather  to 

thrust  their  minds  down  into  the  depths,  and  inquire  into 

the  things  themselves  more  closely,  on  account  of  the  real 

magnitude  and  importance  of  the  possession. 

Besides  this,  why  do  ye  not  think  the  coijcession  of  one 
J  letter,  although  a  small  and  easy  gift,  nevertheless  an  act  of 

*  Genesis  xvii.  5. 


444  PHILO   JUDJEUS. 

providence  ?  and  why  do  ye  not  weigh  its  value  ?  since, 
above  all  things,  the  very  first  element  of  language,  as  ex- 
pressed in  letters,  is  A,  both  in  order  and  in  virtue.  In  the 
'  acond  place,  it  is  also  a  vowel,  and  the  very  first  of  vowels, 
being  placed  above  them  as  their  head.  In  the  third  place, 
because  it  does  not  belong  to  long  properties,  nor  to  short 
properties,  but  it  is  of  the  number  of  those  which  comprise 
each  characteristic,  for  it  is  extended  into  greater  length, 
and  then  again  it  is  recalled  into  shortness,  by  reason  of  its 
softness,  resembling  wax,  and  being  figured  into  many 
shapes,  and  afterwards  figuring  words,  according  to  infinite 
numbers  ;  besides  all  this  it  is  a  cause,  for  it  is  the  brother 
of  unity,  from  which  all  things  begin  and  in  which  all 
things  terminate. 

Therefore,  when  any  one  sees  such  great  beauty,  and  a 
letter  set  forth  with  such  great  importance  and  necessity, 
how  can  he  accuse  it  as  if  he  had  not  seen  this  ?  for  if  he 
has  seen  it,  he  then  shows  himself  to  be  a  person  of  insult- 
ing disposition  and  a  hater  of  what  is  good ;  and  if  he  has 
not  seen  a  fact,  which  is  so  easy  to  comprehend,  how  does 
he  presume  to  ridicule  and  despise  that  which  he  does  not 
understand  as  if  he  did  understand  it  ?  But  however  these 
things  may  be  said  by  the  way,  as  I  stated  before.  But  we 
must  now  examine  into  its  necessary  and  most  important 
task. 

The  addition  of  the  letter  A,  by  one  single  element, 
changed  and  reformed  the  whole  character  of  the  mind, 
causing  it,  instead  of  the  sublime  knowledge  and  learning 
of  sublime  things,  that  is  to  say,  instead  of  astronomy,  to 
acquire  a  comprehension  of  wisdom,  since  it  is  by  the 
knowledge  of  things  above  that  the  faculty  is  acquired  of 
mounting  up  to  one  portion  of  the  world,  that  is  to  say,  to 
heaven,  and  to  the  periodical  revolutions  and  motions  of  the 
stars ;  but  wisdom  has  reference  to  the  nature  of  all  things, 
both  such  as  are  visible  to  the  outward  senses,  and  such  as 
are  appreciable  only  by  the  intellect,  for  the  intellect  is  the 
wisdom  which  gives  a  knowledge  of  divine  and  human 
things  and  of  their  principles. 

Therefore,  ip.  divine  things  there  is  something  which  is 
visible,  and  something  else  which  is  invisible,  and  a  demon- 
strative idea.     And  in  human  aff'airs  there  are  some  things 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  445 

whicli  are  corporeal  and  some  whicli  are  incorporeal ;  to 
jiattaia  to  the  right  comprehension  of  which  is  a  great  task, 
land  a  real  employment  for  the  abilities  and  courage  of  man. 
But  to  be  able,  not  only  to  behold  the  substances  and 
;aatures  of  the  universe,  but  also  the  principles  which  regu- 
[late  each  separate  fact,  indicates  a  virtue  more  perfect  than 
ibhat  which  is  allotted  to  mankind ;  for  it  is  necessary  for 
[:he  mind,  which  perceives  so  many  and  such  great  things, 
bo  be  altogether  and  wholly  eye,  and  to  dispense  with  sleep, 
passing  its  whole  existence  in  the  world  in  a  state  of  inces- 
sant wakefulness,  and  being  surrounded  by  a  light  which 
knows  no  darkness,  and  which  exhibits  the  appearance  of 
light  itself,  as  by  an  ever-flashing  lightning,  taking  God  for 
jts  leader  and  guide,  to  the  comprehension  of  the  know- 
ledge of  those  things  which  are,  and  to  the  faculty  of 
explaining  their  principles. 

I  Therefore  the  -dissyllabic  name  Abram  is  explained  as 
leaning  "  excellent  father,"  on  account  of  his  affinity  to  the 
nowledge  of  sublime  wisdom,  that  is,  astronomy  and  mathe- 

Iiatics.  But  the  trisyllabic  name  Abraham  is  interpreted 
the  father  of  elect  sound,"  being  the  name  of  a  really  wise 
lan ;  for  what  else  is  sound  in  us,  except  the  utterance  of 
pronounced  word  ?  for  which  object  we  have  an  instru- 
ent  constructed  by  nature,  passing  through  the  thick  tube 
f  the  throat,  and  united  with  the  mouth  and  tongue  ;  and 
16  father  of  such  a  sound  is  our  intellect,  and  elect  intellect 
endued  with  virtue. 

But  if  we  are  to  keep  to  exact  propriety,  then  it  is  plain 

lat  the   mind  is  the  familiar  and  natural   father  of  the 

:tered  word,  because  it  is  the  especial  property  of   the 

jther  to  beget,  and  the  word  is  born  from  the  mind ;  and 

!  will  be  a  certain  proof  of  this  if  we  recollect  that  when  it 

■>et  in  motion  by  counsels  it  sounds,  and  when  they  are 

j'sent  it  ceases  to  sound :  and  the  evidences  of  this  are  the 

lotoricians  and  philosophers  who  demonstrate  its  habit  by 

j'cts;  for  whenever  the  mind  publishes  abroad  diflferent 

ads  of  designs,  and  in  the  manner  of  a  motlier  about  to 

ing   forth   produces    each    individual   means    previously 

>red  up  in  itself,  then  also  the  word,  flowing  forth  like  a 

intiiin,  is  borne  to  the  ears  of  the  bystander  as  to  its 

propriate  receptacles :  but  when  those  are  wanting,  then 


446  pniLO  JUDiEUS. 

it  also  is  unable  to  publish  itself  further,  and  rests,  and  the 
sound  is  inactive  as  being  struck  by  no  one. 

Now  therefore,  0  ye  men,  full  and  crammed  with  super- 
fluous loquacity,  ye  men  devoid  of  wisdom,  does  not  the  gift 
of  one  single  element  appear  to  you  to  have  been  such  that 
by  the  intervention  of  a  single  letter  the  wise  man  is  ren- 
dered worthy  of  the  divine  attribute  of  wisdom,  than  which 
there  is  nothing  more  excellent  in  our  nature  ?  because 
instead  of  the  sublime  erudition  of  astronomy  he  gave  him 
intellect,  that  is  to  say,  instead  of  a  small  part  of  wisdom,  he 
gave  him  the  whole  and  perfect  blessing  of  entire  wisdom, 
since  a  knowledge  of  things  above  is  included  and  compre- 
hended in  wisdom,  as  a  part  is  included  in  the  whole  ;  for 
mathematics  are  only  a  part. 

But  it  becomes  you,  0  men,  to  consider  this  point  also,  that 
the  man  who  is  well  instructed  and  skilful  in  the  investiga- 
tion of  the  nature  of  things  above  may  by  possibility  be  a 
man  of  depraved  and  wicked  habits ;  but  the  wise  man  is 
altogether  approved  as  virtuous.  Shall  we  then  now  any 
longer  ridicule  this  gift,  than  which  nothing  more  excellent 
can  be  found  ?  For  what  is  more  shameful  than  wicked- 
ness or  more  excellent  than  virtue  ?  Can  anything  be 
found  here  not  good,  and  is  it  not  wholly  opposed  to  evil  ? 
Or  can  this  gift  be  compared  to  riches,  or  honour,  or  liberty, 
or  health,  or  to  any  other  superfluous  possession  of  any  kind 
around  or  exterior  to  the  body  ? 

For  the  whole  of  philosophy  is  thus  added  to  our  life  as  a 
sort  of  college  of  medicine  to  the  soul,  in  order  from  thence 
to  dispense  to  it  freedom  from  suffering  and  immunity  from 
disease  ;  but  in  truth  it  is  noble  to  be  a  philosopher,  and 
that  wonderful  knowledge  is  truly  noble ;  and  the  end  is 
even  more  admirable,  on  account  of  which  the  act  is  caUed 
into  existence. 

Here  therefore  is  wisdom,  and  that  the  best  kind  of  wis- 
dom, which  God  called  in  the  Chaldaic  dialect  Abraham, 
namely  the  father  of  elect  sound,  giving  as  it  were  a  defi- 
nition of  a  wise  man ;  for  as  the  definition  of  man  is  a 
mortal  animal  endowed  with  reason,  so  also  the  mysterious 
definition  of  a  wise  man  is  the  father  of  elect  sound. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "I  will  greatly  increase  thee,  and 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  447 

set  thee  among  the  nations,  and  kings  shall  proceed  from 
thee?"* 

44.  That  expression,  "I  will  greatly  increase  thee,"  was 
used  to  the  wise  man  with  exceeding  propriety  ;  since  every 

'  wicked   or   bad   man   does   increase   and   advance,  not   to 

improvement  but  towards  deficiency ;  as  withering  flowers 
I  advance  not  towards  life  but  towards  death ;  but  the  man 
'  whose  life  is  extended  long  and  is  greatly  increased  is  like  a 

passing  cloud,  or  like  the  continually  flowing  stream  of  a 

river,  because  as  it  increases  it  is  extended  more  and  more 

out  of  doors,  as  its  wisdom  also  is  divine. 
And  that  expression,  "  I  will  set  thee  among  the  nations," 
i  was  used  in   order  that   God  might  the  more   evidently 
j  demonstrate  that  he  was  making  him  worthy  to  be  as  a 

foundation  and  firm  support  to  the  nations  through  his 
'  wisdom,  not  only  to  his  own  nation,  but  also  to  all  other 
I  peoples  who  in  various  manners  are  in  want  in  respect  of 

their  minds,  as  has  been  said  before  ;  since  the  wise  man  is 
;  the  redeemer  of  nations  and  intercessor  for  them  before 

God,  and  since  it  is  he  who  implores  pardon  for  the  sins  of 

his  relations. 

Last  of  all,  the  promise,  "  Kings  shall  come  forth  from 

thee,"  is  again  used  with  especial  propriety;  for  everything 

which  relates  to  wisdom  is  a  royal  seed ;  the  ofi'spring  of  the 
;  chief  and  master  according  to  nature  :  but  the  wise  man  has 
I  no  seed  or  fruit  of  his  own,  but  is  fertile  and  abundant  in 
'  the  seed  which  proceeds  from  the  great  cause  himself. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  I  will  give  this  land  to  thee  and 
I  to  thy  seed  after  thee,  in  which  thou  hast  sojourned,  namely 
all  the  land  of  Canaan,  for  an  everlasting  possession  ?"t 

45.  The  letter  of  the  promise  is  so  clear  that  the  lan- 
guage does  not  stand  in  need  of  any  explanation  whatever ; 

j  but  with  respect  to  the  inward  meaning  of  it  we  must  have 
'  recourse  to  an  allegory  of  this  kind. 

The   mind  which   is   endowed  with   virtue   is   rather  a 

,  sojourner  in  the  corporeal  space  allotted  to  it,  than  a  regu- 

*  lar  inhabitant  of  it ;  for  its  real  country  is  the  air  and  the 

heaven ;  and  the  earth,  and  the  earthly  body  in  which  it  is 

said  to  sojourn,  is  only  a  colony  ;  therefore  the  Father,  con- 

*  Genesis  xvii.  6  +  Genesis  xvii.  8. 


448  PHILO   JUD^US. 

ferring  a  benefit  upon  it,  gives  to  it  tlie  sovereign  authority 
over  all  the  things  of  the  earth  for  ever  and  ever,  as  he 
says  himself,  for  an  everlasting  possession  ;  so  that  it  for  the  ' 
future  shall  not  be  governed  by  the  body,  but  shall  always 
be  its  master  and  ruler,  having  the  body  for  its  servant  and 
attendant. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  And  every  male  of  you  shall  be 
circumcised,  and  you  shall  circumcise,  or  you  shall  be  cir-     j 
cumcised  in,  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin  ?  "^'  ■ 

46.  I  see  here  a  twofold  circumcision,  one  of  the  male 
creature,  and  the  other  of  the  flesh  ;  that  which  is  of  the 
flesh  takes  place  in  the  genitals,  but  that  which  is  of  the 
male  creature  takes  place,  as  it  seems  to  me,  in  respect  of 
his  thoughts. 

Since  that  which  is,  properly  speaking,  masculine  in  us  is 
the  intellect,  the  superfluous  shoots  of  which  it  is  necessary 
to  prune  away  and  to  cast  ofl",  so  that  it,  becoming  clean  and    i- 
pure  from  all  wickedness  and  vile,  may  worship  Grod  as  his    I 
priest.  I 

This  therefore  is  what  is  designated  by  the  second  cir- 
cumcision, where  Grod  says  by  an  express  law,  "  Circumcise    , 
the  hardness  of  your  hearts,"  that  is  to  say,  your  hard  and    f 
rebellious  thoughts  and  ambition,  which  when  they  are  cut 
away  and  removed  from  you,  your  most  important  part  will 
be  rendered  free. 

Why  orders  he  the  males  only  to  be  circumcised  ?  f        Hf 

47.  For  in  the  first  place,  the  Egyptians,  in  accordance 
with  the  national  customs  of  their  country,  in  the  fourteenth 
year  of  their  age,  when  the  male  begins  to  have  the  power  of 
propagating  his  species,  and  when  the  female  arrives  at  the 
age  of  puberty,  circumcise  both  bride  and  bridegroom. 

But  the  divine  legislator  appoints  circumcision  to  take 
place  in  the  case  of  the  male  alone  for  many  reasons :  the 
first  of  which  is,  that  the  male  creature  feels  venereal  plea-  i 
sures  and  desires  matrimonial  connexions  more  than  the  I 
female,  on  which  account  the  female  is  properly  omitted 
here,  while  he  checks  the  superfluous  impetuosity  of  the 
male  by  the  sign  of  circumcision. 

•  Genesis  xvii.  10.  +  Genesis  xvii.  11. 


I 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  449 

But  the  second  reason  is,  that  the  material  of  the  female 
is  supplied  to  the  son  from  what  remains  over  of  the  eruption 
of  blood,  while  the  immediate  maker  and  cause  of  the  son  is 
the  male.  Because  therefore  the  male  supplies  the  most 
indispensable  part  in  the  act  of  generation,  God  deservedly 
represses  his  pride  by  the  figure  of  circumcision,  but  the 
material  or  feminine  cause,  as  being  inactive,  does  not  display 
ambition  in  the  same  degree.  And  this  is  enough  to  say  on 
this  head. 

But  afterwards  we  must  note  this  likewise,  that  the 
intellect  in  us  is  endued  with  the  power  of  sight,  therefore 
it  is  necessary  to  cut  away  its  superfluous  shoots.  And 
these  superfluous  shoots  are  empty  opinions,  and  all  the 
actions  which  are  done  in  accordance  with  them.  So  that 
the  intellect  after  circumcision  may  only  bear  about  with 
itself  what  is  necessary  and  useful;  and  that  whatever 
causes  pride  to  increase  may  be  cut  away ;  with  which  also 
the  eyes  are  circumcised  as  if  they  did  not  see. 

"Why  did  he  say,  "  And  let  the  child,  every  male  child,  be 
circumcised  at  eight  days  old  ?  "  * 

48.  He  orders  the  freebom  to  be  circumcised,  which,  in 
the  first  place,  was  permitted  on  account  of  diseases  that 
might  arise  ;  for  it  is  more  difficult  to  heal  a  disease  in  the 
genitals,  and  it  is  commonly  done  by  burning  by  fire  those 
parts  over  which  a  membrane  grows,  but  this  rarely  affects 
those  who  have  been  circumcised. 

And  in  truth,  if  it  were  possible  that  other  infirmities  also 

could  be  avoided  by  amputating  any  member  or  any  part 

of  the  body,  so  that  though  it  was  amputated  still  the  ope- 

I  ration  of  each  necessary  part  would  not  be  hindered,  then 

i  without  the  knowledge  of  mortal  man  he  would  betransmit- 

1  ed  into  immortality. 

But  that  here  it  was  thought  fit  that  man  should  be  cir- 
cumcised out  of  a  provident  care  for  his  mind  without  any 
[U'evious  infirmity  is  plain,  since  not  the  Jews  alone,  but 
also  the  Egyptians,  and  Arabians,  and  Ethiopians,  and  nearly 
all  the  nations  who  live  in  the  southern  parts  of  the  world, 
dowu  to  the  torrid  zone  are  circumcised. 

What  then  is  the  chief  reason  of  this  fact  ?  except  that 
*  Genesis  xvii.  12. 

VOL.  IV  G   G 


450  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

in  those  districts,  and  especially  in  the  summer,  when  the 
genitals  are  protected  with  a  skin,  it  burns  and  is  injured  by 
inflammation,  but  when  that  covering  is  laid  bare  by  circum- 
cision it  is  cooled,  and  the  disease  is  repelled ;  and  on  this 
account  the  northern  nations  and  others,  to  whom  the  cooler 
portion  of  the  habitable  earth  has  been  allotted,  are  not 
circumcised,  for  not  only  is  the  solar  heat  moderate  in  those 
regions,  but  so  is  also  all  inflammatory  disease  which  afi'ects 
the  membranes  of  the  members.  Let  every  one  take  a  firm 
judgment,  and  from  that  time  when  the  disease  comes  in 
more  vigorously ;  for  it  never  comes  at  all  in  the  winter,  but 
in  the  summer  it  shows  itself  and  flourishes  and  ripens ;  for 
it  loves,  if  I  may  so  say,  like  fire  to  burn  in  those  parts. 

In  the  second  place,  it  was  not  only  from  a  regard  to 
sound  health  that  our  ancestors  diligently  employed  this 
method  of  cure,  but  also  from  a  regard  to  the  multiplication 
of  the  human  race,  seeing  that  nature  was  very  vivacious  and 
too  eager  to  propagate  the  human  species. 

Therefore  they  knew,  like  wise  men,  how  the  seed  when 
poured  over  the  folds  of  the  membrane  is  often  accustomed 
to  be  wasted  and  so  to  become  unfruitful ;  but  if  no  impedi- 
ment arises  then  it  would  easily  be  able  to  arrive  at  the 
situation  suited  to  receive  it.  On  which  account  also  those 
nations  which  adopt  the  practice  of  circumcision  have  grown 
into  an  exceedingly  numerous  population :  and  our  legislator, 
weighing  the  consequences  also,  commanded  the  circumcision 
of  infants  to  be  performed  at  an  earlier  age,  keeping  in  view 
the  same  eflect  of  circumcision  with  regard  to  the  popula- 
tion. 

Therefore  it  is  in  truth,  as  it  seems  to  me,  that  the 
Egyptians  also  in  the  fourteenth  year  of  their  children's  age, 
in  which  the  desire  to  propagate  the  species  usually  begins, 
have  said  that  it  is  suitable  to  circumcise  them,  with  the 
view  of  increasing  the  population ;  but  it  was  better  and 
more  carefully  done  in  our  nation,  where  the  circumcision 
of  infants  was  ordained,  since  perhaps  the  man  when  grown 
up  would  delay  the  operation  out  of  fear,  because  he  then  has 
a  will  of  his  own. 

In  the  third  place,  he  says  this  with  a  view  to  cleanliness 
in  the  sacred  oblations ;  for  in  truth  those  who  enter  into 
the  courts  of  the  temples  are  made  clean  by  sprinkling  and 


QUESTIONS   AND    SOLUTIONS.  451 

ablutions.  Moreover  the  Egyptians  scrape  the  whole  body, 
removing  all  the  hairs  which  cover  and  envelop  the  body,  r,o 
as  to  appear  white  all  over ;  but  the  circumcision  of  the 
skin  is  no  small  assistance  towards  cleanliness,  otherwise 
everyone  would  abhor  it  when  he  beheld  it  as  it  is  in  itself. 

In  the  fourth  place,  there  are  in  us  two  generative  prin- 
ciples, one  in  the  soul  and  one  in  the  body ;  the  generative 
principle  of  the  soul  is  the  intellect,  and  that  of  the  body  is  the 
corporeal  organ ;  therefore  the  ancients  chose  to  refer  the 
generative  principle  of  the  body  to  an  imitation  of  the  intellect 
which  is  rather  the  generative  principle  of  the  heart.  And  in 
truth  there  is  nothing  to  which  it  is  found  more  like  than 
the  circumcision  of  the  heart ;  these  therefore  are  real  facts 
like  the  celebrated  reasons  for  things  which  have  been  inves- 
tigated. But  we  must  now  speak  of  those  which  have  greater 
symbols  belonging  to  them  and  which  exhibit  a  certain 
principle. 

Therefore  the  circumcision  of  the  skin  is  said  to  be  a 
aymbol,  but  as  one  indicating  that  it  is  proper  to  cut  away 
all  superfluous  and  extravagant  desires,  by  studying  conti- 
nence and  religion;  for  as  the  skin  of  the  prepuce  is  quite 
superfluous  for  generation,  and  is  moreover  especially 
injurious  by  reason  of  the  disease  of  inflammation  which  burns 
within  it,  so  also  an  over  abundance  of  desire  is  as  super- 
fluous as  it  is  pernicious,  superfluous  because  it  is  not 
necessary,  and  pernicious  because  it  is  the  cause  of  diseases 
to  both  body  and  soul ;  and  by  the  greater  desire  he  also 
warns  us  that  all  the  other  desires  are  likewise  to  be  cut 
off".  And  that  is  called  the  greater  desire  which  has  a  regard 
to  the  matrimonial  connexion  of  the  male  and  the  female  ; 
since  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  great  thing,  namely,  of  gene- 
lating ;  and  since  it  creates  a  great  aftection  on  the  part  of 
the  father  towards  her  who  is  to  bring  forth  ;  for  it  is 
natural  for  them  both  to  be  influenced  l)y  love  and  aff'ection 
lor  their  offspring.  Therefore,  he  here  warns  us  to  cut  away 
not  only  all  the  superfluous  desires,  but  also  pride,  as  being 
a  great  wickedness  and  an  associate  of  wickedness. 

For  pride,  as  the  language  of  the  ancients  tells  us,  is 
what  keeps  men  back  and  hinders  them  in  their  im- 
provement ;  since  it  will  not  exliibit  that  honesty  which 
it  really  possesses,   thinking  that  it  is   itself  an  adequate 

o  Q  2 


452  PHILO  JUDiEUS. 

cause  for  anything.  Moreover  it  naturally  influences  those 
who  think  themselves  the  causes  of  generation;  so  that 
they  scarcely  ever  turn  their  minds  at  all  to  hehold  the 
true  Father  of  the  universe.  For  he  is  in  truth  the  one  real 
and  genuine  Father  of  all ;  and  we,  who  are  called  fathers, 
are  only  instruments  of  his,  serving  to  generation ;  since, 
as  in  a  wonderful  resemblance,  all  things  which  are  repre- 
sented in  appearance  are  yet  in  reality  inanimate,  but  that 
which  strengthens  the  nerves  is  invisible,  and  yet  is  itself  the 
cause  of  virtue,  and  of  motion,  and  of  sight.  So,  in  like 
manner,  from  everlasting  and  invisible  space  there  extends 
the  Creator  of  the  universe,  and  we,  like  so  many  pup- 
pets, are  strengthened  by  him  with  nerves  for  the  purpose 
which  belongs  to  us,  namely,  sowing  seed  and  raising  a 
generation  ;  unless  we  choose  to  fancy  that  a  flute  is  blown 
by  itself,  and  is  not  made  by  an  artist  in  a  way  adapted 
for  the  production  of  harmony,  by  whom  it  was  constructed 
as  an  instrument  for  service  and  for  its  own  necessary  end. 

"Why  does  he  order  circumcision  to  be  performed  on  the 
eighth  day?* 

49.  The  number  eight  has  many  beauties  in  it ;  for  it  is, 
in  the  first  place,  a  cubic  number.  Secondly,  it  has  beauties, 
because  it  everywhere  contains  in  itself  the  form  of  equality, 
because  longitude,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  which  are  all 
equal  to  one  another,  are  indicated  by  the  first  number 
eight. 

In  the  third  place,  the  composition  of  the  number 
eight  produces  agjeement,  namely,  the  number  thirty-si)c, 
which  the  Pythagoreans  call  agreement,  since  that  is  the 
first  number  in  which  odd  numbers  being  added  together 
agree  with  even  numbers.  If,  indeed,  four  odd  numbers 
from  the  unit  are  separately  taken  and  added  together  and 
four  even  numbers'  beginning  with  two,  they  united  make 
thirty-six.  Now  the  odd  numbers  are  these:  one,  three, 
five,  seven,  which  make  sixteen.  And  the  even  numbers 
are  these :  two,  four,  six,  eight,  which  make  twenty.  And 
the  addition  of  the  two  together  makes  thirty-six,  which  is 
in  truth  a  more  fertile  number. 

Since  it  is  a  square,  having  each  side  composed  of  the 
*  Genesis  xvii.  12. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  453 

number  six ;  the  first  of  Which  is  both  odd  and  even ;  which 
some  persons  most  correctly  call  harmony  or  matrimony  ; 
and  it  was  by  the  employment  of  this  number  that  the  Cre- 
ator of  the  universe  made  the  world,  as  the  holy  and  admirable 
book  of  Moses  relates. 

In  the  fourth  place,  the  idea  of  eight  produces  sixty- 
four,  which  is  the  first  number,  which  is  a  cube  and  also  a 
square,  being  the  type  of  incorporeal  substance  appreciable 
only  by  the  intellect  and  invisible,  and  also  of  corporeal 
substance.  Of  incorporeal  substance,  inasmuch  as  it  produces 
superficies  according  to  the  square;  and  of  corporeal  sub- 
stance, as  producing  a  solid  according  to  the  cube. 

In  the  fifth  place,  it  is  always  a  kindred  number  to  the 
virgin  number  seven,  for  seven  makes  up  the  parts  of  eight ; 
because  four  is  the  half  of  it,  two  is  the  fourth  part  of  it,  one 
the  eighth  of  it,  and  four,  two,  and  one,  added  together, 
make  seven. 

In  the  sixth  place,  the  power  of  eight  is  sixty-four,  which 
we  call  the  first  number,  being  both  a  cube  and  a  square. 

In  the  seventh  place,  taken  separately  from  the  units  by 
these  doubled  numbers,  one,  two,  four,  eight,  sixteen, 
thirty-two,  the  sum  makes  sixty-four. 

And  the  number  eight  has  also  other  more  distinguished 
virtues  still,  which  we  have  enumerated  in  another  place ; 
but  now  it  seems  better  to  explain  the  principle  which  cor- 
responds to  the  present  question,  and  which  depends  on  the 
grounds  now  laid  down. 

But  in  the  first  place  we  must  premise  this  :  that  nation 
to  whom  it  is  enjoined,  having  the  commandments  given  to 
it,  that  it  should  be  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day,  is  called 
in  the  Chaldaic  language  Israel,  that  is  to  say,  "  he  that 
seeth  by  day."  Therefore  Grod  wills,  in  the  first  place,  that 
he  should  be  a  partaker  both  of  his  own  just  rights,  and  also 
of  those  which  exist  according  to  election,  and  according  to 
the  principle  of  Genesis  (or  creation),  by  that  first  number 
'  six,  which  immediately  followed  the  creation.  This  number, 
in  fact,  the  Father  and  Creator  of  all  things  evidently 
exhibited  to  the  world  as  the  festival  of  generation,  com- 
pleting the  world  on  the  sixth  day.  And  the  other  number, 
that  which  is  according  to  election,  he  exhibited  by  the 
number  eight,  which  is  the  beginning  of  the  second  seven ; 


454  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

as  eight  is  seven  and  one,  so  the  race  which  has  been 
honoured  is  always  a  race  receiving  that  number  also  in  ad- 
dition, so  that  it  should  be  elect,  both  by  nature  and  in 
accordance  with  the  decree  of  the  Father. 

In  the  second  place,  the  number  eight  exhibits  equality 
everywhere,  showing  that  all  its  separations  are  equal,  as 
has  been  aleady  said,  I  mean  its  length,  and  breadth,  and 
depth.  And  equality  it  is  which  is  the  parent  of  equity 
and  justice,  by  which  he  shows  that  the  nation  which  loves 
Grod  is  adorned  with  equity  or  justice,  and  has  advanced  to 
complete  possession. 

In  the  third  place,  eight  is  not  only  a  measure  of  com- 
plete equity  in  all  its  dimensions,  but  is  the  very  first 
number  that  is  so,  for  it  is  the  first  cube ;  since  the  number 
eight  indicates  equality,  and  so  it  has  the  second  and  not 
the  first  rank:  therefore  it  demonstrates  in  a  symbolical 
manner  that  that  nature  was  the  first  which  was  ever  com- 
pletely furnished  with  consummate  and  perfect  equity  and 
justice,  and  that  it  is  the  first  nature  of  the  human  race,  not 
in  point  of  creation  or  of  time,  but  in  the  dignity  of  virtue, 
as  if  justice  united  with  equality  were  a  connatural  part 
of  it. 

In  the  fourth  place,  since  there  are  four  elements,  the  ap- 
pearances of  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire ;  fire  has  received 
for  its  figure  a  shape  becoming  a  similar  name,  a  pyramid  ;* 
and  air  has  received  for  its  figure  an  eight-sided  one ;  water, 
a  twenty-sided  one ;  and  the  earth,  a  cube.  Therefore  he 
thought  it  necessary  that  the  earth,  which  was  to  be  the 
allotment  of  the  race  of  man,  who  were  endowed  with  virtue, 
should  participate  in  the  cubic  number,  as  the  whole  earth 
has  been  formed  in  its  figure.  And  a  part  of  it  receives  the 
parts  of  that  which  should  bring  forth,  because  by  nature 
the  earth  is  very  fertile,  producing  all  the  various  and 
distinct  species  of  every  kind  of  animal  and  plant. 

"Wliy  does  he  order  all  slaves  to  be  circumcised,  those 
born  in  the  family  and  also  those  who  are  bought  ?  t 

50.  The  literal  meaning  is  plain;  for  it  is  fitting  that 
servants  should  imitate  their  masters  on  account  of  then 

*  TTvpafiiQ,  resembling  the  word  Trvp,  "fire." 
+  Genesifs  xvii.  12. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  455 

necessary  employment,  and  the  services  to  which  they  are 
bound  in  life.  But  with  respect  to  the  inner  object  of  the 
command,  those  dispositions  are  what  may  be  called  born  in 
the  family  which  are  influenced  by  nature  itself,  and  those 
are  bought  which  can  be  changed  for  the  better  by  teaching 
and  instruction.  Each  of  these  has  its  appropriate  employ- 
ment, and  requires  like  a  plant  to  be  cleared  and  pruned  in 
order  that  the  good  and  fruitful  parts  may  acquire  constancy; 
for  fertile  plants  produce  many  superfluous  things  by  reason 
of  their  fecundity,  and  those  superfluities  must  be  cut  away ; 
but  those  who  are  taught  by  instructors  cut  away  their 
ignorance. 

What  is  the  meaning  of,  "  And  it  shall  be  my  covenant 
(or  agreement)  in  your  flesh  ?  "  * 

51.  God  is  willing  to  do  good,  not  only  to  the  man  who  is 
endued  with  virtue,  but  he  wishes  that  the  divine  word 
should  regulate  not  only  his  soul  but  his  body  also,  as  if  it 
had  become  its  physician.  And  it  must  be  its  care  to  prune 
away  all  excesses  of  seeing,  and  hearing,  and  taste,  and 
smell,  and  touch,  and  also  those  of  the  instrument  of  voice 
and  articulation,  and  also  all  the  redundant  and  pernicious 
impulses  of  the  genitals,  as  also  of  the  whole  body,  the  effect 
of  which  is,  that  at  times  we  are  delighted  by  our  passions 
and  at  times  pained  by  them. 

Why  is  it  that  he  pronounces  a  sentence  of  death  on  an 
infant,  saying,  "  Every  male  child  who  is  not  circumcised, 
who  has  not  been  circumcised  (or,  as  the  Greek  has  it,  who 
shall  not  be  circumcised)  in  the  flesh  of  his  foreskin  on  the 
eighth  day,  that  soul  shall  be  cut  oflT  from  his  generation?  "f 

52.  The  law  never  declares  a  man  guilty  for  any  un- 
intentional offence  ;  since  even  those  who  have  committed 
an  unintentional  homicide  are  pardoned  by  it,  cities  being 
set  apart  into  which  such  men  may  flee  and  there  find 
security;  for  whoever  escapes  to  them  is  rendered  secure 
and  free!  from  danger ;  and  no  one  has  the  power  to  drag 
him  forth,  or  to  cite  him  before  the  tribunal  of  the  judge  for 
the  deed. 

Therefore,  if  a  boy  is  not  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day 

•  Genesis  xvii.  13.  f  Genesis  xvii.  14. 


456  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 

after  his  birth,  what  offence  will  he  have  committed  that  he 
is  to  be  held  guilty,  and  suffer  the  penalty  of  death  ? 

Some  persons  may  perhaps  say  that  the  form  of  the 
command  points  to  the  parents  themselves,  for  they  look 
upon  them  as  despisers  of  the  command  of  the  law.  But 
others  say  that  it  has  here  exerted  excessive  severity  against 
infants,  as  it  seems,  imposing  this  heavy  penalty  in  order 
that  grown  up  persons  who  break  the  law  may  thus  be 
irrevocably  subjected  to  most  severe  punishment.  This  is 
the  literal  effect  of  the  words. 

But  if  we  look  to  their  inward  meaning,  then  what  is  male 
in  us  is  most  especially  the  intellect,  and  that  God  here 
commands  to  be  circumcised  on  the  eighth  day,  for  the 
reason  previously  stated,  not  in  any  other  part,  but  in  the 
flesh  of  the  foreskin,  by  this  expression  symbolically  indi- 
cating those  parts  which  in  the  flesh  do  subsequently 
become  the  organs  of  pleasure  and  impulse.  And  on  this 
account  it  is  that  he  introduces  a  legitimate  reason,  warning 
men  that  the  intellect,  which  is  not  circumcised  and  cleared 
away  from  the  flesh  and  the  vices  of  the  flesh,  is  corrupt  and 
cannot  be  saved. 

But  that  this  language  is  not  to  be  applied  to  the  man, 
but  to  the  intellect,  which  is  thus  put  in  a  sound  condition, 
he  tells  us  in  the  subsequent  words,  sapng,  "  that  soul  shaU 
be  cut  off,"  not  that  human  body,  or  that  man,  but  that 
soul  and  mind.  Cut  off  from  what  ?  From  its  generation ; 
for  the  whole  generation  is  incorrupt.  Therefore  the  wicked 
man  is  removed  from  incorruption  to  corruption. 

Why  does  God  say,  "Sara  thy  wife  shall  not  be  called 
Sara,  but  Sarra  shall  be  her  name  ?  "  * 

53.  Here  again  some  foolish  persons  may  laugh  at  the 
addition  of  one  single  letter,  that  is  to  say,  of  a  hundred, 
for  in  Greek  characters  the  letter  p  means  a  hundred ;  but 
if  they  jest  in  this  way  they  are  foolish,  as  being  unwilling 
to  behold  the  inward  merits  of  things  and  to  cleave  to  the 
footsteps  of  truth ;  for  that  element,  §,  which  is  here 
thought  of  merely  as  the  addition  of  one  letter,  is  the 
parent  of  all  harmony,  making  things  great  instead  of  small, 
general  instead  of  particular,  and  mortal  instead  of  im- 

*  Genesis  xvii.  15 


M 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  457 

mortal ;  since  Sara,  when  called  Sara  with  one  f ,  is  inter- 
preted "  thy  princedom,"  but  with  two  ^'s,  Sarra,  "  princess." 
Let  us  then  be  careful,  and  see  how  these  two  names  are 
distinguished  from  one  another.  In  me  wisdom  (or 
prudence),  integrity  (or  temperance),  justice,  and  fortitude 
have  only  a  prince-like  power  and  are  mortal;  moreover, 
when  I  die  they  die  too. 

But  this  wisdom  is  herself  a  princess,  and  justice  is  a 
prince  too,  and  each  separate  one  of  these  virtues  is  not  the 
principal  or  princely  part  in  me,  but  is  itself  a  mistress  and 
a  queen,  an  everlasting  monarchy  and  sovereignty.  Do  you 
not  now  see  the  magnitude  of  the  gift  ?  By  this  slight 
change,  God  changes  the  part  into  the  whole,  the  species 
into  the  genus,  the  corruptible  into  the  incorruptible.  And 
'all  these  things  are  previously  dispensed  on  account  of  the 
impending  birth  of  a  more  perfect  joy  than  all  joys,  whose 
name  is  Isaac. 

Why  does  he  say,  "  And  from  her  I  will  give  thee  child- 
ren, and  I  will  bless  him,  and  he  shall  be  over  the  nations, 
and  kings  of  the  nations  shall  come  forth  from  him  ?  "  * 

54.  It  is  scarcely  proper  to  inquire  why  he  has  said 
children  in  the  plural  number,  when  he  meant  their  only 
and  beloved  son ;  for  the  intention  of  God's  words  applies 
to  his  offspring,  from  which  nations  and  kings  should  arise. 

This  is  the  literal  meaning  of  the  words.     But  if  we  look 

to  their  more  inward  sense,  when  the  soul  possesses  that 

virtue,  small  and  mortal  as  it  is,  which  is  only  particular, 

jShe  is  still  barren.     But  from  the  time  that  it  acquires  a 

share  of  the  divine  and  incorruptible  virtue,  it  begins  to 

onceive  and  to  bring  forth  varieties  of  nations,  namely,  of 

ill  other  holy  and  sacred  persons  ;  for  every  one  of  the  ever- 

iasting  virtues  is  subject  to  an  immense  number  of  voluntary 

aws,  which  bear  in  themselves  a  similarity  to  nations  and 

kingdoms  ;  for  virtue  and  the  generations  of  virtue  are  royal 

hings,  being  previously  instructed  by  nature  what  it  is 

A  hicii  rejoices  in  princely  power,  and  has  no  knowledge  of  a 

<  or  vile  condition. 

Why  did  Abraham  fall  on  his  face  and  laugh  ?  f 

*  Genedis  xvii.  16.  +  Genesis  xvii.  17. 


458  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 


55.  Two  things  are  indicated  by  his  falling  on  his  face.  One 
an  act  of  adoration  on  account  of  the  excess  of  his  divine 
ecstacy ;  the  other  that  it  corresponds  to  and  is  suitable  to 
the  aforesaid  harmony,  by  which  the  intellect  has  confessed 
that  Grod  alone  exists  in  a  continual  and  unvarying  exist- 
ence. But  those  creatures  which  owe  their  existence  to 
creation  and  generation,  all  are  subject  to  changes  in  time ; 
for  they  fall  to  a  certain  extent,  inasmuch  as  they  are 
accustomed  to  rise  up,  and  to  be  corrected  in  accordance 
with  their  original  appearance. 

And  it  was  very  natural  for  Abraham  to  laugh  at  the  ^ 
promise,  as  he  was  then  fiUed  with  the  great  hope  that  the 
things  which  he  expected  should  be  accomplished,  especially 
because  he  had  received  a  manifest  revelation  from  that 
appearance,  by  which  he  became  more  thoroughly  acquainted 
with  him  who  exists  for  everlasting  without  variation,  and 
with  him  also  who  is  continually  stooping  and  falling. 

Why  did  Abraham  appear  to  hesitate  about  the  promise, 
for  the  sacred  writer  says,  He  said  in  his  mind,  shall  there 
be  a  son  to  one  who  is  a  hundred  years  old ;  and  shall 
Sarra,  who  is  ninety  years  old,  bring  forth  a  child  ?* 

56.  This  expression,  "he  said  in  his  mind,"  is  not  added 
without  an  object  or  gratuitously,  for  words  which  are 
articulated  in  the  tongue  and  the  mouth  incur  guilt,  and 
become  liable  to  punishment,  but  those  which  are  restrained 
within  the  mind  are  not  liable  to  punishment,  because  the 
mind  without  any  intention  on  its  part  is  led  away  by 
irregularities,  all  kinds  of  passions  being  introduced  from 
different  quarters,  which  it  for  a  while  resists,  being  in- 
dignant at  them,  and  wishing  to  keep  aloof  from  their 
representations. 

But  perhaps  we  should  not  say  that  he  hesitated,  but 
rather  that  he  was  struck  by  wonderment  at  the  amazing 
nature  of  the  gift,  and  so  said,  "  Behold  my  body  is  ad- 
vanced in  years,  and  has  passed  the  age  of  generation ; 
nevertheless  all  things  are  possible  to  God,  so  that  he  may 
transmute  old  age  into  youth,  and  lead  those  who  have  no 
seed  nor  fruit  to  fertility  and  generation :  and  if  a  man  who 
is  a  hundred  years  and  a  woman  who  is  ninety  years  old 

*  Genesis  xxii.  18. 


QUESTIONS   AND   SOLUTIONS.  459 

become  parents,  all  common-place  occurrences  and  all 
regularity  of  nature  will  be  done  away,  and  it  will  be 
(•l(Mirly  seen  that  it  is  only  tbe  power  and  the  grace  of  God." 

But  what  virtue  the  number  one  hundred  has  must  now 
bo  explained. 

In  the  first  place,  a  hundred  is  the  power  of  the  number 

H'll. 

In  the  second  place,  the  number  ten  thousand  is  the 
power  of  this  number  a  hundred,  and  ten  thousand  is  the 
i)rother  of  the  unit,  for  as  one  times  one  is  one,  so  ten 
thousand  times  one  is  ten  thousand. 

In  the  third  place,  every  part  of  the  number  a  hundred  is 
honourable. 

In  the  fourth  place,  this  number  consists  of  thirty-six 
land  sixty-four,  which  is  a  cube,  and  at  the  same  time  a 
triangle. 

In  the  fifth  place,  it  is  composed  of  all  these  separate  odd 
numbers :  one,  three,  five,  seven,  nine,  eleven,  thirteen, 
ififteen,  seventeen,  nineteen,  which  added  together  make  a 
^hundred. 

In  the  sixth  place,  it  is  composed  of  these  four  numbers  : 
one  and  its  double,  and  four  and  its  double  ;  as  one,  two, 
jfour,  eight,  which  make  fifteen,  and  of  these  four  numbers 
jalso  added  together,  one,  four,  fifteen,  sixty-four,  which 
jtnake  eighty-five.  And  the  principle  of  doubling  pervades 
all  these  numbers,  containing  that  principle  which  is  by 
fours  and  by  fives :  and  the  principle  of  four  times  and 
twice  pervades  them  all. 

In  the  seventh  place,  it  is  composed  of  five  numbers 
;taken  simply,  one,  two,  three,  four,  which  make  ten ;  and  of 
five  triangular  numbers,  one,  three,  six,  ten,  which  make 
twenty ;  and  of  five  quadrangular  numbers,  one,  four,  nine, 
sixteen,  which  make  thirty ;  and  of  five  quinquangular 
numbers,  one,  five,  twelve,  twenty-two,  which  make  forty : 
;iiid  all  these  added  together  make  a  hundred. 

In  the  eighth  place,  it  is  composed  of  four  cubes  taken 
■dimply  beginning  with  the  unit,  for  after  giving  one,  two, 
three,  four,  their  cubes  one,  eight,  twenty-seven,  sixty-four, 
make  a  hundred. 

In  the  ninth  place,  it  is  divided  into  forty  and  sixty,  each 
of  which  is  a  very  natural  number ;  and  in  accordance  with 


460  PHILO  JUD^US.  I 

the  first  order  of  decimals  up  to  ten  thousand  in  a  quinl 
quanguiar  figure  the  number  a  hundred  holds  the  middl^l 
place ;  for  instance :  one,  ten,  a  hundred,  one  thousand,  ter 
thousand,  where  a  hundred  is  the  middle  number  of  one,  ten,r 
a  hundred,  one  thousand,  and  ten  thousand. 

But  we  ought  also  not  to  pass  over  in  silence  the  numbei 
ninety  as  far  as  it  concerns  the  visible  characters.  , 

As  it  seems  to  me  the  number  ninety  is  second  only  to 
the  number  a  hundred,  inasmuch  as  the  tenth  part  of  it. 
that  is  to  say  ten,  is  taken  away,  since  I  see  that  in  the  \sivi 
two-tenths  of  the  first-fruits  were  set  apart,  first  a  tenth  oi 
the  whole,  secondly  a  tenth  of  the  remainder,  for  when  a 
tenth  of  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  of  corn,  or  wine,  or  oil,  is 
taken,  another  tenth  is  also  taken  from  the  remainder} 
therefore  of  these  two  that  which  is  the  first  and  principal 
one  is  honoured  with  the  greater  share  ;  and  in  the  second 
place  that  which  follows  it,  since  the  number  a  hundred  of 
the  years  of  the  vdse  man  comprises  both  the  first-fruits' 
with  which  it  is  consecrated,  both  the  first  and  the  second 
kind ;  but  the  number  ninety  of  the  years  of  the  female 
parent,  comprehends  the  second  and  lesser  first-fruits^ 
namely,  the  remainder  of  the  first,  which  is  the  great  on© 
among  the  sacred  numbers. 

This  therefore  may  be  called  the  first  vision  in  the  sacred 
law  which  is  familiar;  and  the  other  has  a  general  cha- 
racter, for  the  number  ninety  is  fertile ;  on  which  account 
also  it  happens  that  the  woman  begins  to  bring  forth  in  the 
ninth  month ;  but  the  tenth  is  the  sacred  and  perfect 
number ;  and  when  the  two  numbers  nine  and  ten  are 
multiplied  together  ninety  is  made,  as  being  the  virtue  of 
the  sacred  birth,  receiving  a  fertile  generation  according  to 
the  number  nine,  and  a  holy  one  according  to  ten. 

"Why  did  Abraham  say  to  Grod,  O  may  this  my  son 
Ishmael  live  before  thee  ?* 

57.  In  the  first  place,  I  do  not  despair,  says  he,  O  Lord, 
of  a  better  generation,  but  I  believe  thy  promise :  never- 
theless, it  would  be  a  sufficient  blessing  for  me  for  this  son 
to  live  who  in  the  meantime  is  a  living  son,  standing  visibly, 

*  Genesis  xvii.  18. 


QUESTIONS  AND  SOLUTIONS.  461 

ven  though  he  be  not  so  according  to  the  legitimate  blood, 
lut  is  only  born  of  a  concubine. 

In  the  second  place,  that  blessing  which,  he  is  now  asking 
or  is  an  additional  one ;  for  he  does  not  entreat  for  life 
lone  for  his  sons,  but  for  an  especial  life  in  God ;  and  we 
(lust  suppose  that  there  is  nothing  more  perfect  than  the 
ejoicing  in  the  presence  of  God  with  a  salutary  soundness 
f  mind,  which  is  equal  to  immortality. 

In  the  third  place,  he  by  a  conjectiu-e  intimates  that  the 
iivine  law,  when  heard,  ought  not  to  be  considered  enough 
f  merely  heard,  but  that  it  ought  also  to  enter  more  deeply 
Qto  the  inward  man,  and  to  form  his  principal  part ;  for 
hat  life  is  worthy  of  being  beheld  by  the  Deity  which  is 
ormed  in  accordance  with  his  word. 

Why  does  the  divine  oracle,  in  the  way  of  intimation,  say 
0  Abraham,  Yes,  be  it  so :  behold  Sarah  thy  wife  shall 
Iso  bring  forth  a  son  unto  thee  ?  * 

58.  The  meaning  of  this  sentence  is  as  follows  :  that 
onfession  and  admission,  says  God,  is  on  my  part  an 
admission  of  thy  wish,  being  manifestly  full  of  unadulterated 
oy ;  and  your  faith  is  not  doubtful,  but  without  any  hesita- 
ion  it  has  a  share  of  modest  awe  and  reverence  ;  therefore 
hat  which  thou  hast  received  before,  as  to  be  done  unto 
hee  on  account  of  thy  faith  in  me,  shall  certainly  be  done ; 
or  this  is  what  is  meant  by  yes. 

"Why  does  he  say,  Eut  behold  I  will  also  listen  to  thee 
!oncerning  Ishmael,  and  I  will  bless  him,  and  he  shall 
)ecome  the  father  of  twelve  nations  ?t 

59.  God  says,  I  will  grant  to  thee  both  the  first  and  the 
lecond  blessing,  that  is  to  say,  both  the  blessings  of  nature 
md  the  blessings  of  instruction ;  by  nature  that  which  is 
iccording  to  the  legitimate  course  of  nature,  that  is  Isaac, 
lud  by  instruction  that  which  is  according  to  Ishmael,  who 
s  not  legitimate:  for  hearing,  when  compared  with  sight,  is 
ike  the  illegitimate  compared  with  the  legitimate,  and  what 
s  brought  about  by  instruction  is  not  of  the  same  class 
vith  that  which  owes  its  existence  to  nature  ;  and  the  man 
vho  is  desirous  of  encyclical  wisdom  becomes  the  father  of 

*  Genesis  xvii.  19.  t  Genesis  xvii.  20. 


402  PHILO   JUDiEUS. 


I 


nations,  for  the  encyclical  number  is  a  period  of  twelve  days  ' 
and  years. 

Why  does  he  say,  But  I  will  set  up  my  covenant  with 
Isaac,  whom  Sarah  shall  bring  forth  about  this  time  in  the 
succeeding  year  ?  * 

60.  As  in  men's  wills  some  persons  are  set  down  as  heirs, 
and  some  are  entered  as  worthy  of  gifts  which  they  are  to 
receive  from  the  heirs,  so  also  in  the  divine  testament  that 
man  is  set  down  as  the  heir  who  is  by  nature  a  worthy 
disciple  of  Grod  being  adorned  with  all  perfect  virtues  ;  but 
he  who  is  introduced  by  learning,  and  is  made  subject  to  the 
law  of  wisdom,  and  partakes  in  encyclical  instruction,  is  not 
at  all  an  heir,  but  only  a  receiver  of  gifts  gratuitously  given. 

But  it  is  said  with  great  wisdom  and  propriety  that  his 
mother  shall  bring  forth  Isaac  in  the  succeeding  year,  since 
this  birth  unto  life  does  not  belong  to  the  present  time,  but 
to  another  great  and  holy  time  ;  and  that  which  is  divine 
rejoices  in  excessive  abundance,  and  is  by  no  means  like  the 
nations  of  this  world. 

"Why  does  he  say,  Abraham  was  ninety  and  nine  years  old 
when  he  was  circumcised,  and  Ishmael  his  son  was  thirteen 
years  old  ?  f 

61.  The  number  of  ninety  and  nine  years  is  arranged  here 
as  approximating  to  the  number  a  hundred.  And  it  is  m 
accordance  with  this  number  that  it  is  arranged  that  the  seed 
of  the  perfect  man  becomes  the  beginning  of  generation, 
which  appears  more  evidently  in  the  number  a  hundred ;  but 
the  number  thirteen  is  composed  of  the  first  square  numbers 
of  four  and  nine,  the  odd  and  even  numbers ;  so  that  the 
even  number  has  for  its  sides  a  twofold  material  form ;  and 
the  odd  number  has  an  operative  form,  from  all  which  a 
triple  number  is  made,  which  is  the  greatest  and  most  per- 
fect of  the  festival  victims  which  the  examinations  of  the 
sacred  scriptures  contain. 

This  is  one  reason.  A  second  also  it  may  be  allowed  to 
us  to  mention,  that  the  age  namely  of  thirteen  years  is  very 
near  to  and  a  partaker  with  the  fourteenth  year,  in  which  the 
motions  of  seed  towards  generation  begin  to  have  life.    In 

*  Genesis  xvii.  21.  t  Genesis  xvii.  24. 


QUESTIONS  AND   SOLUTIONS.  463 

order,  therefore,  that  no  foreign  seed  should  be  sown,  he 
arranged  that  the  first  generations  should  be  kept  pure, 
figuring  the  instrument  of  generating  under  the  figure 
of  generation. 

In  the  third  place,  he  teaches  that  he  who  is  about  to  go 
through  the  operations  of  matrimony  ought  by  all  means 
first  of  all  to  cut  away  concupiscence,  reproving  all  las- 
civious and  effeminate  persons  as  those  who  bring  together 
superfluous  mixtures  which  were  not  for  the  sake  of  the  gene- 
ration of  children  but  to  gratify  incontinent  desires. 

Why  did  Abraham  also  circumcise  strangers  ?  * 

62.  The  wise  man  is  as  useful  as  the  humane  man,  who 
saves  and  invites  to  himself  not  only  his  relations  andn  eigh- 
bours,  but  also  strangers  and  men  of  another  family,  giving 
them  a  share  of  his  own  habit  of  patient  and  religious  con- 
tinence ;  for  these  are  the  foundations  of  constancy,  which 
is  the  object  of  all  virtue,  and  the  point  at  which  it  rests. 

*  Genesis  xvii.  27. 


INDEX. 


A,  the  letter,  the  very  first  element 
of  language,  iv.  444. 

Aaron,  meaning  of  the  name,  i.  119, 
140;  the  brother  of  Moses,  iii.  21 ; 
his  mouthpiece,  interpreter,  and 
prophet,  i.  251  ;  changes  the  river 
into  blood,  iii.  22;  other  miracles 
performed  by  him,  23  ;  constituted 
high  priest,  103;  his  sacred  vest- 
ments, ii.  66  ;  his  sacrifice  consum- 
ed by  fire  from  heaven,  iii.  106  ; 
his  rod  blossoms,  111. 

\bae,  the  temple  of,  burnt,  iv.  231. 

\bel  and  Cain,  Sacrifices  of,  i. 

1   207. 

\bel,  meaning  of,  i.  207  ;  is  a  shep- 
herd, 209,  iv.  31.5  ;  his  sacrifice,  i. 
228  ;  offered  the  first-born,  288. 

Vbihu,  meaning  of,  ii.  81. 

Ibimelech,  covenant  of  Isaac  with, 
iv.  278. 

Abraham,  Life  of,  ii.  396. 

Vbraham,  Migration  of,  ii.  43, 

Ibraham,  the  founder  of  the  Jewish 
nation,  iv.  181;  meaning  of  his 
name,  i.  129  ;  his  departure  from 
his  country,  ii.  43;  symbolical 
meaning  of,  44;  his  trance,  143; 
promises  of  God  to,  ii.  147,  238  ;  iv. 
406  ;  symbols  represented  by  the 
name,  ii.  251 ;  his  oflfering  of  Isaac, 
333  ;  fortune  of  his  posterity,  iv. 
418  ;  his  prayer  for  Tshmael,  460. 
wbraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  symbols 
of  the  three  natures  of  God,  ii.  240. 
bram,  his  name  changed  to  Abra- 
ham, i.  176  ;  ii.  249;  iv.  443; 
symbols  represented  by  the  name 
of  Abram,  ii.  251. 
TOL.  TV.  H 


Abuse,  a  wise  man  refuses  to  engage 
in  a  contest  of,  i.  400. 

Abyss,  what,  i.  8. 

Acheman,  meaning  of,  i.  299. 

Actions,  various  classes  of,  according 
to  the  dialecticians,  i.  406. 

Actors,  censure  of,  iv.  1 45. 

Adah,  meaning  of,  i.  303. 

Adam,  interpretation  of  the  name,  i. 
75 ;  the  last  work  in  the  creation  of 
the  world,  22  ;  his  beauty  both  of 
soul  and  body,  40  ;  the  viceroy  of 
God,  44  ;  woman  the  cause  of  his 
fall,  44  ;  expelled  from  paradise, 
46,  120.     See  Man. 

Adam  and  Eve,  iv.  248. 

Adin.     See  Eden. 

Adultery,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 
146  ;  the  commandment  against, 
iii.  164,  173,  305  ;  trial  of  the  wo- 
man accused  of,  317. 

Advisers,  remarks  on,  iv.  266,  275. 

^gina  swallowed  up  bv  the  sea,  iv. 
58. 

^schvlus,  citations  from,  iv.  40  ;  iii. 
557. 

Affliction,  what  kind  of,  profitable,  ii. 
193. 

Agar,  meaning  of,  i.  215. 

Age,  a  name  given  to  the  life  of  the 
world,  ii.  291. 

Agrippa,  king,  his  visit  to  Alexandria, 
iv.  66  ;  insulted  by  the  populace, 
68  ;  protects  the  Jews  against  Flac- 
cus,  82  ;  his  fear  of  Caligula,  158  ; 
writes  to  him  against  his  projected 
desecration  of  the  Temple,  160. 

Agrippa,  Marcus,  his  offerings  in  the 
temple  of  Jerusalem,  iv.  164. 


466 


INDEX. 


Agrippina,  death  of,  alluded  to,  iv.  63. 

Aileem,  a  place  with  twelve  fountains 
and  seventy  palm-trees,  symbolical 
of  the  twelve  tribes  and  seventy 
elders,  iii.  42. 

Air,  the,  symbolically  represented  by 
a  ladder  reaching  from  earth  to 
heaven,  ii.  322  ;  filled  with  living 
things,  i.  331 ;  the  cause  of  health 
and  disease,  331. 

Air  and  light,  creation  of,  i.  7, 

Alexander,  of  Macedon,  foolish  boast 
of,  i.  191  ;  fall  of  the  successors 
of,  ii.  480. 

Alexandria,  turbulent  character  of  its 
people,  iv.  67  ;  their  oppression  of 
the  Jews,  69,  125. 

Allegories  of  the  Sacred  Laws, 
On  the,  i.  53. 

Almond,  character  of  the,  iii.  112; 
blossoming  of  Aaron's  rod,  iii.  3  ; 
symbolical  of  perfect  virtue,  112, 

Aloadae,  foble  of  the,  ii.  2. 

Altar,  why  built  by  Noah,  iv.  380. 

Altars,  why  two,  ordered  to  be  pre- 
pared, iii.  233. 

Amalek,  meaning  of,  ii.  168. 

Amalekites,  king  of  the,  destroyed, 
iii.  48. 

Ambassadors,  Treatise  on  the 
Virtues  and  on  the  Office  of, 
iv.  99. 

Amorites,  the,  symbolical  meaning  of, 
ii.  155  ;  sins  of  the,  iv.  421. 

Amram,  the  father  of  Moses,  ii.  184. 

Anaphe,  a  name  of  the  island  of 
Delos,  iv.  53. 

Anarchy,  the  cause  of  evils,  ii.  394  ; 
evils  of,  iv.  243. 

Anaxagoras,  inconsiderate  conduct  of, 
iv.  4  ;  his  astronomy,  22  ;  his  for- 
titude, iii.  529. 

Ancestry,  pride  of,  ridiculed,  iii.  497. 

Andros,  the  island  of,  a  place  of  ban- 
ishment, iv.  92. 

Angels,  the  ministers  of  God,  ii.  237  ; 
both  good  and  bad,  i.  332 ;  called 
demons  by  philosophers,  331  ;  why 
made  to  resemble  men,  iv.  252  ; 
their  likeness  assumed  by  God,  ii. 
341  ;  assume  the  human  shape,  iv. 


334  ;  visit  of  the,  to  Abraham,  il 
418  ;  figurativel)  explained,  420. 

Angels,  demons,  and  souls,  identity 
of,  i.  332. 

Anger,  remark  on,  i.  138. 
Animals  fit  for  Sacrifice,  Trea- 
tise ON,  iii.  211, 
Animals,  principle  of  the  generation 
of,  i.  19  ;  in  general,  creation  of,  i, 
17,  18  ;  aquatic,  creation  of,  i.  17  ; 
winged  and  terrestrial,  creation  of, 
i.  17,  18,  418;  naming  of,  by 
Adam,  i.  44  ;  iv.  248  ;  laws  of 
Moses  respecting,  iii.  379,  405 ; 
the  irrational,  created  for  the  sake 
of  man,  iv,  277,  335. 

Annan,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  80. 

Antigonides,  the  flute-player,  ready 
wit  of,  iii.  537, 

Antisthenes,  remark  of,  on  the  virtu- 
ous man,  iii.  512, 

Antonius,  fragments  of  Philo  preserv- 
ed by,  iv,  27 1 . 

Apelles,  a  tragic  actor,  his  hatred  of 
the  Jews,  i v.  145  ;  his  punishment, 
146. 

Apollo,  the  inventor  of  medicine, 
iv.  122;  his  various  attributes,  120; 
his  character  assumed  by  Caligula, 
120. 

Appetites,  evil  arising  from  the  indul' 
gence  of  the,  i.  336. 

Aquatic  animals,  creation  of,  i.  17  ; 
the  clean  and  unclean,  iii.  381. 

Arabia,  retreat  of  Moses  to,  iii.  12 ; 
circumcision  practised  in,  iv.  449. 

Archons  of  Athens,  ii.  398. 

Argo,  the  ship,  iii.  537. 

Argonautic  voyagers  all  free  men,  ii. 
537. 

Aristarchus,  fortitude  of,  iii.  530. 

Aristippus,  a  cynic  philosopher,  i.  447. 

Aristotle,  his  opinions  concerning  the 
world,  iv,  23  ;  his  definition  of  hap- 
piness, 423. 

Ark,  the,  an  emblem  of  the  body,  i. 
425  ;  iv.  348  ;  its  preparation,  340. 

Ark  of  the  tabernacle  described,  iii.  94, 

Arnon,  interpreted,  i.  169. 

Arphaxad,  meaning  of,  ii.  275. 

Arrogance,  censure  of,  iii.  451. 


INDEX. 


467 


Ascalon,  pigeons  why  abundant  there, 
iv.  240. 

Aseneth,  wife  of  Joseph,  ii.  309. 

Ashes,  meaning  of  the  sprinkling  of, 
in  purification,  iii.  230. 

Ashriel,  the  son  of  Manasseh,  ii.  1 66. 

Asser,  a  symbol  of  wealth,  ii.  351. 

Astronomy  the  queen  of  all  the  scien- 
ces, ii.  167. 

Atalantes,  island  of,  overwhelmed  be- 
neath the  sea,  iv.  59. 

Atheism,  the  greatest  of  i.\l  vices,  iii. 
182. 

Athens,  praise  of,  iii.  536. 

vVthletes,  or  boxers,  i.  195  ;  ii.  244, 
253  ;  iii.  530. 

Audro,  a  Jewish  elder,  plundered  and 
scourged,  iv.  76. 

lUgustus,  the  emperor,  his  favour  to 
the  Jews,  iv.  76,  167  ;  panegyric  ot, 
132. 

\uthority,  the  cause  of  good,  ii.  394. 

Autolycus,  feast  given  by,  iv.  1 3. 

H'ribel,  tower  of,  ii.  2. 

Babylon,  the  sacrifice  of  children  not 
practised  in,  ii.  434  ;  the  Jews 
dwelling  there,  iv.  161. 

Hiicchus,  blessings  conferred  on  man- 
kind by,  iv.  118, 

liaker,  the  chief,  of  Pharaoh,  his 
dream,  ii.  472. 

lialaam,  meaning  of,  ii.  34  ;  an  im- 
pious man,  08  ;  his  history,  i.  183  ; 
iii.  59  ;  his  fate,  ii.  278. 

lialak,  meaning  of,  ii.  14;  his  mes- 
sages to  Balaam,  iii.  59. 

Banquets  of  the  Greeks,  two  most 
celebrated,  iv.  13;  of  intemperate 
men  contrasted  with  those  of  the 
TherapeutHe,  iv.  9  ;  full  of  trifling 
and  folly,  15. 

Harad,  meaning  of,  ii.  237. 

JiASKET  OP  First-Fruits,  Treatise 
ON  THE  Festival  of  the,  iii.  291. 

Baskets,  the  three,  symbolically  ex- 
plained, ii.  473. 

H;>ssu8,  a  centurion,  sent  to  Alex- 
andria, iv.  83 ;  apprehends  Flaccus, 
84  ;  sends  him  to  Italy,  87. 

Hear,  constellation  of  the,  i.  54. 


Beasts,  creation  of,  i.  18;  subjection 
of,  to  man.  25  ;  the  passions  com- 
pared to,  83 ;  their  destruction  in 
the  deluge,  iv.  349  ;  humane  treat- 
ment of,  iii.  438,  441  ;  which  are 
the   cause   of  a  man's  death,  law 
regarding,  iii,  339;  clean  and   un- 
clean, 380. 
Beauty   of  images,  statues,  and  pic- 
tures, ii.  451. 
Bees,  why  accounted  unclean,  iii.  236. 
Bea;inning,  spoken  of  by  Moses,  how 

to  be  understood,  i.  7. 
Bellv,  symbolical  meaning  of  the,  i. 

138. 
Belphegor,  ii.  13,  259. 
Benjamin,  meaning   of,  ii.   256  ;    an 

emblem  of  time,  ii.  351. 
Bethuel,  meaning  of,  ii.  204. 
Besaleel,  or  Bezaleel,  meaning  of,  i. 

133.421  ;  ii.  336. 
Bias  of  Priene,  retort  of,  to  Croesus, 

iii.  539. 
Bible.     See  Septuigint. 
Bilhah,  or  Billah,  meaning  of,  i.  140. 
Birds,  creation  of,  i.    17;  symbolical 
meaning    of,    ii.     139 ;     why    not 
divided  in  the  saciifices,  139. 
Blasphemy,  no  pardon   for,  ii.   211  ; 
instances  of  its  punishment,  250  ; 
iii.  114. 
Blessings,    promised    to    those    who 

observe  the  Law,  iii.  477. 
Blind,  deaf,  and  other  afflicted  per- 
sons, laws  for  the  protection  of,  iii. 
403. 
Blood,  the,  whv  called  the  life  of  the 

flesh,  i.  261  ;  iv.  388. 
Bodleian  Library,  fragments  of  Philo 
preserved  in  the,  iv.  276. 
;  Body,  the,  symbolized  by  the  ark,  i. 
I      425  ;  seven  divisions  of  the,  i.  35; 
I      Moses'  explanation  of  the  divisions 
I      of  the,  i.  234, 
Boethus,    the    Stoic,    embraces    the 
i      doctrine  of  the  incorruptibility  of 
I      the  world,  iv.  34,  41. 
I  Boils  and  blains,  plague  of,  in  Egypt, 
I      iii.  29. 

I  Bold  and  brave  men,  remark  on,  iv. 
i      263. 
H    2 


468 


INDEX. 


Bone  of  mv  bone,  explained,  i.  90 ; 
iv.  298. 

Boxers.     Sec  Athletes. 

Bow  in  the  clouds,  explained,  iv.  393. 

Boys,  love  of,  condemnation  of,  iii.  12. 

Brazen  serpent,  the,  i.  100. 

Bread  from  heaven,  ii.  222,  289. 

Bread  and  salt,  the  food  of  the  The- 
rapeutae,  iv.  9,  17. 

Breadth,  torpor  of,  explained, iii.  467. 

Breastplate  of  the  high  priest,  de- 
scribed, iii.  195. 

Breath  of  the  Deity,  iv.  364. 

Breathed  into,  explained,  i.  60  ;  iv. 
285. 

Bricks,  baking  of,  its  symbolical 
meaning,  ii.  21. 

Brutus,  his  attack  on  the  Xanthians, 
iii.  532  ;  the  murderer  of  his  king 
and  benefactor,  532. 

Bura,  swallowed  up  by  the  sea,  iv.  58. 

Burning  bush,  miracle  of  the,  ii.  227; 
iii.  16. 

Burnt  offering.     See  Victims. 

Bush,  the  burning,  ii.  227  ;  iii.  16. 

Butler  of  Pharaoh,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of,  ii.  376  ;  his  dream,  472. 

Caddes,  fountain  of,  ii.  234. 

Cadesh,  meaning  of,  iv.  4.37. 

Caesar  and  Pompey,  war  of,  iv.  131. 

Cain,  Treatisk  on  the  Posterity 
OF,  i.  286. 

Cain  and  Abkl,  Sacrifices  of,  i.  207. 

Cain,  meaning  of,  i.  191,  207  ;  birth 
of,  185  ;  a  tiller  of  the  ground, 
209;  iv.  315;  his  pride,  i.  217; 
his  sacrifice,  217;  his  murder  of 
his  brother,  241;  iv,  319;  his 
flight,  i.  283 ;  builds  a  city,  294  ; 
why  not  mentioned  as  dying,  ii. 
206  ;  why,  though  the  elder,  men- 
tioned after  Abel,  iv.  316  ;  his 
punishment,  321,  322;  omitted 
from  the  genealogy  of  Adam,  326. 

Caius  (Caligula),  accession  of,  iv.  63  ; 
his  liberality  to  Agrippa,  0(5 ;  orders 
Flaccus  to  be  seized,  83  ;  puts  him 
and  other  banished  magistrates  to 
death,  98;  his  sickness,  103;  his 
hypocrisy,     105  ;     his    cruelty    to 


Macro  and  others,  106,  112,  113; 

his  impiety,  116  ;  fancies  himself  a 

god,  116  ;  his  hatred  of  the  Jews,_ 

124;    determines    to    set    u))    his 

statue  in  the  holy  of  holies,  146  ; 

his  anger  at  the  delay  of  Petronius, 

156 ;    yields   to   the   entreaties   of 

Agrippa,    172;    his    inequality    of 

temper,  173;  his  strange  reception 

of  the  Jewish  ambassadors,  176. 
Caius  Norbanus,  letter  of,  concerning 

the  Jews,^iv.  168. 
Calanus,  the  Indian,  his  speech  and 

letter  to  Alexander,  iii.  527. 
Caleb,  meaning  of,  ii.  262. 
Caligula.     See  Caius. 
Camel,  the,  an  unclean  beast,  i.  404, 
Camels,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i.  32 , . 
Canaan,  son  of  Noah,  evil  conduct  of, 

i.   9'y ;    meaning   of  the   name,   i. 

510  ;  iv.  395  ;  why  accursed,  i.  510. 
Canaan,    land    of,    the    emblem    of 

wickedness,   ii.    174;   promised  to 

Abraham,  iv.  447. 
Canaanites,  defeat  of,  by  the  Hebrews, 

iii.  57  ;   sometimes   called   Cappa- 

docians,  iv.  278. 
Candlestick,    the    sacred,  symbolical 

meaning  of  its  trunk  and  branches, 

ii.   136;  an  imitation  of  the  seven 

planets,  137. 
Capito,  the  collector  of  the  imperial 

revenues  in  Judaea,  his  false  charge^ 

against  the  Jews,  iv.  144. 
Cappadocians,     the     Canaanites     so 

called,  iv.  278. 
Captivts,  female,  humane  directions 

regarding,  iii.  438. 
Carabbas,  a  madman,  his  mock  coro- 
nation at  Alexandria,  iv.  68. 
Carbuncle  and  emerald,  symbolically 

explained,  i.  69. 
Carcases   and    bodies    torn    by   wild 

beasts,  law  of  Moses  regarding,  iii. 

384. 
Carthage,  its  fall,  i.  376. 
Cast  out  and  sent  out,  the  different 

explained,  i,  175. 
Castor  and  Pollux,  iv.  118. 
Categories,  the,  ten  only  in  numbei 

iii.  142. 


I 


INDEX. 


469 


Cattle  and  beasts,  creation  of,  i.  1 8. 

Caution,  likened  to  a  wall,  ii.  359. 

Cenchreas,  the  dockyard  of  Corinth, 
iv.  93. 

Centurions  appointed  by  Moses,  ii. 
179. 

Ceos,  isle  of,  peopled  by  Japhet,  iv. 
404. 

Chaldaeans,  the  sacrifice  of  children 
not  practised  among  the,  ii.  434  ; 
their  skill  in  astronomy  and  gene- 
alogies, 82 ;  land  of  the,  symboli- 
cally explained,  iv.  406. 

Chameleon,  its  v?onderful  property,  i. 
488. 

Changes  of  countries  and  nations, 
enu'meration  of,  i.  376. 

Chaos,  opinions  of  Aristotle  and 
others  concerning,  iv.  25. 

Character  impressed  on  man,  meaning 
of,  i.  133. 

Chariot  of  the  soul,  i.  393;  of  Cleo- 
patra, iv.  129. 

Charran,  ii.  82  ;  its  meaning,  85 ;  a 
metropolis  of  the  outward  senses, 
ii.  301. 

Chatterers,  censure  of,  iv.  246. 

Chebron,  meaning  of,  i.  245,  -\)'.). 

Chemosh,  meaning  of,  i.  169. 

Cherubim,  On  the,  i.  175. 

Cherubim,  what  to  be  understood  bv 
the,  i.  181  ;iv.  314. 

Chest,  the  seat  of  courage,  i.  138. 

Cheth,  meaning  of,  ii.  360. 

Cheturah,  meaning  of^  i.  215. 

Children,  ignorant  people  so  termed 
by  Moses,  i.  503;  sacrifice  of,  among 
heathen  nations,  ii.  433;  power  of 
life  and  death  over,  given  to  parents 
by  the  law  of  Moses,  iii.  296;  hap- 
piness of  the  parents  of  virtuous, 
iv.  275. 

Chiliarchs  appointed  by  Moses,  ii.  179. 

Chaereas,  an  Alexandrian,  freedom  of 
speech  of,  iii.  533. 

Choruses,  male  and  female,  of  the 
Therapeutae,  iv.  19;  an  imitation  of 
those  led  by  Moses  and  Miriam,  20. 

Chrvsippus,  paradoxes  of,  iv.  40,  45, 

46. 
Chus,  the  eldest  son  of  Ham,  iv.  405. 


Cidaris  of  the  high  priest,  iii.  97. 

Circumcision,  Treatise  on,  iii.  175. 

Circumcision,  rite  of,  practised  by  the 
Egyptians  and  other  nations,  iii.  175; 
iv,  449;  its  advantages,  iii.  176;  of 
what  things  a  symbol,  176;  when 
ordained,  iv.  448;  why  to  be  per- 
formed on  the  eighth  day,  452; 
neglect  of,  who  punishable  for,  277, 
455 ;  of  the  heart,  239. 

Cities,  two  species  of,  ii.  23. 

Cities,  Levitical,  i.  238. 

Cities  of  refuge,  ii.  212;  reasons  for 
their  number  and  situation,  212; 
why  chosen  from  the  Levitical  ci- 
ties, 213;  why  the  refugees  might 
return  on  the  death  of  the  high 
priest,  216. 

Cities  and  houses,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of,  i.  362. 

City  built  by  Cain,  meaning  of,  i.  297. 

Cleanthes,  his  opinion  on  the  confla- 
gration of  the  world,  iv.  45. 

Clean  and  unclean  animals,  iii.  380. 

Cleopatra,  chariot  of,  iv.  129. 

Clothing,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii. 
313. 

Command,  recommendation,  distin- 
guished, i.  76. 

Commandments,  On  the  Ten, iii.  136. 

Commandments,  the  ten,  summary  oi\ 
ii.  126. 

Concealment  from  God,  symbolically 
explained,  i.  108. 

Concubinage,  iii.  321. 

Concubines  and  wives,  ii.  162. 

Conflagrations  and  regenerations  of 
the  world,  the  Stoic  opinion  of 
successive,  combated,  iv.  32. 

Confusion  of  Languages,  On  the, 
ii.  1. 

Conscience,  an  incorruptible  and  un- 
erring judge,  iv.  243. 

Conscience,  power  of,  remark  on,  iv. 
265. 

Contemplative  Life,  Treatise  on 
A,  iv.  1. 

Contentiousness  and  disobedience,  i. 
456. 

Contentment,  remarks  on,  iv.  265. 

Contests  at  the   public  games,  their 


470 


INDEX. 


I 


worthless    character,  i.    401 ;    the 

Olympian    contest    only  esteemed 

sacred,  402;  drinking  contests,  448. 

Cook.     See  Baker. 

Corn,  Pharaoh's  vision  of  the  ear  of, 

ii.  474. 
Corruption  of  all  flesh,  iv.  337. 
Courage,  On,  iii.  412. 
Courage  and  boldness  discriminated, 

iii.  412. 
Covenant,  Isaac's,  with  Abimelech,  iv. 

278. 
Covetousness,      the      commandment 

against,  iii.  167,  173,  373. 
Cowardly   and  wavering  people,  re- 
marks on,  iv.  261. 
Cowards,  reasons  for  exempting  from 

military  service,  iii,  417. 
Creation   op   the   World,   as   de- 
scribed BY  Moses,  Treatise  on, 
i.  1. 
Creation  of  animals,  iv.  293. 
Creation  of  the  world,  questions  con- 

certiing  the,  iv.  284. 
Creeping  things  given  for  food ,  iv.  387. 
Critolaus,  his  arguments  for  the  eter- 
nity of  the  world,  iv.  27,  32. 
Crocodile,    the,    honoured    in    some 
parts    of    Egypt,   but    injured    in 
others,  iv.  3,  240. 
Croesus,  king  of  Lydia,  his  fall,  ii.  480. 
Cultivation  of  the  earth,  iv.  395. 
Cup,  Joseph's,  ii,  496;  Pharaoh's,  472. 
Curses,  On,  iii.  485. 
Curse  pronounced  on  the  serpent,  iv. 
307;  on  the  woman,  308;  on  the 
man,  309. 
Curses  against  those  who  violate  the 

Law,  iii.  485. 
Custom,  a  singular,  of  somecities,i.  275. 
Custom  and  familiarity,  remark  on,  iv. 

277. 
Customs,  observance  of,  i.  463. 
Cyclops,  country  of  the,  iv.  240. 

Damage,  law  concerning,  iii.  360. 

Damascus,  meaning  of,  ii.  104. 

Damocles,  story  of,  iv.  229. 

Dan,  meaning  of,  i.  397 ;  how  likened  ; 
to  a  serpent,  103;  a  symbol  of  I 
division,  ii.  351.  ! 


Dardanian   women,   their   disdain    of 

slavery,  iii.  531. 
Darkness,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  28. 
Daughters,    metaphorically    used   for 

arts  and  sciences,  i,  192. 
Daughters  of  men,  what  meant  by,  i. 

330. 
Daughters  of  Midian,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of,  ii.  260. 
Death,  two  kinds  of,  i.  79;  in  what 
cases  inflicted  by  the  laws  of  Moses, 
iii.  298,  300. 
Death,  shadow  of,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of,  ii.  152. 
Debtors,  the  law  respecting,  symboli- 
cally explained,  ii.  312. 
Debtors  and  creditors,  proper  conduct 

of,  iii.  432. 
Decade,  the  all-perfect,  the  number 
4  its  origin,  i.  12;    excellent  things 
attributed   to,  by   Moses,  ii.   1 75 ; 
properties  of  the,  iii.  140. 
Decalogue.     See  Commandments. 
Deceits,  what  kind  of,  allowable,  iv. 

244. 
Delos,  island  of,  said  to  have  risen 

from  the  sea,  iv.  53. 
Deluge,  the  great,  an  image  of  sin,  ii. 
6  ;  described,  404;  iii.  85;  iv.  353  ; 
its  cessation,  iv.  376. 
Demeter,  iv.  2. 
Demetra,  name  given  to  the  earth,  and 

why,  i.  39. 
Democracy,  a  well-ordered,  the'  best 

of  all  constitutions,  iii.  455. 
Democritus,  inconsiderate  conduct  of, 
iv.  4;  his  opinions  regarding  the  in- 
corruptibility of  the  world,  23. 
Deposits,  law  concerning,  iii.  362. 
Desire  of  the  wicked,  iv.  318. 
Deucalion.     See  Noah. 
Dialectics,  ii.  161. 
Diapason,  the,  i.  13. 
Diatessaron,  i.  13. 
Diaulos,  a  foot-race  among  the  Greeki 

i.  30;  iii.  376. 
Dibon,  meaning  of,  i.  169. 
Dica^archia,    a    port   for   vessels    for 

Alexandria,  iv.  66. 
Dinah,  meaning  of,  ii.  93. 
Diogenes,    the    Cynic,   i.    447;     hisi 


INDEX. 


471 


opinions  concerning  the  incorrupt- 
ibility of  the  world,  iv.  M ;  his 
ready  wit  and  courage,  iii.  532. 

Dionysius,  an  Alexandrian  dema- 
gogue, iv.  65. 

Dionysius  of  Sicily,  his  apprehensions 
for  his  life,  iv.  228;  his  fall,ii.  480. 

Dioscuri,  legend  of  the,  iii.  148. 

Diseases  threatened  to  the  disobedient, 
iii.  489,  491. 

Disobedience  and  contentiousness,  i. 
456. 

Disorders  at  banquets,  iv.  9,  11,  12. 

Distinctness,  praise  of,  iv.  26  2. 

Dividing  rightly,  what,  iv.  317. 

Divine    voice,  considerations  on  the, 

.  iii.  143. 

Divination  and  augury,  why  forbidden, 
iii.  189. 

Division  of  the  victims,  symbolical 
meaning  of,  ii.  119  ;  the  birds  not 
divided,  and  why,  139. 

Dog,  the  name  of,  a  homonymy,  i. 
446;  dissimilar  things  indicated  by 
the  name,  446 ;  styled  the  most 
audacious  of  beasts,  iii.  162. 

Dogflies.     See  Flies. 

Dotham,  meaning  of,  i.  248;  ii.  220. 

Dove,  the,  sent  forth  by  Noah,  iv. 
370. 

Dove's  neck,  changes  of  colour  of  the, 
i.  489. 

Dragon,  judgment  likened  to  the,  i. 
397. 

Dreams  sent  prom  God,  On  the 
Doctrine  of,  ii.  292. 

Dream,  Jacob's,  explained,  ii.  320. 

Dreams  of  waking  as  well  as  sleeping 
persons,  ii.  478  ;  all  things  relating 
to  the  body  dreams,  479. 

Dress  of  the  high  priest  described,  iii, 
96;  its  symbolical  meaning,  98. 

Drinking  contests,  i.  448. 

Drunkenness,  considerations  on,  i.  444 ; 
censure  of,  ii.  376. 

Drusilla,  sister  of  Claudius,  her  death, 
IV.  73. 

"  Dust  shalt  thou  eat,"  symbolical 
meaning  of,  i.  149. 

Earth,  its   early  production  of  fruit 


and  herbs  explained,  i.  12;  why  no 
longer  spontaneously  productive; 
50  ;  filled  with  iniquity,  iv.  338  ; 
cultivation  of  the,  395;  motion  of 
the,  ii.  21. 

East,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  14. 

Eating  of  the  trees  of  Paradise  ex- 
plained, i.  77. 

Eclipses  considered  as  prophetic  of 
events  on  earth,  iv.  236. 

Eden,  meaning  of,  i.  1.  See  Para- 
dise. 

Edict  of  Caius  Norbanus  Flaccus  in 
favour  of  the  Jews,  iv.  168. 

Edom,  the  earthly,  its  opposition  to 
godliness,  i.  375,  377. 

Education  typified  by  Hagar,  ii.  161 ; 
the  suitable  employment  of  both 
youth  and  age,  iii.  509. 

Egypt,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  76. 
iv.  423;  reduced  from  a  sovereign 
to  a  slave,  ii.  480  ;  folly  of  a  pre- 
fect of,  ii.  366  ;  persecution  of  the 
Jews  in,  iv.  69,  125;  king  of,  his 
six  hundred  chariots,  symbolical 
meaning  of,  i.  476 ;  river  of,  ii.  167. 

Egyptian  midwives,  the,  symbolical 
meaning  of,  ii.  1 1 8. 

Egyptians,  destruction  of  the,  sym- 
bolical meaning  of,  ii.  392 ;  their 
impiety,  iii.  114;  their  ridiculous 
idolatry,  154;  iv.  2;  overthrow  of, 
in  the  Red  Sea,  iii.  41 ;  their 
haughty  and  boastful  character,  i. 
391  ;  yet  not  to  be  cursed,  iii.  436. 

Eight,  the  number,  its  properties,  i. 
29;  iv.  452. 

Eighty,  the  number,  its  composition, 
iv.  438. 

Elders,  who  so  called  by  Moses,  i. 
504  ;  who  so  regarded  among  the 
Therapeutae,  iv.  J  5. 

Eleazar  of  Damascus,  ii.  105. 

Eleazar,  son  of  Moses,  ii.  105. 

Elements,  the  four,  i.  440 ;  tlie  uni- 
verse made  from,  14;  further  con- 
siderations on,  ii.  295. 

Eliezer.     See  Eleazar. 

Eliphah,  the  son  of  Esau,  ii.  168. 

Emerald  svmbolicallv  explained,  i. 
69. 


473 


INDEX. 


Encyclical  instruction,  ii.  172. 

Enemies,  directions  for  the  treatment 
of,  iii.  439,  447. 

Enoch,  meaning  of,  i.  294  ;  oracle 
respecting  him,  ii.  244;  his  transla- 
tion, 399;  iv.  329. 

Enoch,  son  of  Cain,  and  Enoch,  son 
of  Seth,  i.  295. 

Eno;;,  meaning  of,  i.  276:  ii.  398;  iii. 
459;  iv.  326. 

Envy,  remark  on,  iv.  268;  defeated 
by  time,  iv.  274. 

Ephemereutae,  or  elders,  among  the 
Therapeutae,  iv.  15. 

Ephraim,  blessing  of,  by  Jacob,  i. 
131. 

Ephron,  meaning  of,  ii.  17. 

Epicure,  censure  of  the,  ii.  353. 

Epicurus,  his  opinions  concerning  the 
world,  iv.  23. 

Epistritus,  its  ratio,  i.  13. 

Equal  parts  into  which  the  sacrifices 
were  to  be  divided,  symbolical 
meaning  of,  ii.  121. 

Equality,  remark  on,  iv.  264. 

Equality  and  inequality,  iii.  411. 

Er,  meaning  of,  i.  121 ;  wickedness 
of,  121. 

Erroneous  judgments,  sources  of,  i. 
490. 

Esau,  meaning  of,  ii.  169;  his  wick- 
edness, i.  107;  his  skill  in  hunting 
injurious  to  himself,  ii.  144 ;  con- 
duct of,  iv.  279. 

Eschol,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  79. 

Essenes,  account  of  the,  iii.  523:  iv. 
219. 

Eternity  properly  means  "to-day," 
ii.  206. 

Ethiopia,  interpretation  of  the  name, 
i.  69. 

Ethiopian  woman,  the,  symbolically 
explained,  i.  96. 

Eunuch,  figurative  meaning  of,  ii.  466. 

Euodius,  a  Jewish  elder,  plundered 
and  scourged,  iv,  76. 

Euphrates,  a  river  of  Paradise,  sym- 
bolically explained,  i.  70;  ii.  157; 
iv.  291,  423. 

Euphrates,  the  river,  a  boundary  of 
the  Roman  empire,  iv.  102,  291. 


Euripides,    fragment    from,    i.    161; 

cited,  iv.  22,  35. 
Eurystheus  and  Hercules,  iii,  532. 
Eusebius,  fragments  of  the  works  of 

Philo  preserved  by,  iv.  210. 
Eve,   birth   of,    i.    190 ;    brought    to 

Adam,  90. 
Evening  and  morning,  creation  of,  i.  8. 
Evidence,  faithful,  iv.  251. 
Evils,  influx   of,  the  soul    disturbed 

thereby,  iv.  251. 
Evil-speaking,  iv.  244. 
Evilat,  the  land  of,  i.  69.  ^ 

Exiles  and  citizens,  iii.  507. 
Eye,    its    excellent    services    to   the 

mind,  iii.  349. 
Eye,  the,  and  the  mhid,  their  offices    , . 

similar,  i.  14.  ji  lis 

Eye  and  sight,  remark  on  the,  ir.  264.  * 


Face  of  God,  a  figurative  expression, 

i.  286.  |||ii 

Face  of  the  living  God,  explained,  iv. ' 

249. 
Faith  of  Abraham,  ii.  450. 
Fallow,  the  land  directed  to  be  left, 

wisdom  of  the  injunction,  iii.  407. 
False  swearing,  hateful  to  God,  iv.  274. 
False    witness,     the     commandment 

against,  iii.  166,  173,  365. 
Famine,  threat  of,  iii.  486  ;  in  Egypty 

ii.  475;  the  great  famine,  486. 
Farmer    the  virtuous  man  compares 

to  the,  i.  268. 
Fat,  why  men  commanded  to  abstai 

from  eating,  iii.  386. 
Fate  and    necessity   not    taught    bs 

Moses,  ii.  154, 
Father  and  mother,  symbolical  raeai 

ing  of,  458. 
Fathers,  question  as  to  what  is  meant 

by,  ii.  150. 
Female  garments,  why  forbidden  U 

men,  iii.  416. 
Festivals,  On  the  Ten,  iii.  265. 
FesMvals,  why  ten  in  number,  iii.  265;. 

the  first,  266  ;  the  second,  269  ;  the 

third,  283;  the  fourth,  283  ;  the  fifth, 

284  ;  the  sixth,  285 ;   the  seventh, 

286;   the  eighth,  288;   the  ninth, 

288  ;  the  tenth,  290. 


at    i 


I 


INDEX. 


473 


Festivals,  abuses  at,  i.  198. 

Fevers,  periodical  changes  in,  ii.  32. 

Pield,  the  principles  of  philosophy 
likened  to  a,  i.  381, 

ji'ifteen  cubits,  explanation  of,  ii.  360. 

:''iftieth  year,  ordinances  regarding  the, 
iii.  435. 

^'ifty,  the  most  holy  and  natural  of 
numbers,  iv.  15. 

'Mg-leaves,  girdles  of,  iv.  305. 

fire,  its  use  in  the  Stoic  philosophy, 
iv.  23,  46  ;  three  species  in,  44  ;  sent 
from  heaven  to  consume  the  sacri- 
fices when  Aaron  was  appointed 
high  priest,  iii.  106;  on  the  altar, 
why  to  be  kept  burning  for  ever,  iii. 
234  ;  law  regarding,  iii.  361. 

•'irst-bom,  death  of  the,  in  Egypt,  iii. 
30. 

''irst-fruits,  reason  of  the  command  of 
offering  the,  ii.  116  ;  iii.  227,  433. 

''ishes  and  sea-monsters,  creation  of, 
i.  17. 

Yaccus,  Treatise  against,  iv.  61. 

'laccus  Avilius  made  viceroy  of  Alex- 
andria, iv.  61  ;  his  wise  government 
in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  62 ;  his 
grief  on  that  emperor's  death,  63; 
his  apprehensions  on  the  death  of 
Macro,  64  ;  is  persuaded  to  perse- 
cute the  Jews,  65  ;  treacherously 
keeps  back  their  address  on  the  ac- 
cessicm  of  Claudius,  82 ;  interfe- 
rence of  King  Agrippa,  82  ;  Bassus, 
a,  centurion,  seizes  Flaccus  at  an 
entertainment,  84 ;  he  is  sent  to  Italy. 
87;  is  condenmed  and  banished, 
92;  his  paiTiful  progress  to  Andros, 
the  place  of  his  exile,  93;  his  mad- 
ness, 95;  is  put  to  death,  99. 

'laccus,  Caius  Norbanus,  edict  of,  in 
favour  of  the  Jews,  iv,  168. 

'laming  Sword,  On  the,  i.  1 75. 

'laming  sword  of  the  cherubim,  its 
symbolical  meaning,  i.  181. 

'latterers,  caution  against,  iv.  273. 

'lattery  not  acceptable  to  the  wise 
man,  iv.  278. 

'lax,  fine,  emblematic  meaning  of, 
ii.  181. 

'lies,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  30. 


Flight,  various  causes  of,  ii.  194. 
Flour,   fine,   its  symbolical  meaning, 

ii.  287. 
Flying  creatures,  various  classes  of, 

iii.  383. 
Folly,  its  offspring,  ii.  276,  378. 
P^oUy  and  falsehood,  warning  against, 

iv.  281. 
Food  of  the  Lord,  what,  i.  152. 
Foolish  man,  the,  a  slave,  iii.  517. 
Foolish  and  wicked  men,  iv.  243. 
Forty,  the  number,   the  produce   of 

many  virtues,  ii.  355. 
Fountain,    various    senses  in    which 

spoken  of,  ii.  230  ;  iv.  284. 
r^ountain,  the  mind  likened  to  a,  i.  59. 
Fountains  of  the  deep,  iv.  359. 
Four,  the  number,  its  perfection  and 

wonderful  powers,  i.  12  ;  why  styled 

holy  and  praiseworthy,  ii.  399;  dig- 
nified in  the    prophetic  books,  i. 

440. 
Fragments  of  the  Lost  Works  op 

Philo,  iv.  210. 
Frankincense,  ii.  132;  its  symbolical 

meaning,  iii.  214. 
Fratricide,  the  first,  his  punishment, 

iii.  472. 
Free,  all  men  so  created,  iv.  16. 
Freedom,  praise  of,  iii.  536. 
French   king's  library,    fragments   of 

Philo  preserved  in  the,  iv.  277. 
Friends,  good,  remark  on,  iv.  257. 
Friendship,  remarks  on,  iv.  275,  276. 
Frogs,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  23. 
Fruit  of  the  soul,  what,  i.  439. 
Fruit  trees  not  to  be  destroyed,  iii. 

447;  pruning  of,  449. 
Fruits,   created   in   a  state  of  entire 

ripeness,  i.  11 ;  reason  assigned,  11. 
Fruits,  first,  ii.   116;  iii.  227;  to  be 

offered  to  the  priests,  iii.  433. 
Fugitives,  On,  ii.  194. 
Furnace,  human  life  compared  to  a 

smoking,  iv.  422. 

Gad,  a  symbol  of  war,  ii.  351. 
Gaidad,  meaning  of,  i.  300. 
Galbanum,  ii.  132. 
Game-cocks,  courage  of,  iii.  535. 
Garment,  speech  likened  to  a,  ii.  313. 


474 


INDEX. 


Garments  of  skin,  iv.  311. 

Geloni,  a  Scythian  tribe,  i.  489. 

Genesis,  Questions  on,  and  Solu- 
tions, iv.  284. 

Genesis,  book  of,  whence  its  title  de- 
rived, ii.  396. 

Gentiles,  isles  of  the,  peopled  by 
Japhet,  iv.  404. 

Germans,  the,  said  to  assail  the  sea 
with  their  naked  swords,  ii.  365. 

Giants,  birth  of  the,  iv.  334. 

Gideon,  meaning  of,  ii.  27. 

Gifts  how  distinguished  from  offerings, 
i.  159. 

Gift  and  sacrifice  discriminated,  iii. 
317. 

Gihon,  a  river  of  Paradise,  symboli- 
cally explained,  i.  69  ;  iv.  290. 

Girgashites,  iv.  424. 

Gleaners,  command  concerning,  iii. 
432 

Glory,  twofold  meaning  of,  iv.  283. 

Glorv  of  the  Lord,  how  described  by 
Moses,  iv.  283. 

Glutton,  character  of  the,  ii.  380. 

Gluttony,  remark  on,  iv.  277- 

Goat,  character  of  the,  iv.  409,  412; 
the  symbul  of  the  external  sense, 
ii.  113. 

God,  an  argument  for  the  existence 
of,  from  the  orderly  arrangement 
of  the  world,  iiJ.  182  ;  the  cause  of 
all  good,  ii.  282  ;  how  said  to  walk, 
iv.  305  ;  reason  of,  what,  i.  6  ;  man 
how  said  to  be  created  in  the  image 
and  likeness  of,  19;  concealment 
from,  what  meant  by,  108;  how 
said  to  repent  of  having  created 
man,  347;  the  first  command, 
the  declaration  of  the  existence 
of  only  one  God,  iii.  150;  incom- 
prehensible, iv.  260  ;  judgments 
of,  remark  on,  263 ;  love  of,  for 
mankind,  270  ;  mercies  of,  267 ; 
piety  towards,  265. 
God  and  Lord  God,  distinction  be- 
tween, ii.  325. 
Gods  of  silver  and  gold,  the  formation 

of,  why  forbidden,  iii.  179. 
Gold,  symbolically  explained,  i.  69  ; 
taken  as  an  emblem,  ii.  136. 


Golden  calf,  its  destruction  bv  Moses 

i.  323;  iii.  107. 
Gomorrah,  meaning  of,  ii.  378. 
Good,  threefold  division  of,  i.  305. 
Good  man,  mode  of  life  of  the,  ii.  400 
Good  men  a  ransom  for  the  wicked,  i 

237. 
Gorgon's  head,  tradition  of  the,  iv 

153. 
Governor,  the   four   qualifications  o 

the  perfect,  united   in  Moses,  iU 

113. 
Grafting,  the  operation  of,  described 

i.  269. 
Grammar   and  music,  power  of  thi 

number  7  in,  i.  36. 
Grass  of  the  field,  explained,  i.  58.    i 
Greece,  the  only  country  which  realh 

produces  men,  iv.  240 ;  calamities 

brought  on,  in  the  case  of  CEdipua 

iii.  306  ;  its  overthrow,  ii.  480. 
Greek  historians,  censure  of,  iii.  1. 
Greek   language,   translation   of    the 

Scriptures  into  the,  iii.  80. 
Green  herb  of  the  field,  what  meant 

by,  i.  57- 
Groaning,  its  twofold  nature,  i.  164. 
Guardian  angels,  remark  on,  iv.  260. 
Gyara,   the    island    of,    a    place    oJ 

banishment,  iv.  92. 
Gymnosophists,  a  sect  of  Indian  plg^ 

losophers,  iii.  523. 

Habit  more  powerful  than  nature,  iv. 
277. 

Hagar  the  handmaid,  ii.  157  ;  iv.  425; 
meaning  of,  161  ;  her  history  sym- 
bolically explained,  157. 

Hail,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  27. 

Hajk,  a  fabulous  patriarch  of  the 
Armenians,  iv.  334. 

Ham,  son  of  Noah,  wickedness  of,  i. 
507  ;  iv.  398  ;  meaning  of  the 
name,  395.  fiiitt 

Hamor,  meaning  of,  ii.  93.  "Bwi 

Handmaidens,  symbolical  meaning  of,    '^ 
ii.  163.  > 

Hands,  heavy,  of  Moses,  symbolically    ^ 
explained,  i.  119,  157.  '  ''^ 

Hannah,  meaning  of  the  name,  i.  344;     flS 
483;  iiymnof,  ii.  266. 


3 


IT 


INDEX. 


475 


appy  life,  steps  to  a,  ii.  248. 
appy  nature,  the,  iv.  244. 
ABLOT,  On  the  Wages  of  a,  iii.  249. 
arlot,   the   wages   of  a,  not  to  be 
received  in  the  sacred  treasury,  ii. 
249. 

asty   talkers,  condemnation  of,  iv. 
266. 

aughtiness,  censure  of,  iii.  451. 
aughtv  men,  remarks  on,  iv.  247, 
267.  ' 

ead,  seven  divisions  of  the,  i.  35. 
eathen    nations,  numerous   gods  of 
the,  iii.    148;  human  sacrifices  of 
some,  241. 

eaven,  (ovpavog)  why  so  called,  i. 
9 ;   how   diversified    and   adorned, 
11  ;    its    nature   incomprehensible, 
ii.  '296  ;  likened  to  a  well,  301. 
eavenly  bodies,  predictions  founded 
on  the  motions  of  the,  i.  16  ;  ail 
things  on  earth  depend  on  the,  35. 
brews.     See  Jews. 
iter,  the  symbol  of  the  soul,  ii.  113. 
EiR  OF  Divine  things.  Treatise 
ON  THE,  ii.  94. 

}lica  swallowed  up  bv  the  sea,  iv. 
58. 

jlicon,  a  base  Egyptian,  iv.  136; 
his  accusations  of  the  Jews  to 
Claudius,  137 ;  his  punishment, 
146. 

ill,  the  life  of  the  wicked  the  real, 
ii.  169. 

ilp-meet,  or  assistant,  i.  81. 
emiolius,  its  ratio,  i.  13. 
iphaistus,  iv.  2. 
ara,  iv.  2. 

jraclitus,  citation  from,  i.  80  ;  enig- 
matical expression  of,  iv.  50. 
rb  of  the  field,  explained,  i.  174. 
Jrbs  and  fruits,  early  production  of, 
at  the  creation,  reason  of,  i.  12. 
jrcules,  labours  of,  iv.   117;   why 
expelled  from  the  company  of  the 
Argonauts,  iii.  534. 
jrcules  and  Eurystheus,  iii.  532. 
?retical  teachers,remarks  on,  iv.  260. 
?retics,  axioms  regarding,  iv.  252. 
rod  the  king,  iv.  66. 
jroes,  or  demigods,  iii.  529. 


Heroopolis,  a  city  of  Egypt,  ii.  506. 
Heshbon,  meaning  of,  i.  169. 
Hesiod,  his  opinions  concerning  the 

world,  iv.  25,  35. 
Hierosolyma.     See  Jerusalem. 
High  priest,  of  a  nature  bordering  on 
God,  ii.  377  ;  laws  for  the,  iii.  197; 
garments  of  the,  symbolically  ex- 
plained, ii.  66. 

Hippocrates,  his  seven  ages  of  man, 
i.  31. 

Hippopotami,  iii.  476. 

Hittites,  iv.  424. 

Hoary  head,  how  differing  from  the 
elder,  i.  224. 

Homer  cited,  ii.  2,  37,  78,  86,  273 ; 
iv.  5,  10,  37,56,  117,224,410,423. 

Homicides,  the  law  respecting,  ii,  205. 

Honey,  why  forbidden  to  be  mixed 
with  any  offering,  iii.  235. 

Hoof,  parting  of  the,  its  symbolical 
meaning,  iii.  381. 

Hope,  the  beginning  of  participation 
in  all  good  things,  ii.  398  ;  its 
office,  iv.  279. 

Hope,  the  siuter  of  Moses  so  called 
figuratively,  ii.  369. 

Horse,  the  passions  compared  to  a,  i. 
105,  392. 

Horse-breeding,  symbolical  meaning 
of  the  Mosaic  prohibition  of,  i.  395. 

Horseman,  symbolically  explained,  i. 
106. 

Horseman  and  rider,  how  distin- 
guished, i.  392. 

Hosea,  meaning  of,  ii.  262  ;  his  name 
changed  to  Joshua,  262. 

Hospitality,  duties  of,  cheerfully  ren- 
dered by  the  wise  man,  ii.  418. 

Housebreakers, punishment  of,  iii.  365. 

Human  affairs,  their  unstable  con- 
dition, iv.  242. 

Human  dispositions,  three  classes  of, 
ii.  422. 

Human  happiness  and  unhappiness, 
in  what  they  consist,  ii.  '^85. 

Human  voice  ascribed  to  the  serpent,  ■ 
why,  i.  48. 

Humanity,  On,  iii.  423. 

Humanity  strongly  inculcated  in  the 
laws  of  Moses,  iii.  423. 


476 


INDEX. 


Humiliation,  two  kinds  of,  iv.  434. 
Humility,  praise  of,  iv.  266. 
Husband,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 

166. 
Husbandman,  who  so  called,  i.  379. 
Husbandry  of  the  soul,  i.  381. 
Hymns  among  the  Therapeutee,  iv.  18. 
Hypocrites,  every  city  full  of,  ii.  277. 
Hyssop,  its  use  among  the  Therapeutse, 

iv.  9, 17. 

"  I  am  that  I  am,"  explained ,  ii.  240. 
Ibis,  the,  worshipped  by  the   Egyp- 
tians, iv.  3. 
Ideas   brought    forth   by   the   mind, 

divided  into  male   and   female,  i. 

231. 
Idolaters,  gross  folly  of,  iv.  2. 
Idolatry,  folly  and  wickedness  of,  iii. 

152,   154  ;   iv.  2;   the  command- 
ment against,  iii.  153,  170. 
Ignorance,  evils  of,  i.  455,  485. 
Imagination,  the  brother  of  appetite, 

i.  59. 
Immortality  of  the  mind,    proofs  of 

the,  i.  208. 
Impious  men,  remarks  on,  iv.  242. 
Impossible  things,  iv.  244. 
Incense,  altar  of,  ii.  138;  otfering  of, 

iii.  213. 
Incestuous  custom  of  the  Persians,  iii. 

306. 
Incorruptibility    of   the   World, 

Treatise  on  the,  iv.  21. 
Indian  philosophers.     See  Gymnoso- 

phists. 
Industrious   people,  remarks   on,   iv. 

268. 
Inequality,  the  cause  of  all  evil,  iv.  16. 
Infants,  exposure   of,  forbidden,   iii. 

330. 
Inheritance,  the  divine   law   of,   iii. 

125. 
Initiations    into    heathen    mysteries, 

iii.  244. 
Inspiration  and  prophecy,  ii.  146. 
Instabilility  accounted  for,  iv.  254. 
Instruction,  On  meeting  for  the 

SAKE  of  rzceiving,  ii.  157. 
Instruction,  love  of,  iv.  246. 
Intemperance,  evils  of,  ii.  465. 


Ion,  the  tragic  writer,  cited,  iii.  S3i 

Isaac,  birth  of,  ii.  264  ;  symbolicall 

explained,    i.    101  ;   why    he   ha" 

only  one  wife,  ii.   164  ;  offering  o) 

431. 

Isaiah,  citation  from,  iv.  373.  ' 

Ishmael,   iv.   435;     meaning    of,  l 

236;  character  of,  237  ;  Abraham' 

13rayer  for,  ii.  278  ;  iv.  460. 
Isidorus,  an  Alexandrian  demagogue 

iv.  65  ;  his  accusations  of  Flaccus 

89  ;  his  charges  against  the  Jews 

176. 
Israel,  a  name  given  to  Jacob,  ii.  87 

252;  meaning  of,  iv.  100.  See  Jacob 
Israelites.     See  Jews. 
Issachar,  meaning  of,  i.  443  ;  symbo 

lically  explained,  i.  73. 

Jacob,  meaning  of  the  name, i.  Ill 
flight  of,  from  Laban  the  Syrian 
symbolically  explained,  i.  Ill;  ii 
195  ;  his  reproof  of  Joseph,  i.  154 
his  name  changed  to  Israel,  ii.  87' 
252  ;  his  dreams,  292.  333  ;  the 
blessing  bestowed  on,  iv.  279. 

Jacob  and  Esau,  ii.  144. 

Jamnia,  altar  set  up  at,  and  destroy 
ed  by  the  Jews,  iv.  144.  ' 

Janis,  meaning  of,  i.  300,  ■ 

Japhet*  conduct  of,  i.  95 ;  countriei 
peopled  by  him,  iv.  404. 

Jason  and  the  Argonauts,  iii.  537. 

Jebusites,  iv.  424. 

Jeremiah,  the  prophet,  i.  187. 

Jerusalem,  the  city  of  God,  ii.  38JL.  j|. 

Jesein,  meaning  of,  i.  299.  -**' 

Jews,  the,  the  most  God-loving  of  al 
nations,  ii.  416  ;  naturally  friendly 
to  all  who  are  peaceful  in  their  in- 
tentions, iii.  409  ;  journey  of,  intc 
and  from  Egypt,  iv.  212 ;  theii| 
constitution  established  by  the 
laws  of  Moses,  214  ;  their  numbeij 
in  Egypt,  70  ;  their  safety  undet 
Augustus,  134  ;  under  Tiberius 
135 ;  their  appeal  to  Caligula,  139 
the  reception  of  their  ambassadors 
176. 

Jews  of  Alexandria,   persecution  o 
the,  in  the  time  of  Caligula,  iv.  65 


■k 


INDEX. 


477 


their  synagogues  broken  open,  70  ; 
they  are  deprived  of  their  civil 
rights,  and  declared  aliens,  72  ; 
their  houses  plundered,  73  ;  many 
of  them,  with  their  wives  and  chil- 
dren, burnt,  torn  to  pieces,  or 
otherwise  put  to  death,  74  ;  their 
elders  arrested  and  scourged,  76  ; 
their  houses  searched  for  arms,  79  ; 
forced  to  eat  swine's  flesh,  81  ;  re- 
lieved by  the  interposition  of 
Agrij^nri,  82 ;  Flaccus,  their  op- 
pressor, seized  during  the  feast  of 
tabernacles,  84  ;  their  pious  joy 
and  thanksgiving,  86. 

}ws  (u  Palestine  and  the  neighbour- 
ing countries,  their  great  number, 
strength,  and  courage,  iv.  148 ;  their 
remonstrances  against  the  threaten- 
ed profanation  of  the  Temple,  15 1 . 

)hn  of  Damascus,  fragments  of  the 
works  of  Philo  preserved  by,  iv. 
242. 

)Si5PH,  On  the  Life  of,  ii.  453. 

)seph,  his  temptation,  symbolical 
meaning  of,  i.  170  ;  symbolical 
meaning  of  the  name,  ii.  255  ;  his 
dreams,  345  ;  his  life,  453 ;  his 
name  in  Egypt,  255. 

jseph's  coat  of  many  colours,  sym- 
bolical meaning  of,  ii.  338. 

)shua,  meaning  of,  ii.  262  ;  friend- 
ship of  Moses  for  him,  iii.  424  ; 
becomes  his  successor,  427. 

3ther,  interpretation  of,  ii.  258. 

5thor,  an  opponent  of  Moses,  i.  460. 

oy  of  the  foolish,  ii.  272. 

ubal,  meaning  of,  i.  304. 

uda?a,  great  populousness  of,  iv.  1 48  ; 
courage  and  spirit  of  the  people, 
148. 

udah,  meaning  of,  i.  443  ;  symboli- 
cally explained,  i.  73. 

udas  symbolically  explained,  ii.  350. 

udge,  the  office  and  character  of  a, 
iii.  368. 

udgment,  the  last,  iv.  243. 

ulia  Augusta,  her  oflerings  to  the 
temple  of  Jerusalem,  iv.  169. 

upiter,  Bacchus  preserved  by,  iii. 
534. 


Jupiter,  the  planet,  placed  above  the 
sun,  ii.  137  ;  belt  of,  iv.  39.3. 

Justice,  On,  iii.  388. 

Justice,  praise  of,  iv.  263 ;  the  Scy- 
thians famed  for,  5  ;  symbolically 
represented  bv  the  river  Euphrates, 
i.  74. 

Kadmonites,  iv.  424. 

Keepers  of  sheep,  how  distinguished 
from  shepherds,  i.  386. 

Keepers  of  the  temple,  their  sedition 
against  the  priests,  iii.  110,  133; 
its  punishment,  134. 

Kenezites,  iv.  424. 

Kenites,  the,  iv.  424. 

Kidnappers,  law  concerning,  iii.  358. 

King,  a  general  name  for  those  who 
excel,  ii.  268  ;  proper  conduct  of  a, 
iv,  274 ;  the  real,  is  the  virtuous 
man,  245  ;  the  true,  he  only 
Avho  is  perfect  master  of  his  art, 
254. 

Kings,  why  called  shepherds  of  the 
people,  ii.  453  ;  conquered  by 
Abraham,  symbolical  meaning  of, 
i.  474  ;  overthrow  of  several,  enu- 
merated, ii.  480. 

Kiss,  the  false  money  of  friendship, 
ii.  102. 

Kite,  worshipped  bv  the  Egyptians, 
iv.  3. 

Knowledge,  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the 
soul,  i.  486. 

Knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  tree  of, 
i.  78  ;  iv.  302. 

Laban  the  Syrian,  flight  of  Jacob 
from,  symbolically  explained,  i. 
HI;  ii.  i95  ;  his  idle  boasts,  i.  192. 

Lamech,  meaning  of,  i.  295;  his  two 
wives,  302;  his  offence  greater  than 
that  of  Cain,  iv.  323. 

Labour  the  nurse  of  virtue,  i.  214. 

Lacedaemonian  boy,  fortitude  of  a,  iii. 
531. 

Lacedaemonians,  laws  of  the,  iii.  517. 

Ladder,  Jacob's,  symbolically  ex- 
plained, ii.  320. 

Lamb  not  to  be  seethed  in  its  mother's 
milk,  iii.  445. 


478 


INDEX. 


Lampo,  an  Alexandrian  demagogue, 
iv.  65;  his  dishonest  conduct,  87. 

Land,  how  separated  from  chaos,  i. 
10;  how  adorned,  10;  the  fruits  of 
the,  only  partially  the  produce  of 
man's  labour,  iii.  433. 

Land-marks,  not  to  be  removed,  iii. 
391. 

Language,  one  common,  fabulously 
attributed  to  animals,  ii.  2. 

Languages,  On  the  Confusion  of,  ii. 
1. 

Last  day,  remark  on  the,  iv.  270. 

Laughter.     See  Isaac. 

Laver,  brazen,  of  the  tabernacle,  iii. 
102. 

Law,  On  the  Unwritten,  ii.  396. 

Law,  delivery  of  the,  iii.  146 ;  the 
two  tables,  147;  expressions  of  the, 
to  be  taken  in  an  allegorical  sense, 
i.  170;  nothing  to  be  added  to  or 
taken  from  it,  iii.  390;  to  be  written 
out  by  each  magistrate,  394. 

Laws  of  Moses,  why  given  not  in 
cities,  but  in  the  desert,  iii.  137 ; 
detail  of,  150 — 174;  why  no  pun- 
ishments annexed  to  the  violation 
of  them,  174;  their  venerable  and 
godlike  character,  77 ;  honoured 
by  other  nations  besides  the  Jews, 
79 ;  their  translation  into  Greek, 
80 ;  why  without  initiations  and 
mysteries,  242;  persons  excluded 
from  the  sacred  assembly,  244. 

Leah,  meaning  of,  ii.  75  ;  a  woman 
endowed  with  all  virtue,  64;  typifies 
the  rational  faculties  of  the  soul,  ii. 
163. 

Leaven,  why  forbidden  to  be  mixed 
with  any  offering,  iii.  236. 

Leavened  bread,  why  forbidden  to  be 
offered,  iv.  281. 

Lepidus,  his  intercession  with  Caligula 
in  favour  of  Flaccus,  iv.  92;  is 
himself  in  danger,  97. 

Leprosy,  directions  concerning,  figu- 
ratively explained,  i.  245,  367. 

Levi  symbolically  explained,  i.  73; 
ii.  350. 

Levi,  tribe  of,  its  pious  zeal,  iii.  109. 

Levites,  the  ransom  of  the  rest  of  the 


Israelites,  i,  235;  ii.  117;  law  con  Iii 

cerning  them,  i.  257;  cities  of  the 

238.  ,., 

Levitical  cities,  i.  238.  |.K 

Liberation   of  the   slave,  symbolical' 

meaning  of  the  directions  for  the 

ii.  130. 
Liberty,  praise  of,  iii.  536. 
Libya,  kingdoms  of,  i.  376, 
Lice,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  24. 
Life,  three  kinds  of,  ii.  102. 
Life,  tree  of,  why  placed  in  the  centre 

of  Paradise,  i.   66;  eating  of  the 

tree  of  life,  iv.  313.  *      .  , 

Light  in  the  dwellings  of  the  Israelites,  |{ 

symbolically  explained,  ii.  317.  k 
Lightning,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  26.  !j 
Lights  in  the  sacred  candlesticks,  why  | 

to  be  constantly  kept  burning,  iii.  1, 

237.  , 

Lion,  worshipped  by  the  Egyptians,! 

iv.  3. 
Lips,  uses  of  the,  ii.  389. 
Living  and  the  dead,  the,  symbolical 

meaning  of,  ii.  385. 
Loaves,  on  the  sacred  table,  symbol- 1 

ical  meaning  of,  iii.  213. 
Locusts,  plague  of,  in  Egypt,  iii.  27. 
Logeum   of  the  high  priest,  iii.  97; 

its  use  and  meaning,  1 00. 
Lord,  and  master,  different  meanings 

of,  ii.  98. 
Lot,  his  flight  from  Sodom,  iv.  278. 
Lot  and  his  daughters,  symbolically 

explained,  i.  327,  487. 
Love,  genuine,  and  vulgar,  iv.  13,  14. 
Lowlv-minded   people,    remarks  on, 

iv."'266. 
Lucifer,  motion  of  the  planet,  i.  180. 
Luxurious  life  inimical  to  virtue,  ii. 

318. 
Luxury,  indulgence  in,  i.  498;  cen- 
sure of,  ii.  353- 
Lycurgus,  laws  of,  iii.  517. 
Lysimachus,  iii.  534. 

Macedonians,  fall  of  the,  ii.  480. 

Machir,  the  son  of  Manasseh,  ii.  16.5. 

Macro,  the  successor  of  Sejanus,  iv. 
63;  his  protection  of  Caius  Caligula 
in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  64,  107; 


INDEX. 


479 


his  endeavours  to  instruct  him,  109; 
is  put  to  death  by  Caligula,  64, 1 1 2. 

[adian.     See  Midian. 

[adienaeans,  their  hostility  to  the 
Hebrews,  iii.  420. 

[adness  a  greater  evil  than  death,  i. 
446. 

agi,   a   company   of  virtuous    and 
honourable  men,  iii.  522. 

[agical  art,  greatly  esteemed  by  the 
Persians,  iii.  328. 

lagicians  of  Egypt  confounded  by 
Moses  and  Aaron,  iii.  21. 

Iagistrates,  Treatise  on  the 
Creation  of,  iii.  392. 

lagnet,  attraction  of  wire  by  the,  iii. 
470. 

laltese  dogs,  their  exceeding  tame- 
ness  and  affection,  iii.  476. 

lamre,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  80. 

Ian,   meaning   of  the   term   in  the 

j  writings  of  Moses,  i.  262  ;  creation 
of,  18  ;  made  in  the  image  and 
likeness  of  God,  19 ;  this  phrase 
explained,  19;  iv.  285;  his  crea- 
tion, why  ascribed  to  several  crea- 
tors, i.  20;  why  the  last  work  in 
the  creation  of  the  world,  22;  not 
formed  of  dust  alone,  iv.  248  ;  the 
first,  his  beauty  both  of  soul  and 
body,  i.  40;  the  viceroy  of  God,  44; 
woman  the  cause  of  his  fall,  45  ; 
expelled  from  Paradise,  46 ;  not 
now  as  at  first  created,  39 ;  his 
original  excellence,  40;  our  rela- 
tionship to  the  first  man,  43;  fall 
of,  120;  in  what  respects  inferior  to 
some  animals,  ii.  450;  how  superior 
to  the  rest  of  the  animal  creation, 
i.  351 ;  the  growth  of,  in  periods  of 
seven  years,  30;  verses  of  Solon, 
31  ;  opinion  of  Hippocrates,  31 ; 
character  impressed  on,  meaning  of" 
133;  made  in  the  image  of  God, 
explained,  iv.  210;  the  factitious, 
and  the  man  modelled  after  the 
image  of  God,  i.  65  ;  the  perfect, 
ii.  385;  he  who  is  truly  free,  iii.  510. 

Ian  and  woman,  symbolical  of  the 
mind  and  the  external  sensations,  i. 
92. 


Manasseh,  sons  of,  ii.  166. 
Manasses, blessing  of,  by  Jacob,i.  131. 
Mandragora,  iv.  10. 
Manius  Maximus,  governor  of  Egypt, 

iv.  76. 
Manna,  meaning  of,  i.  153;  heavenly 

food,  ii.  109;  how  collected,  iii.  45; 

not  gathered  on  the  Sabbath,  46. 
Marah,  meaning  of,  ii.   191;  the  law 

why  given    there,  190;   the  bitter 

waters  of,  i.  322. 
Marriage,  restrictions  of  the  Mosaic 

law  regarding,  iii.  306. 
Marriage  of  the  high  priest,  regula- 
tions for  the,  iii.  198;  of  the  inferior 

priests,  199. 
Mars,  the  planet,  placed  above  the 

sun,  ii.  137. 
Mars,  character  of,  assumed  by  Ca- 
ligula, iv.  120. 
Master,  no   mortal   absolutely  so  of 

anything  vrhatever,  i.  1 95;  a  severe, 

the  best  for  unruly  servants,  iv.  274. 
Master  and  Lord,  different  meanings 

of,  ii.  98. 
Matter,  disquisition  on,  iv.  211. 
Measures  of  the  ark,  iv,  343. 
Medical  science,  remark  on,  iv.  246. 
Mehel,  meaning  of,  i.  301. 
Melchisedek,  meaning  of,  i.  128. 
Memphis,  in  Egypt,  iii.  26. 
Men,  races  of,  twofold,  i.  60. 
Men-women,  censure  of,  iii.  244. 
Men-women  and  women-men,  iii.  417. 
Merchants  and  dealers,  laws  for,  iii. 

402. 
Mercury,  the   planet,   placed  below 

the  sun,  ii.  137. 
Mercury,  character    of,  assumed   by 

Caligula,  iv.  120. 
Meshech,  meaning  of,  ii.  101. 
Mesopotamia,  the  sacrifice  of  children 

not  practised  in,  ii.434;  symbolical 

meaning  of,  204. 
Methusaleh,  iv.  327  ;  meaning  of,  i. 

295. 
Midian,  symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  13, 

259;  his  daughters,  260. 
Milcah,  meaning  of,  ii.  166. 
Migration  of  Abraham,  On  the,  ii. 

43. 


480 


INDEX. 


Military  service,  who  exempted  from, 
and  why,  iii.  417;  humane  regula- 
tions of  Moses,  4. 

Milk,  a  bounteous  gift,  iii.  44'2. 

Miltiades  exhibits  game-cocks  to  hia 
army  as  examples  of  courage,  iii.  535. 

Mind,  the,  the  same  to  the  soul  as 
the  eye  to  the  body,  i.  14 ;  the 
needs  of  each,  14;  likeness  of  man 
to  his  Maker  to  be  found  in  the 
mind,  20;  its  nature  incomprehen- 
sible, ii.  -298. 

Mind  and  outward  senses,  the  cham- 
pions of  each,  iii.  240'. 

Minerva  compared  to  the  number 
seven,  i.  55. 

Minotaur,  story  of  the,  iii.  314. 

Miriam,  song  of,  i.  394. 

Mischief,  designers  of,  remark  on,  iv. 
261. 

Mitre  of  the  high  priest,  ii.  66 ;  iii.  97. 

Mixed  multitude  which  accompanied 
the  Israelites  from  Egypt,  iii.  33. 

Mixture  distinguished  from  confusion, 
ii.  40. 

Moab,  fire  in,  symbolical  meaning  of, 
i.  167;  ii.  65;  daughters  of,  310. 

Mob,  domination  of  the,  the  greatest 
of  all  evils,  ii.  395. 

Moderation,  praise  of,  iii.  415. 

Monarchy,  Treatise  on,  iii.  177. 

Money,  eager  search  for,  iii.  521. 

Monkish  manuscript,  fragments  from 
Philo,  preserved  in  a,  iv.  257. 

Monsters,  iii.  315. 

Month,  notion  of  a,  the  number  30 
derived  from  the,  i.  16. 

Moon,  the,  placed  close  to  the  air, 
and  below  the  sun,  ii.  137. 

Morning  and  evening,  creation  of,  i.  8. 

Moses,  On  the  Life  of,  iii.  1. 

Moses,  birth  of,  iii.  2 ;  is  exposed  on 
the  bank  of  the  river,  3;  saved  by 
the  daughter  of  Pharaoh,  4 ;  adopted 
by  her,  5 ;  his  education,  5 ;  his 
temperance  and  fortitude,  7 ;  his 
sympathy  with  his  brethren,  10; 
slays  an  Egyptian  taskmaster,  11 ; 
is  obliged  to  flee  to  Arabia,  12  ; 
rescues  the  daughters  of  Jethro,  13; 
his  marriage,  14;  the  burning  bush. 


irafl 
mu" 


16  ;  the  allegory  explained, 
signs  and  tokens,  18;  returns 
Egypt,  20  ;  Pharaoh  refuses  to 
the  children  of  Israel  go,  20  ;  M» 
ses'  rod,  21;  the  plagues  of  Egypt; 
22 ;  the  Israelites  driven  out,  31 
Moses  is  elected  their  leader, 
his  disregard  of  riches,  34 ;  Phars 
pursues  the  Israelites,  37 ;  rnurmul 
ings  of  the  people,  38 ;  their  passage 
of  the  Red  Sea,  40;  the  bitt« 
waters  made  sweet,  41 ;  famine,  4lj 
the  gift  of  manna,  45 ;  the  Sabbal| 
ascertained  by  the  double  supp^ 
of  manna,  46;  the  quails,  47;  Mo- 
ses procures  water  from  the  rock 
47 ;  the  Moabites  defeated,  49 ;  spip 
sent  to  view  the  land  of  Canaan,  4^; 
their  report  disheartens  the  peopl^ 
53;  Moses  turns  aside  from  tbi 
Edomites,  54;  the  Israelites  de- 
feated by  the  Canaanites,  56;  viftt 
tory  of  the  Israelites,  57;  thflj 
defeat  Sihon,  king  of  the  Amoriten 
58;  Balak  and  Balaam,  59;  Phin©' 
has,  67;  the  war  against  the  Moab* 
ites,  68;  conduct  of  Moses  as  r 
lawgiver,  76;  excellence  of  hij 
method  of  setting  forth  his  laws,  84j 
his  actions  as  a  chief  priest,  88; 
divinely  instructed  to  build  tbe 
tabernacle,  90;  selects  his  brothei 
Aaron  for  high  priest,  103;  the 
golden  calf,  107;  plot  against  Mo- 
ses, 1 1 1 ;  his  character  as  a  prophet, 
114;  examples  of  his  prophedei^ 
126;  his  death,  136;  his  humane 
laws,  430,  et  seq.;  the  interpreter 
of  the  will  of  God,  468;  the  meek- 
est of  men,  474 ;  his  admirable 
method  of  setting  forth  his  laws,  i. 
1 ;  his  exordium,  1 ;  his  learning,  *2; 
his  description  of  the  creation,  3;  iv, 
25;  five  lessons  taught  therein,  i.fil. 

Moses,   spirit    of,   imparted    to    flw 
seventy  elden»,  i.  334. 

Moses,    tent   of,   symbol icallv   conai- 
dered,  i.  283. 

Motions,  seven  in  number,  i.  36. 

Mourning,  regulations  respecting,  ni. 
122. 


I 


INDEX. 


481 


Mouth,  Plato's  remark  on  the,  i.  35. 
Multitude,  the,  likened  to  a  eunuch, 

ii.  466;  the  mixed  multitude  which 

accompanied    the    Israelites    from 

Egypt,  iii.  33, 
Murder,  the  commandment  against, 

iii.  165,  173,  324;  denunciation  of, 

to  Noah,  iv.  391. 
Murder  of  their  families  and  them- 
selves   practised   by   the  Jews  in 

great  extremities,  iv.  152. 
!Murrain    of    beasts,    plague    of,    in 

Egypt,  iii.  30. 
Music,  power  of  the  number  7  in,  i. 

36. 
Music,  heavenly,  what,  iv.  410. 
Music  and  musical  instruments,  i.  310. 
Mysteries,  sacred,  not  to   be  spoken 

of  to  the  uninitiated,  iv,  245. 

Nachor,  meaning  of,  ii.  166  ;  his  two 
wives,  166. 

Nadab,  meaning  of,  ii.  80,  356. 

Nakedness,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 
93,  121 ;  iv.  299. 

Names  in  Holy  Scripture,  On  the 
CHANGE  OF,  ii.  238. 

Naming  of  the  animals  by  Adam,  iv. 
294. 

Naphtali,  a  symbol  of  peace,  ii,  351; 

Nature,  uselessness  of  struggles 
against,  iv.  247. 

Navigation,  its  benefits,  iv.  245. 

Necessity  and  fate,  not  taught  by 
Moses,  ii.  154. 

Nectar  and  ambrosia,  i.  373. 

Nests,  or  rooms,  in  the  ark,  iv.  341. 

Nile,     See  Egypt. 

Nimrod,  a  giant  and  a  mighty  hunter, 
iv.  405. 

Ninetv-nine,  the  number,  remarks  on, 
iv.  439,  462. 

NoAii,  On  the  Tilling  of  the 
Earth  by,  i,  379 ;  On  the  Plant- 
ing OP,  418, 

Noah,  meaning  of,  i,  127  ;  ii.  401  ; 
why  he  found  grace  in  the  sight  of 
the  Lord,  i.  360  ;  a  husbandman, 
378  ;  plants  a  vineyard,  416  ;  wick- 
edness of  his  sons,  487  ;  his  prayers, 
513  ;  called  Deucalion  by  the 
VOL,  IT,  I 


Greeks,  iii,  461  ;  prophecy  con- 
cerning him,  iv.  330. 

Noah,  the  sons  of,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of  their  names,  iv.  330. 

Nobility,  On,  iii,  496, 

Nobility,  true,  is  nobility  of  mind, 
iii.  497. 

Nocturnal  festival  of  the  Therapeutse, 
iv.  19. 

Nod,  land  of,  meaning  of,  i.  293. 

Noeman,  meaning  of,  i.  313. 

Number,  mystical  properties  ascribed 
to,  i.  3. 

Numbers,  perfect,  ii.  275. 

Oak  of  Sichem,  its  symbolical  mean- 
ing, ii.  93. 

Oath,  field  of  the,  i.  432;  well  of 
the,  ii.  293  ;  how  God  is  said  to 
take  an,  i.  161. 

Oaths  not  to  be  taken  if  it  can  be 
avoided,  iii.  155  ;  oaths  and  vows 
considered,  255. 

Obulus,  the  secretary  of  Caligula,  iv. 
140. 

Ocellus,  his  opinions  regarding  the 
world,  iv.  24. 

(Edipus,  ii.  306. 

Offences  punished  with  death  by  the 
law  of  Moses,  iii.  298,  300. 

Offerer  of  sacrifice,  the,  must  be  pure 
both  in  body  and  soul,  iii.  229. 

Offerings  of  Cain  and  Abel,  i.  207. 

Offerings  distinguished  from  gifts,  i. 
159. 

Ointment,  the  holy,  iii.  104. 

Old  age,  remarks  on,  iv.  244. 

Olive-branch,  the,  iv.  372. 

Olive  garden,  symbolical  meaning  of, 
i.  362. 

Olives,  command  concerning  gather- 
ing, iii.  432. 

Olympian  contest,  iv.  426  ;  the  only 
one  there  deserves  to  be  called 
sacred,  i.  402. 

On,  meaning  of,  i.  298. 

Onan,  i.  328,  346. 

One  hundred,  virtue  of  the  number, 
iv.  459. 

One  hundred  and  twenty  years  as- 
cribed to  man,  iv.  331. 


48-2 


INDEX. 


Onomarchus,  punishment  of  the  sacri- 
lege of,  iv.  231. 

Onycha,  ii.  132. 

Opinion,  slavery  of  men  to,  ii.  354. 

Opposition  of  the  parts  of  the  sacri- 
fices, symbolical  meaning  of,  ii.  134. 

Oracles  of  God,  remarks  on  the,  iv. 
255. 

Oracles  and  secret  ceremonies  ridi- 
culed by  Caligula,  iv.  116. 

Outward  senses,  the,  likened  to  win- 
dows, iv.  264 ;  typified  bv  Charran, 
ii.  85,  301. 

Ox,  the,  when  not  to  be  muzzled,  iii. 
445. 

Oxen,  Pharaoh's  dream  of  the,  ex- 
plained, ii.  382,  473. 

Oxen,  sheep,  and  goats,  why  offered 
in  sacrifice,  iii.  211. 

Pain,  remark  on,  iv.  276. 

Palestine,   the    Essenes    of,  iii.   523. 

See  also  Jews. 
Palm,  the  symbol  of  victory,  i.  120. 
Panathensea,  a  festival,  iii.  535. 
Pancratium,  contest  of  the,  i.  401. 
Pandora,  a  poetic  appellation  of  the 

earth,  iv.  29. 
Pansetius,   the    Stoic,    embraces   the 

doctrine  of  the   incorruptibility  of 

the  world,  iv.  34. 
Paradise,  iv.  286  ;  planting  of,  i.  422  ; 

placed  in  the  east,  424  ;  its  plants 

unlike  those  of  modern  parks,  45  ; 

man  expelled  from,  46 ;  virtue  so 

termed    metaphorically,    63 ;    tlie 

tree  of  life,  66  ;  rivers  of,  68. 
Pardon  apt  to  engender  repentance, 

iv.  273. 
Pardon  of  offences,  remark  on,  iv.  271. 
Parents,  Treatise  on  the  Honour 

COMMANDED  TO  BE  PAID  TO,  iii.  293. 

Parents,  honour  to,  the  command- 
ment respecting,  iii.  160,  172,  293, 
294  ;  have  the  power  of  life  and 
death  over  their  children,  296  ;  the 
power  justified,  298. 

Parthians  and  Persians,  changes  in 
their  situation,  ii.  480. 

Pascha.     See  Passover. 

Pasiphae,  legend  of,  iii.  314. 


Passions,  why  compared  to  beasta 
and  birds,  i.  83  ;  compared  to  a 
horse,  105  ;  reason  the  pilot  or 
charioteer  of  the,  138. 

Passover,  the,  symbolically  explained, 
i.  220. 

Patience  typified  by  Rebecca,  ii.  89. 

Peace,  a  divine  blessing,  iv.  273 ;  of 
what  nature  was  that  promised  to 
Abraham,  ii.  151 ;  though  un- 
favourable, more  advantageous 
than  war,  iii.  409. 

Peace  and  war,  directions  regarding, 
iii.  488. 

Peg,  reason  so  called  symbolically,  i. 
147.  '       ^ 

Peitho,  meaning  of,  ii.  306.  M 

Peithom,  meaning  of,  i.  298. 

Peloponnesus,  cities  of,  swallowed  up  ' 
by  the  sea,  iv.  58. 

Pentecost,  day  of,  in.  171. 

Pentephoe,   wife  of   Pharaoh's  chief | 
cook,  i.  170. 

People  who  are  governed,  remarks 
on,  iv.  243,  246,  258. 

Perfume,  symbolical  meaning  of  the 
directions  concerning,  ii.  132. 

Peripatetics,  sect  of  the,  iv.  423. 

Perizzites,  iv.  424. 

Perjury,  condemnation  of,  ir.  256. 

Persian?,  impious  marriage  custom  of 
the,  iii.  306. 

Persians  and  Parthians,  changes  in 
their  situation,  ii.  480. 

Petronius,  governor  of  Syria,  ordered 
to  set  up  a  statue  of  Caligula  in 
the  holy  of  holies,  iv,  146;  his 
prudent  measures,  149  ;  opposition 
of  the  Jew«,  150 ;  ms  letter  to 
Claudius,  155  ;  the  project  aban- 
doned, 172. 

Peutephres,  father-in-law  of  Joseph, 
ii.  309. 

Phanuel,  meaning  of,  ii.  27. 

Pharan,  meaning  of,  iv.  437. 

Pharaoh,  dreams  of,  explained,  ii. 
382,  473  ;  his  cup,  472  ;  flight  of 
Moses  from  the  presence  of,  sym- 
bolically explained,  i.  110;  his 
cruelty  to  the  Hebrews,  iii.  9. 

Pharos,  island  of,  the  laws  of  Moses 


INDEX. 


483 


translated   there,    iii.   81  ;   comme- 
morative festival  held  there,  82. 

Thayllus,  punishment  of  the  sacri- 
lege of,  iv.  231. 

Pheison,  a  river  of  Paradise,  symbol- 
ically explained,  i.  68;  iv.  289. 

Phidias,  the  statuary,  i.  470. 

Philip,  the  tetrarch,  iv.  66. 

Philo  JudjBus,  an  ambassador  to 
Claudius,  iv.  140;  his  account  of  an 
interview  with  the  emperor,  176; 
wife  of,  her  reason  for  not  wearing 
golden  ornaments,  275. 

Philolaus,  his  testimonv  on  the  nature 
of  God,  i.  29. 

Philosophy,  the  most  perfect  good  of 
human  life,  i.  15  ;  the  royal  road, 
.309;  the  handmaid  of  wisdom,  ii. 
173;  Avhy  called  a  science,  and  not 
an  art,  186. 

•I'hilomelus,  punishment  of  the  sacri- 
lege of,  iv.  231. 

Phinehas,  his  just  anger,  iii.  67,  187; 
how  rewarded,  67,  68. 

Phison.     See  Pheison. 

Phocean  sacred  war,  the,  iv.  231. 

Physicians,  various  skill  of,  i,  252. 

Physicians  and  cooks,  great  quarrel 
which  exists  between,  ii.  466. 

Pigeons,  the  reason  of  their  abun- 
dance at  Ascalon,  iv.  240. 

Pilate,  procurator  of  Judea,  his  perse- 
cution of  the  Jews,  iv.  164. 

Pillar  erected  by  Jacob,  ii.  342. 

Pillars,  symbolical  meaning  of,  iv. 
282. 

Pilot,  prudent  conduct  of  the,  iii.  464. 

Pindar,  citation  frono,  iv.  53. 

Pitch,  whv  employed  in  the  ark,  iv. 
H2. 

Pi  the  law  of  Moses  regarding,  iii. 
339. 

Place,  considerations  on,  ii,  305. 

Plagues  of  Egypt,  the,  iii.  22. 

Plain,  figurative  meaning  of,  i.  241. 
Planets,  motions  of  the,  i.  180;  their 

position,  ii.  137. 
Planets   and    fixed   stars  arrayed  in 

seven  divisions,  i.  34. 
Plants,  considerations  on  the  nature 
of,  i.  350. 


Plants  of  Paradise,  the  virtues  so 
termed,  i.  45,  422. 

Plato,  the  sweetest  of  all  writers,  iii. 
509;  his  remark  on  the  mouth,  i. 
35;  his  description  of  an  entertain- 
ment, iv,  13;  citations  from,ii.  207, 
211;  iv.  24,  34,  37. 

Pleasure,  remark  on,  iv.  276;  symbol- 
ized by  the  serpent,  i,  47 ;  curses 
against,  136;  life  of  the  man 
devoted  to,  i.  47, 

Pleasures  of  man  more  various  than 
those  of  animals,  i.  48. 

Pledges,  the  law  of,  ii.  31 1. 

Pleiades,  band  of  the,  their  motions, 
i.  34. 

Poets,  the  instructors  of  mankind,  iii. 
537. 

Poisoners,  punishment  of,  iii.  328. 

Political  affairs,  their  variety,  ii.  460. 

Polycrates,  tyranny  and  unhappy  fate 
of,  iv.  228. 

Polypus, its  wonderful  property, i.  488. 

Pomegranates,  their  emblematic 
meaning,  iii.  196. 

Pontus,  fall  of,  i.  376. 

Poseidon,  iv.  2. 

Posidonius,  the  Stoic,  embraces  the 
doctrine  of  the  incorruptibility  of 
the  world,  iv.  34. 

Poverty,  remarks  on,  iv.  281. 

Powers,  the  heavenly,  the  creation  of 
man  attributed  to,  ii.  38. 

Prayer  of  Noah,  iv.  401. 

Precept,  command,  prohibition,  and 
recommendation  distinguished, i. 76. 

Pregnant  animals  not  to  be  sacrificed, 
iii,  44.3. 

Preservation,  sacrifice  for.  See  Vir- 
tues. 

Pride  the  cause  of  manv  other  evils, 
iii.  137. 

Priests,  On  the  PvEwards  and 
Honours  which  belong  to  th;:, 
iii.  204. 

Priests,  laws  relating  to  the,  iii.  194; 
marriage,  198 ;  mourning,  2'i0 ; 
mutilation,  201  ;  rewards  and  ho- 
nours, 204 ;  difficult  cases  to  be 
referred  to  their  judgment,  iii.  401. 

I      See  High  Priest. 

I  2 


484 


INDEX. 


Prisoners  of  war,  directions  regarding, 
iii.  437. 

Procession,  the  course  of  the  affairs  of 
life  likened  to  a,  ii.  481. 

Prohibition,  command,  recommenda- 
tion, distinguished,  i.  76. 

Promises,  remarks  on,  iv.  267,  268, 
270. 

Prophecy,  gift  of,  ii.  146. 

Prophet,  every  good  man  a,  ii.  446; 
character  of  Moses  as  a,  iii.  114. 

Prophets,  false,  how  to  be  treated,  iii. 
242. 

Proselytes,  regulations  respecting,  iii. 
186. 

Prosperity,  deceitfulness  of,  iii.  241. 

Protagoras,  impious  opinion  of,  i.  294. 

Providence,  arguments  for  a,  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  atheists,  iv.  222. 

Prudence,  eulogium  of,  i.  70;  likened 
to  gold,  72. 

Psonthomphanech,the  Egyptian  name 
of  Joseph,  ii.  255;  its  meaning,  256. 

Ptolemy  Philadelphus  procures  the 
laws  of  Moses  to  be  translated  into 
Greek,  iii.  80. 

Ptolemies,  fall  of  the,  ii.  480. 

Punishments  and  Rewards,  On,  iii. 
456. 

Punishment,  remark  on,  iv.  275;  its 
benefit  to  the  bystanders,  iv.  247. 

Purification  for  blood  shed  in  war, 
why  required,  iii.  69. 

Purifying  victims,  various  kinds  of,  ii. 
285. 

Purple  (TToptpvpa),  emblematic  mean- 
ing of,  ii.  181. 

Pythagoras,  saying  of,  iv.  293. 

Pythagoreans,  their  excellent  doc- 
trines, iii.  507;  their  opinions  con- 
cerning the  world,  iv.  24. 

Quadrupeds,  what  are  clean,  iii.  380. 
Quails,  the  supply  of,  iii.  387. 
Quaternion,  the  heavens  adorned  with 
a,  i.  17. 

Rachel,  meaning  of,  ii.  163. 
Raguel-Jother,  meaning  of,  ii.  259. 
Rain,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i.  58. 
Rainbow.     See  Bow  in  the  clouds. 


Rains,  seasonable,  iii.  479. 

Ram,  character  of  the,  iv.  409,  412; 

the  symbol  of  speech,  ii.  113. 
Rameses,  meaning  of,  i.  298. 
Raven,  a  sign  of  wickedness,  iv.  369. 
Reason,  the  pilot  or  charioteer  of  the 

passions,  i.  138. 
Rebecca,  meaning  of,  i.  131;  ii.  89. 
Rebekkah,  Moses'  account  of  her,  its 

symbolical  meaning,  i.  317. 
Recommendation,   command,    distin- 
guished, i.  76. 
Red  Sea,  passage  of  the,  iii.  40,  126. 
Refraction  alluded  to,  i.  490. 
Refuge,  cities  of,  ii.  2 12, iii.  334. 
Repentance,  On,  iii.  463. 
Repentance,   ii.  226  ;   iii.  453  ;  how 

produced,  iv.  273  ;  God  propitiated 

bv,  ii.  284;  wrongly  ascribed  to  him, 

iv.  335,  382. 
Rephaims,  iv.  424. 
Reproach,  caution  to  avoid,  iv.  246, 
Reptiles,  various  kinds  of,  iii.  382. 
Reptiles     with     wings,     symbolical 

meaning  of,  ii.  141. 
Reputation,  remark  on,  iv.  271. 
Reuben,  the  symbol  of  goodness  of 

disposition,  i.  236  ;  interpretation  of 

the   name,   ii.   257  ;   symbolically 

explained,  i.  73,  ii.  350. 
Rewards  and  Punishments,  On,  iii. 

456. 
Rewards  promised  to  those  who  keep 

God's  commandments,  iii.  303. 
Rhegium,  city  of,  why  so  called,  iv. 

58. 
Rhine,  the  river,  a  boundary  of  the 

Roman  empire,  iv.  102. 
Rhodes,  island  of,  said  to  have  risen 

from  the  sea,  iv.  53  ;   peopled  byj 

Japhet,  404. 
Rib,  symbolically  explained,  i.  89 

iv.  296. 
Ring-straked,  svmbolical  meaning  ol 

ii.  336. 
River,  speech  compared  to  a,  ii.  386,^ 
River  of  God,  what,  ii.  386. 
Rivers  of  Paradise,  i.  68  ;  iv.  289; 

symbolically  explained,  68. 
Rock,   the    solid,    symbolically   ex- 
plained, i.  271. 


INDEX. 


485 


Rod  of  Aaron,  changed  into  a  serpent, 
iii.  21 ;  its  blossoming,  111. 

Rod  of  Moses,  its  change  into  a  ser- 
pent, i.  18;  symbolically  explained, 
102. 

Roman  world,  the,  its  boundaries,  iv. 
102. 

Rome,  embassy  to,  from  the  Jews  of 
Alexandria,  iv.  140. 

Royal  treasures,  what,  i.  428. 

Ruler,  the  true  education  of  the,  is  to 
be  ruled,  iv.  243. 

Rumah,  meaning  of,  ii.  166. 

Sabbath,  meaning  of,  i.  197 ;  manna 
not  gathered  on  the,  iii.  46. 

Sabbath-breaker,  punishment  of  the, 
iii.  120. 

Sacrifice,  On  Animals  fit  for,  iii. 
211 ;  On  those  who  offer,  229. 

Sacrifice,  animals  fit  to  be  offered  in, 
iii.  21 1  ;those  who  offer  sacrifice,  229. 

Sacrifice  of  first-fruits,  how  to  be 
divided,  i.  224. 

Sacrifices  of  the  law,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of  the  directions  for  the,  i.  226, 
233;  division  of  the,  ii.  119. 

Sacrilege,  various  punishments  of,  iv. 
231. 

Salpaath,  case  of  the  daughters  of,  iii. 
123. 

Salt,  why  to  be  added  to  every  offer- 
ing, iii.  235;  pillar  of,  ii.  343;  valley 
of,  ii.  7. 

Samuel,  meaning  of,  i.  344,  483;  his 
abstinence  from  wine,  483. 

Sarah,  meaning  of,  the  name,  i.  165; 
virtue  typified  by,  ii.  163;  her 
handmaiden  Hagar,  or  education, 
161. 

Sarai,  change  of  her  name  to  Sarah,  i. 
165. 

Sardanapalus,  his  luxury  and  intem- 
perance, iii.  385. 

Sarmatians  and  Scythians,  iv.  102. 

Sarra,  or  Sarrah,  meaning  of,  ii.  253; 
iv.  456. 

Saturn,  the  planet,  placed  above  the 
sun,  ii.  137. 

Scape-goat,  directions  respecting  the, 
i.301. 


Science.     See  Philosophy. 

Scorpion,  the,  symbolically  explained, 
i.  101. 

Scriptures,  explanation  of  the,  at  the 
banquets  of  the  Therapeutae,  iv.  17. 

Scythians,  celebrated  for  justice,  iv.  5; 
the  Geloni,  a  tribe  of,  i.  489. 

Scythians  and  Sarmatians,  iv.  102. 

Sea,  the,  how  separated  from  chaos,  i. 
10;  its  asserted  diminution,  iv.  53  ; 
cities  and  countries  swallowed  up 
by,  58;  islands  merged,  53;  help  to 
commerce  afforded  by,  245. 

Sea-monsters,  creation  of,  i.  17. 

Seeking  God,  remarks  on,  iv.  269. 

Sejanus,  an  oppressor  of  the  Jews,  iv. 
61. 

Self-conceit,  its  mischief,  iv.  247. 

Self-knowledge,  cultivation  of,  recom- 
mended, ii.  304. 

Self-satisfied  people,  remarks  on,  iv. 
259,  267. 

Semele,  iii.  534. 

Sensation,  five-fold  division  of,  i.  17. 

Sensation  the  middle  term,  the  mind 
and  the  external  object  the  ex- 
tremes, i.  59. 

Sensations,  the  handmaids  of  pleasure, 
i.  49. 

Senses,  their  number,  i.  17;  things 
judged  by  the,  seven  in  number,  36 ; 
styled  the  guards  of  the  soul,  ii.  5. 

Septuagint,  the,  iii.  81. 

Serpent,  the,  an  old  poisonous  and 
earth-born  reptile,  i.  46;  spoke  to 
Eve  with  a  human  voice,  46  ;  iv. 
300;  the  symbol  of  pleasure,  i.  47; 
curse  on  the,  124,  136;  the  brazen 
serpent,  100,  398. 

Serpent  of  Dan  distinguished  from  the 
serpent  that  appeared  to  Eve,  i. 
398. 

Serpent  in  the  wilderness,  symboli- 
cally explained,  i.  104. 

Serpent-fighter,  a  symbolical  animal 
expressing  temperance,  i.  49. 

Servant,  the  greatest  praise  of  a,  iv. 
274. 

Servant  of  vnsdom,  the,  is  the  servant 
of  God,  iv.  262. 

Servants,  kindness  to,  inculcated,  iv. 


486 


INDEX. 


master  the  best  for 


273;  a  severe 
unruly,  274. 

Service  of  God  the  surest  freedom,  ii. 
20. 

Seth,  birth  of,  i.  189;  iv.  325;  mean- 
ing of,  i.  314. 

Seven,  the  number,  admirable  proper- 
ties of,  i.  26;  of  what  it  consists,  27; 
its  divisions,  27;  its  essence  the 
foundation  of  geometry  and  trigo- 
nometry, 29;  its  sanctity,  29;  its 
perfecting  power,  30;  the  most  har- 
monious of  numbers,  82;  its  nature 
extends  over  heaven  and  earth,  33; 
grammar  and  music,  36;  further 
considerations  on,  54;  iii.  264. 

Seven  ages  of  man,  i.  31. 

Seven  divisions  of  the  body,  i.  35;  of 
the  head,  35. 

Seven  wise  men  of  Greece,  iii.  522. 

Seven-fold  punishment  to  the  slayer 
of  Cain  explained,  iv.  321. 

Seventh  day,  or  Sabbath,  why  called 
"rest,"  ii.  402;  why  hallowed,  i. 
26,  56 ;  rest  on  the  seventh  day  ex- 
plained, 55;  the  commandment  re- 
specting it,  iii.  158,  170. 

Seventh  year,  enactments  regarding 
the,  iii.  434. 

Seventy,  the  number,  ii.  88. 

Seventy -five,  the  number,  ii.  88. 

Severus,  lieutenant-governor  of  Egypt, 
iv.  61. 

Shamelessness  and  modesty,  i.  96;  iv. 
273. 

Shalpaath.     See  Salpaath. 

Sheaf,  festival  of  the,  meaning  of  the 
injunction,  ii.  357. 

Sheaves,  Joseph's  dream  of  the,  ii. 
345. 

Shechem,  meaning  of  the  name,  i.  114; 
ii.  92. 

Sheep,  a  purifying  victim,  ii.  285. 

Shem,  conduct  of,  i.  95;  blessed,  511. 

Shepherd,  why  an  abomination  to  the 
Egyptians,  i.  217. 

Shepherds  and  keepers  of  sheep,  how 
distinguished,  i.  386. 

Shew-bread,  table  of,  iii.  96. 

Shinar,  meaning  of,  li.  1 5. 

Shittim,  meaning  of,  ii.  310. 


1 

143| 


Shoulder,  the  symbol  of  labour,  i 
See  Shechem. 

Shur,  meaning  of,  ii.  235. 

Sichem.     See  Shechem. 

Sicilian  strait,  how  formed,  iv.  58. 

Sicily,  its  separation  from  the  Italian 
mainland,  iv.  58. 

Sight,  the  most  excellent  of  all  gif*s, 
ii.  429 ;  figuratively  represented  by 
Zoar,  ii.  430. 

Sihon,  king  of  the  Amorites,  defeate 
by  the  Israelites,  iii.  58. 

Silanus,  Marcus,  father-in-law  of  Cali^, 
gula,  put  to  death  by  him,  iv. 
113. 

Silence,  to  whom  proper,  ii.  96 ;  appr 
priate  times  for,  ii.  390. 

Simeon  symbolically  explained,  i.  7 

Sin  more  to  be  feared  than  dise 
iv.  276. 

Sin-off'ering.     See  Victims. 

Sins,  voluntary  and  involuntary,  iv, 
245. 

Sirens,  song  of  the,  iv,  410. 

Six,  the  number,  the  most  productive 
i.  3;  of  what  composed,  14 

Six  days  of  creation,  how  to  be  unde: 
stood,  i.  53. 

Skins,  garments  of,  iv.  311. 

Slave,  gentle  and  humane  treatme 
of  the,  enjoined  by  the  law  of 
Moses,  iii.  274 ;  symbolical  meaning 
of  the  directions  for  the  liberation 
of  the,  ii.  130. 

Slaves,  possession  of,  contrary  to  na- 
ture, iv.  16;  ordered  to  be  circum- 
cised, 454 ;  law  regarding  the  killing 
of,  iii.  337;  liberation  of,  348;  fugi- 
tive, 440;  the  ministration  of,  un- 
known among  the  Tiierapeutae,  iv. 
16;  manumitted,  iii.  538;  descrip- 
tion of  those  attending  at  banquets, 
iv.  11. 

Slavery,  two  kinds  of,  iii.  510. 

Sleep,  remarks  on,  iv.  2b7,  273. 

Sleep  of  Adimi,  iv.  29d. 

Sobriety,  advantages  of,  i.  501. 

Sodom,  meaning  of,  i.  499. 

Sodom,  land  of,  symbolical  meaning 
of,  ii.  179. 

Sodomites,  cities  of  the,  destruction 


Ii 


INDEX. 


487 


of  the,  ii.  424  ;  figurative  explana- 
tion, 426. 

Sojourners  and  foreigners,  ii.  162  ;  iii. 
4;35. 

Soldiers,  labours  and  subordination  of, 
iii.  513. 

Solon,  laws  of,  iii.  517  ;  his  descrip- 
tion of  the  different  ages  of  man,  i. 

:n. 

Son,  why  one  only  given  to  Sarah,  ii. 
266. 

Sons  and  daughters,  metaphorically 
used  for  reasonings  and  arts,  i.  192. 

Sophist,  the,  his  inferiority  to  the 
wise  man,  i.  502. 

Sophocles,  his  ffidipus  Tyrannus  al- 
luded to,  iii.  306. 

Soul,  the,  the  habitation  of  God,  iv. 
274  ;  its  excellent  nature,  i.  18  ; 
essence  of  the,  263 ;  irrational 
part  of  the,  divided  into  seven 
parts,  284  ;  the  senses,  the  guards 
of  the,  ii.  5 ;  its  rational  and 
irrational  faculties,  typified  by  Leah 
and  Rachel,  163. 

Soul  or  life  of  man,  its  essence,  iii. 
385. 

Soul,  speech,  and  external  sense, 
symbolized  by  a  heifer,  a  ram,  and 
a  goat,  ii.  113  ;  how  regarded  by 
the  righteous,  and  by  the  wicked, 
114. 

Souls,  demons,  and  angels,  identity  of, 
i.  332. 

Sowing-time  and  harvest,  iv.  384. 

Special  Laws,  Treatise  on  the,  iii. 
•255,  303. 

Speckled  and  ring-straked,  symboli- 
cal meaning  of,  ii.  336. 

Speech  likened  to  a  garment,  ii.  313  ; 
evils  of  unseemly  freedom  of,  359  ; 
freedom  of,  who  proper  to,  96  ; 
akin  to  friendship,  98. 

Spirit  of  God,  its  temporary  abode 
with  even  bad  men,  i.  333. 

Sponge,  ii.  40. 

Squared  pieces  of  wood,  why  employ- 
ed by  Noah  in  building  the  ark,  iv. 
340. 

Stacte,  ii.  132. 

Stars,  creation  of  the,  i.   15;  reasons 


of  this,  15;  their  uses,  16  ;  useful 
to  navigatois,  34  ;  their  nature 
unknown,  iii.  178  ;  the  viceroys  of 
God,  177  ;  shine  by  their  own  light, 
466. 

Statesman,  On  the,  or  Life  of 
Joseph,  ii.  453. 

Statue  of  Caligula,  attempt  to  set  up 
the,  at  Jerusalem,  iv.  146. 

Stealing,  the  commandment  against, 
iii.  166,  173,  355. 

Stephanion,  a  freedman,  the  friend  of 
Flaccus,  iv.  84. 

Stilbon,  motion  of  the  planet,  i. 
180. 

Stoic  philosophers,  their  opinion  on 
the  creation  and  destructibility  of 
the  world,  iv.  23  ;  change  of  opinion 
of  some  of  them,  34. 

Stoning,  the  punishment  of  the  blas- 
phemer, and  the  Sabbath-breaker, 
iii.  114,120. 

Stork,  filial  piety  of  the,  iii.  162. 

Stranger,  judgment  respecting  the,  iii. 
398. 

Strangers  not  to  be  elected  to  situa- 
tions of  authority,  iii.  394  ;  laws  of 
Moses  regarding,  435. 

Strife  and  contention,  symboliaed  by 
a  plain,  i.  241. 

Study  of  the  holy  scriptures,  in  what 
manner  to  be  pursued,  iv.  253. 

Suicide,  a  practice  of  the  Jews  in 
great  extremities,  iv.  152. 

Sun,  its  place  in  the  centre  of  the 
planets,  ii.  137  ;  the  symbol  of  the 
mind,  147,  308. 

Sun,  the,  and  other  good  gifts  design- 
ed only  for  the  virtuous,  ir.  278. 

Superstition,  the  great  hindrance  to 
holiness,  i.  363  ;  instances  of,  437. 

Suppliants,  Treatise  on  the  Vir- 
tues OF,  iv.  1. 

Sur,  way  leading  to,  iv.  431  ;  its 
meaning,  432. 

Sword,  Flaming,  On  the,  i.  175. 

Syleus,  iii.  529. 

Synagogues,  Jewish,  statues  forcibly 
erected  in  them,  by  the  populace 
of  Alexandria,  iv.  70,  129. 

Syria,  meaning  of  the  name,  i.  112. 


488 


INDEX. 


Tabernacle  of  testimony  symbolically 
explained,  i.  119. 

Tabernacle  and  the  altar,  symbolical 
meaning  of,i.  481 ;  described,  iii.  90. 

Table  of  shewbread,  iii.  96. 

Tables,  the  two,  of  the  Law,  nature  of 
their  division,  iii.  147. 

Tamar,  iii.  504. 

Taming  of  the  passions,  iii.  476  j  of 
wild  beatss,  476. 

Tantalus,  legend  of,  alluded  to,  iii. 
169. 

Tarandus,  a  fabulous  animal  among 
the  Geloni,  i.  489. 

Tartarus,  iii.  491. 

Tax  collector,  cruelty  of  a,  iii.  342. 

Temperance,  consequences  of,  ii.  465. 
symbolical  figure  of,  i.  49. 

Temple,  the,  described,  iii.  191  ;  why 
not  surrounded  by  a  grove,  192. 

Ten  Commandments,  On  the,  iii.  136. 

Ten,  the  number,  excellent  things 
attributed  to,  ii.  175. 

Terah,  meaning  of,  ii.  302  ;  his  migra- 
tion from  Charran  explained,  303. 

Tetrapharmacon,  a  medicine,  its  com- 
position, ii.  40  ;  iv.  42. 

Thalamein,  meaning  of,  i.  299. 

Thamar,  meaning  of,  i.  126,  370; 
her  story  symbolically  explained, 
ii.  182,  224. 

Thank-offering.     See  Victims. 

Theatre,  various  behaviours  of  spec- 
tators at  the,  i.  489. 

Theft,  law  against,  iii.  355. 

Theocritus,  allusion  to,  i.  361. 

Theodorus,  sumamed  the  Atheist,  his 
reply  to  Lysimachus,  iii.  534. 

Theognis,  proverb  from,  iii.  450. 

Theophrastus,  his  opinion  respecting 
the  earth,  iv.  52. 

Therapeutse,  found  chiefly  in  Egypt, 
iv.  6  ;  their  shrines,  6  ;  their  mo- 
nasteries, 7  ;  their  sacred  assem- 
blies, 7j  their  temperance,  8  ;  their 
raiment,  9  ;  their  common  assem- 
blies, 9  ;  their  feasts,  15  ;  reading 
the  scriptures,  17  ;  hymns,  18 ; 
nocturnal  festival,  19  ;  choruses,  in 
imitation  of  those  led  by  Moses  and 
Miriam,  19. 


Thief,  killing  of  the  nocturnal,  sym- 
bolically explained,  i.  115. 

Thimna,  a  concubine,  ii.  168. 

Thirteen,  the  number,  iv.  462. 

Thirtv,  the  number,  whence  derived, 
i.  16. 

Thirty-six,  the  number,  why  termed 
by  the  Pythagoreans  agreement, 
iv.  452. 

Thorns  and  thistles,  symbolical  mean- 
ing of,  i.  174. 

Thoughts  of  the  soul,  ii.  141. 

Three,  the  number,  the  image  of  a 
solid  body,  i.  53. 

Three  hundred  and  sixty-five,  symbo- 
lical meaning  of,  iv.  328. 

Thunderbolts,  plague  of,  in  Egypt, 
iii.  27, 

Thyestes,  accursed  food  of,  iii.  487. 

Tiberius,  death  of,  iv.  63  ;  designed 
to  put  Claudius  to  death,  but  dis- 
suaded by  Macro,  107. 

Tiberius,  son  of  Drusus,  death  of, 
alluded  to,  iv.  69,  106. 

Tigris,  a  river  of  Paradise,  symboli- 
cally explained,  i.  68  ;  its  charac- 
ter, iv.  290. 

Tilling  the  ground,  how  it  differs  from 
husbandry,  i.  379. 

Time,  its  prior  existence  to  that  of 
the  world  inconsistent  with  philo- 
sophy, i.  7 ;  its  measure  by  the 
stars,  1 6 ;  the  grandson  of  God, 
349  ;  economy  of,  iv.  246. 

Titans  and  giants,  fable  of  the,  iv.  405, 

Tones,  musical,  seven  in  number,  i, 
55. 

Tooth,  law  regarding  the  striking  out 
of  a,  iii.  352. 

Tower  of  Babel,  its  symbolical  mean^ 
ing,  ii.  27. 

Trance  of  Abraham,  ii.  143;  iv.  41i 
various  kinds  of,  ii.  143. 

Translators,  the  seventy,  their  laboui 
iii.  80. 

Travelling  through  the  land,  symbol 
cal  meaning,  ii.  91. 

Treachery,  condemnation  of,  iii.  400; 
iv.  272. 

Tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil, 
i.  78;  iv.  289. 


H 


INDEX. 


489 


'rees,  created  in  full  perfection,  i.  1 1 ; 

reason  assigned,    11;    of  a  hostile 

city  not  to  be  cut  down,  iii.  409. 
'riad,  the  earth  adorned  with  a,  i.  17. 
riclinia,  couches  so  called,  iv.  1 1. 
riptolemus,  fable  of,  iii.  458. 
rypho,  a   Jewish   elder,   plundered 

and  scourged,  iv.  76. 
urtle-dove   and    pigeon,   symbolical 

meaning  of,  ii.  118. 
wo  hundred,  the  number,  iv.  328. 
yphus,  an  Egyptian  god,  his  emblem, 

i.  472. 

ncertain  and  unknown   things,  re- 
marks on,  iv.  259. 
nintentional  homicide,  punishment 
of,  iii.  334. 

niverse,  the,  filled  with  living  beings 
in  all  its  parts,  i.  33 1 . 
nleavened    bread,    ii.     190  ;     why 
sacred,  J  91. 

nmixed  wine,  a  poison,  i.  446. 
NwiUTTEN  Law,  On  the,  ii.  396. 
r,  meaning  of  the  name,  i.  119. 
rim    and     Thummim,     symbolical 
meaning  of,  i.  1  38. 
rsa   major,    the   constellation,    the 
guide  of  mariners,  i.  34  ;  consists  of 
seven  stars,  34,  54. 
surv,   lending    on,    condemned,   ii. 
273;  iii.  430. 

ain-glorv  an  untameable  wild  beast, 
ii.  461.' 

ariegated  texture,  symbolically  ex- 
plained, ii.  335. 
enus,  the  heavenly,  iv.  ]  3. 
enus,  the  planet,  placed  below  the 
sun,  ii.  137. 

Bsta,    the   only   fixed   part   of  the 
world,  i.  181. 

iCTiMS,  Treatise  on,  iii.  211. 
ictims,  why  to  be  whole  and  entire, 
and  without  blemish,  iii.  212;  the 
three  classes  of,  214;  symbolical 
meaning  of  the  mode  of  sacrifice, 
216. 

ne,    Joseph's    dream   of    the,    ex- 
plained, ii.  372. 
neyard  of  the  Lord,  ii.  374. 


Vineyard,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 
362;  why  planted  by  Noah,  iv, 
396. 

Vineyards,  not  to  be  gleaned  a  second 
time,  iii.  432. 

Violation  of  a  virgin,  punishment  for, 
iii.  320. 

Virtue,  remarks  on,  iv.  271 ;  contem- 
plative and  active,  i.  66;  meta- 
phorically termed  a  paradise,  63; 
trees  of,  66;  typified  by  Sarah,  ii, 
163;  her  handmaidens,  163. 

Virtue  and  pleasure,  opposition  of, 
i.  211;  allegory  of,  iii,  250. 

Virtues,  Treatise  on  Three,  iii.  4 1 2. 

Virtues,  the  four  generic,  i.  315. 

Virtues,  the  generic,  likened  to  cities, 
and  the  specific  to  houses,  ii.  230. 

Virtuous  Man,  Treatise  on  the,  iii. 
506. 

Virtuous  man,  the,  a  common  good 
to  all  men,  iv.  250  ;  he  alone  free, 
iii.  519. 

Visions.     See  Dreams. 

Voice  of  God,  explained,  ii.  53. 

Vow,  an  offering  to  God,  ii.  344. 

Vow,  the  great,  explained,  iii.  227. 

Wages  op  a  Harlot,  On  the,  iii. 

249. 
Wages  of  pleasure,  i.  50  ;  of  a  harlot 

not  to  be  brought  into  the  sacred 

treasury,  iii.  249  ;  of  the  poor  man, 

431. 
Walking,  how  attributed  to  God,  iv. 

305. 
War,  how  and  when  to  be  put  an  end 

to,  iii.  477 ;  exemptions  from  going 

to,  in  the  Law,  considered,  i,  408  ; 

sound  of,   symbolical  meaning  of, 

i.  473. 
Wars,  the  ordinary  causes  of,  i,  313. 
Wasps,  swarms  of,   to   fight  for  the 

pious,  iii.  478  ;  symbolical  meaning 

of,  iv.  282. 
Water,  salt  and  fresh,  separated,  i,  9. 
Wavering  and  cowardly  people,  re- 
marks on,  iv.  261. 
Wealth,  the  true,  iii.  414. 
Well,  the  heavens  whv  likened  to  a 

ii.  301. 


490 


INDEX. 


Wells  dug  by  the  patriarchs,  why 
four  in  number,  ii.  295. 

Wheat,  Pharaoh's  vision  of  the  ears 
of,  ii.  474. 

Wicked,  friendship  of  the,  remarks 
on,  iv.  272. 

Wicked  man,  flight  of  the,  i.  107  ; 
how  he  conceals  himself  from  God, 
108  ;  where,  114  ;  is  governed,  by  a 
master,  ii.  243  ;  his  imhappiness, 
271  ;  his  mode  of  life,  400  ;  mise- 
rable life  of  the,  iv.  256  ;  his  hopes 
unstable,  265  ;  unworthy  of  free- 
dom of  speech,  iii.  518  ;  cannot  be 
happy,  iv.  224. 

Wicked  men,  conduct  of'  ii.  11,  198; 
danger  of  association  with,  iv.  247. 

Wickedness,  likened  to  ground  ac- 
cursed, i.  273. 

Widow,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 
370, 

Widow  and  orphan,  the  peculiar  care 
of  the  just  magistrate,  iii.  398. 

Wife,  to  be  subject  to  her  husband, 
iv.  308. 

Wild  beasts,  breaking  in  of,  iii.  476. 

Wild  vine,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i. 
499. 

Window  of  the  ark,  what,  iv.  368. 

Wine,  unmixed,  its  symbolical  mean- 
ing, i.  453. 

Wine  and  strong  drink  forbidden  to 
Aaron  and  the  priesthood,  i.  479. 

Winter,  why  unknown  in  Egypt,  iii. 
25. 

Wisdom,  three  different  manners  by 
which  it  exists  among  men,  ii,  327. 

Wise  Man  made  perfect  by  In- 
struction, On  the,  ok  Life  of 
Abraham,  ii.  396. 

Wise  man,  the,  why  desirous  of  peace 
and  labour,  iv.  252 ;  more  difficult 
to  enslave  than  the  lion,  iii.  515  ; 
question  whether  there  is  really 
such  a  thing,  ii.  245. 

Wives,  choosing,  symbolical  meaning 
of,  i.  302. 

Wives  and  concubines,  ii.  162. 


Woman,  symbolical  meaning  of,  i 
120  ;  creation  of'  45,  85  ;  the  cauw 
of  the  fall  of  man,  45  ;  why  stylec 
a  building,  iv.  297  ;  said  to  be  onl; 
an  imperfect  male,  255. 

Women,  why  emj)loyed  in  the  prejia* 
ration  of  the  sacred  works  of  th€ 
tabernacle,  ii.  64 ;  law  respecting 
those  who  behave  immodestlv,  iii, 
345. 

Word,  the  divine,  iv.  392. 

World,    Treatise   on   the    Incori 

RUPTIBILITY  OP  THE,  iv.  21. 

World,  creation  of  the,  as  describe! 
by  Moses,  i.  2  ;  why  six  days  wer« 
occupied  therein,  3 ;  how  the  term 
"  six  days "  is  to  be  understood 
53 ;  likened  to  a  great  and  all-pro 
ductive  plant,  i.  417  j  varioui 
meanings  given  to  the  word,  ivJ 
22.  \ 

World,  creation  of  the,  remark  on,  iv<f 
269 ;    the    incorporeal,   styled    thi 
reason  of  God,  i.  6  ;  love  of  th 
not  reconcilable  with  the  love 
God,  iv.  244. 

Xanthians,  their  noble  resistance 

Brutus,  iii.  532. 
Xenophon,  his  description  of  an  en* 

tertainment,  iv.  13. 
Xerxes,  king  of  Pesia,  his  impiety, 

365.' 

Young  men  and  elders,  how  spoke 

of  by  Moses,  i.  502. 
Youth,  indolent,  unhappy  fate  of, 

275. 

Zabulon,  the  symbol  of  light,  ii.  3i 
Zeno,  fortitude  of,  iii.  529. 
Zillah,  meaning  of,  i.  313. 
Zilpah,  meaning  of,  ii.  163. 
Zipporah,  wife  of  Moses,  i.  185. 
Zoar,  figurative  meaning  of,  ii.  43C 
Zodiac,  the,  whence  its  name  deriF 

ed,  iii,  364  ;     the  sun  and  moon 

said  to  traverse  it,  364. 


HADDON,    BROTHERS,    AND   CO.,    PBJ.VrERS,   CASTLB   STREET,    K.NSBURy. 


CATALOGUE   OF 

BOHN'S   LIBRARIES. 


J^.B. — //  is  requested  that  all  orders  be  accompanied  by 
)ay7nent.  Books  are  sent  carriage  free  on  the  receipt  of  the 
"published  price  in  stamps  or  otherwise. 

The  Works  to  which  the  letters  *  TV.  6*.'  {denoting  New 
■ityle)  are  appended  are  kept  in  neat  cloth  bindings  of  various 
V lours,  as  well  as  in  the  regular  Library  style.  All  Orders 
\re  executed  in  the  New  binding,  unless  the  contrary  is  ex- 
pressly stated. 

Complete  Sets  or  Separate  Volumes  can  be  had  at  short 
lotice,  half-bound  in  calf  or  morocco. 


New  Volumes  of  Standard  Works  in  the  various  branches 

f  Literature  are  constantly  being  added  to  this  Series,  which 

$•  already  unsurpassed  in  respect  to  the  nwnber,  variety,  and 

heapness  of  the  Works  contained  in  it.     The  Publishers  have 

0  announce  the  following  Volumes  as  recently  issued  or  now 

n  preparation  : — 

Jeneca's   Minor   Works.     Translated  by  Aubrey  Stewart,  M.A. 

[/w  the  press. 

size's  Life  of  Shakespeare.     Translated  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz. 

\See  p.  4. 

Dunlop's  History  of  Fiction.  With  Introduction  and  Supple- 
ment, bringing  the  Work  down  to  recent  times.  By  Henry 
Wilson.  \_I7nmediately . 

jetters  and  Works  of  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu. 

\_Ready,  see  p.  7. 

leaton's  Concise  History  of  Painting.  \In  the  press. 

liucian's  Dialogues  of  the  Gods,  the  Sea  Gods,  and 

the  Dead. 

Jtrickland's  Lives  of  the  Tudor  and  Stuart  Princesses. 

\_Ready^  see  p.  9. 

vlme.  de  Stael's  Corinne.  \_Imniediately. 

"osephus's  Works.     Edited  by  the  Rev.  A.  K.  Shilleto. 

[//^  the  press. 

ohnson's  Lives  of  the  Poets.  [In  the  press. 

>chopenhauer's  The  Fourfold  Root  and  The  Will  in 

Nature.  [/«  the  press. 


li 


^une^  I 


BOHN'S    LIBRARIES. 


STANDARD    LIBRARY. 

17  Vols,  at  3^.  (>d.  each,  excepting  those  marked  otherwise.     (56/.  is.  per  set.) 


JDISON'S  Works.  Notes  of  Bishop 
^urd.  Short  Memoir,  Portrait,  and  8 
Plates  of  Medals.     6  vols.     N.  S. 

This  is  the  most  complete  edition  of 
Addison's  Works  issued. 

LFIERI'S  Tragedies.  In  English 
/erse.  With  Notes,  Arguments,  and  In- 
roduction,  by  E.  A.  Bowring,  C.B.  2  vols. 
V.S. 

VIERICAN  POETRY. —  J^^  Poetry 
'/America. 

ICON'S    Moral    and    Historical 

IVorks,  including  Essays,  Apophthegms, 
kVisdom  of  the  Ancients,  New  Atlantis, 
Henry  VII.,  Henry  VIII.,  Elizabeth, 
Henry  Prince  of  Wales,  History  of  Great 
Ikitam,  Julius  Caesar,  and  Augustus  Caesar. 
kVith  Critical  and  Biographical  Introduc- 
ion  and  Notes  by  J.  Devey,  M.A.  Por- 
[rait.    N.  S. 

—  See  also  Philosophical  Library. 

k.LLADS  AND  SONGS  of  the  Pea- 

antry  of  England,  from  Oral  Recitation, 
)rivate  MSS.,  Broadsides,  &c.  Edit,  by 
i.  Bell.    N.  S. 

:aumont     and     fletcher. 

jielections.  With  Notes  and  Introduction 
y  Leigh  Hunt. 

'.CKMANN  (J.)  History  of  Inven- 

ions,     Discoveries,    and    Origins.     With 
I'ortraits  of  Beckmann  and  James  Watt, 
vols.    N.  S. 

|LL  (Robert).— .y^*  Ballads,  Chaucer ^ 
Ireen. 

'SWELL'S  Life  of  Johnson,  with 
he  TOUR  in  the  HEBRIDES  and 
OHNSONIANA.  New  Edition,  with 
^fotes  and  Appendices,  by  the  Rev.  A. 
japier,  M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cara- 
ridge.  Vicar  of  Holkham,  Editor  of  the 
.^mbridge  Edition  of  the  '  Theological 
'orkslof  Barrow.'  With  Frontispiece  to 
ich  vol.    6  vols.    N.S, 

1  EMER'S      (Frederika)      Works. 

rans.  byM.  Howitt.  Portrait.  4  vols.  N.S. 


BRINK  (B.  T.)  Early  English  Litera- 
ture (to  WicliO-  By  Bernhard  Ten  Brink. 
Trans,  by  Prof.  H.  M.  Kennedy.    N.  S. 

BRITISH  POETS,  from  Milton  to  Kirke 
White.  Cabinet  Edition.  With  Frontis- 
piece.    4  vols.    N.  S. 

BROWNE'S   (Sir    Thomas)   Wo/ks. 

Edit,  by  S.  Wilkin,  with  Dr.  Johnson's 
Life  of  Browne.     Portrait.     3  vol?. 

BURKE'S  Works.    6  vols.    N.  S. 

Speeches  on  the  Impeachment 

of  Warren  Hastings  ;  and  Letters.  2  vols. 
N.S. 

— —  Life.     By  J.  Prior.    Portrait.     N.  S. 

BURNS  (Robert).  Life  of.  By  J.  G. 
Lockhart,  D.C.L.  A  new  and  enlarged 
edition.  With  Notes  and  Appendices  by 
W.  S.  Douglas.    Portrait.    N.  S. 

BUTLER'S  (Bp.)  Analogy  of  Reli- 
gion; Natural  and  Revealed,  to  the  Con- 
stitution and  Course  of  Nature  ;  with  Two 
Dissertations  on  Identity  and  Virtue,  and 
Fifteen  Sermons.  With  Introductions, 
Notes,  and  Memoir.    Portrait.     N.  S. 

CAMOEN'S  Lusiad,  or  the  Discovery 
of  India.  An  Epic  Poem.  Trans,  from 
the  Portuguese,  with  Dissertation,  His- 
torical Sketch,  and  Life,  by  W.  J.  Mickle. 
5th  edition.    N.  S. 

CARAFAS     (The)      of     Maddaloni. 

Naples  under  Spanish  Dominion.  Trans, 
by  Alfred  de  Reumont.  Portrait  of  Mas- 
sanlello. 

CARREL.    The  Counter-Revolution 

in  England  for  the  Re-establishment  of 
Popery  under  Charles  II.  and  James  II., 
by  Armand  Carrel  ;  with  Fox's  History  of 
James  II.  and  Lord  Lonsdale's  Memoir  of 
James  II.     Portrait  of  Carrel. 

CARRUTHERS.  —  vS"f<r  Po/c.  in  Illus- 
trated Library. 


BONN'S  LIBRARIES. 


GARY'S  Dante.  The  Vision  of  Hell, 
Purgatory,  and  Paiadise.  Trans,  by  Rev. 
H.  F.  Cary,  M.A.  With  Life,  Chronolo- 
gical  View  of  his  Age,  Notes,  and  Index 
of  Proper  Names.     Portrait.     A'^.  .S". 

This  is  the  authentic  edition,  containing 
Mr.  Cary's  last  corrections,  with  additional 
notes. 

BELLINI  (Benvenuto).    Memoirs  of, 

by  himself.  With  Notes  of  G.  P.  Carpani, 
Trans,  by  T.  Roscoe.     Portrait.     N.  S. 

JERVANTES'  Galatea.  A  Pastoral 
Romance.    Trans,  by  G.  W.  J.  Gyll.    A^.  S. 

—  Exemplary  Novels.  Trans,  by 
W.  K.  Kelly.     A^.  S. 

—  Don    Quixote   de    la    Manoha. 

Motteux's  Translation  revised.  With  Lock- 
hart's  Life  and  Notes.     2  vols.    A''.  S. 

;H AUGER'S  Poetical  Works.  With 
Poems  formerly  attributed  to  him.  With  a 
Memoir,  Introduction,  Notes,  and  a  Glos- 
sary, by  R.  Bell.  Improved  edition,  with 
Preliminary  Essay  by  Rev.  W.  W.  Skeat, 
M.A.     Portrait.     4  vols.    N.  S. 

CLASSIC  TALES,  containing  Rasselas, 
Vicar  of  Wakefield,  Gulliver's  Travels,  and 
The  Sentimental  Journey.     A^.  S. 

!OLERIDGES  (S.  T.)  Friend.  A  Series 
of  Essays  on  Morals,  Politics,  and  Reli- 
gion.    Portrait.     A''.  S. 

—  Aids  to  Reflection.    Confessions 

of  an  Inquiring  Spirit ;  and  Essays  on 
Faith  and  the  Common  Prayer-book.  New 
Edition,  revised.     A^.  S. 

—  Table-Talk   and   Omniana.     By 

T.  Ashe,  B.A.     A^.^. 

—  Lectures    on    Shakspere     and 

other  Poets.    Edit,  by  T.  Ashe,  B.A.  N.S. 
Containing  the  lectures  taken  down  in 
1811-12  by  J.   P.    Collier,  and   those   de- 
livered at  Bristol  in  1813. 

—  Biographia  Literarla;  or,  Bio- 
graphical Sketches  of  my  Literary  Life 
and  Opinions ;  with  Two  Lay  Sermons. 
N.S. 

—  Miscellanies,    Esthetic    and 

Literary  ;  to  which  is  added.  The  Theory 
OF  Life  Collected  and  arranged  by 
T.  Ashe,  B.A.     N.S. 

OMMINES.— ^^/r  Philip. 

ONDE'S  History  of  the  Dominion 

of  the  Arabs  in  Spain.  Trans,  by  Mrs. 
Foster.  Portrait  of  Abderahmen  bea 
Moavia.     3  vols. 

DWPER'S  CompleteWorks,  Poems, 

Correspondence,  and  Translations.  Edit, 
with  Memoir  by  R.  Southey.  45  En- 
gravings.    8  vols. 


COXE'9  Memoirs   of  the  Duke 

Marlborough.  With  his  original  Corr^ 
spondence,  from  family  records  at  Bleij 
heim.  Revised  edition.  Portraits.  3  vol 
■*»*  An  Atlas  of  the  plans  of  Marl 
borough's  campaigns,  4to.  105.  dd. 

History  of  the  House  of  Austrift 

From  the  Foundation  of  the  Monarchy  n 
Rhodolph  of  Hapsburgh  to  the  Death  ^ 
Leopold  II.,  1218-1792.  By  Archdn.  Cox? 
With  Continuation  from  the  Accession  ci 
Francis  I.  to  the  Revolution  of 
4  Portraits.     4  vols. 

CUNNINGHAM'S  Lives  of  the  mog 

Eminent   British   Painters.      With  Note 

and  16  fresh  Lives  by  Mrs.  Heaton.  3  vou 

A^.  S. 

DEFOE'S  Novels  and  Mlscellaneon 

Works.  With  Prefaces  and  Notes,  iil 
eluding  those  attributed  to  Sir  W.  Scot  l| 
Portrait.     7  vols.     A^.  6".  I 

DE  LOLME'S  Constitution  of  En|  « 

land,  in  which  it  is  compared  both  with  tr 
Republican  form  of  Government  and  tl 
other  Monarchies  of  Europe.  Edit.,  wil 
Life  and  Notes,  by  J.  Macgregor,  M.P. 

DUNLOP'S  History  of  Fiction.    Wii 

Introduction  and  Supplement  adapting ti 
work  to  present  requirements.  By  Hem 
Wilson.     3  vols.  [/«  the prei 

ELZE'S  Life  of  Shakespeare.    Tran 

lated  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz.      [/«  the prei 

EMERSON'S  Works.  3  vols.  Mc 
complete  edition  published.     A'^.  ^. 

Vol.  I.— Essays,  Lectures,  and  Poems. 

Vol.  II. — English  Traits,  Nature,  ai, 
Conduct  of  Life. 

Vol.  III. — Society  and  Solitude — Lett* 
and  Social  Aims — Miscellaneous  Pap« 
(hitherto  uncollected) — May-Day,  &c. 


tt 


FOSTER'S    (John)    Life  and  Corrt 

spondence.     Edit,  by  J.  E.  Ryland.     P( 
trait.     2  vols.     A^.  6". 

Lectures  at  Broadmead  Chape 

Edit,  by  J.  E.  Ryland.     2  vols.     A^.  S. 

Critical   Essays  contributedji 

the  '  Eclectic   Review.'      Edit,   by 
Ryland.     2  vols.     A'^.  S. 

Essays :  On  Decision  of  Chi 

ter  ;  on  a  Man's  writing  Memoirs  of  ] 
self;   on   the    epithet   Romantic;    on" 
aversion  of  Men  of  Taste  to  Evangelici  ||jjj 
Religion.     A''.  6". 

Essays  on  the  Evils  of  Populi 

Ignorance,  and  a  Discourse  on  the  Pi 
gation  of  Christianity  in  India.     A''. 

Essay  on  the  Improvemeni 

Time,   with  Notes  of  Sermons  and 
Pieces.     N.  S. 

Fosteriana  :  selected  from  peril 

papers,  edit,  by  H.  G.  Bohn.     N.  S, 


STANDARD  LIBRARY. 


)X  (Rt.  Hon.  C.  Z.)—See  Carrel. 

BBON'S  Decline  and  Fall  of  the 

Roman  Empire.  Complete  and  unabridged, 
vith  variorum  Notes  ;  including  those  of 
[fuizot,  Wenck,  Niebuhr,  Hugo,  Neander, 
ind  others.     7  vols.     2  Maps  and  Portrait. 

JETHE'S  Works.  Trans,  into  English 
jy  E.  A.  Bowring,  C.B.,  Anna  Swanwick, 
Sir  Walter  Scott,  &c.  &c.     13  vols.     N.  S, 

Vols.  I.  and  II. — Autobiography  and  An- 
lals.     Portrait. 

Vol.  Ill,— Faust.     Complete. 

Vol.  IV. — Novels  and  Tales  :  containing 
Elective  Affinities,  Sorrows  of  Werther, 
rhe  German  Emigrants,  The  Good  Wo- 
nen,  and  a  Nouvelette. 

Vol.  V. — Wilhelm  Meister's  Apprentice- 
;hip. 

Vol.  VI. — Conversations  v/ith  Eckerman 
ind  Soret. 

Vol.  VII. — Poems  and  Ballads  in  the  ori- 
ginal Metres,  including  Hermann  and 
Dorothea. 

Vol.  VIII.— Gotz  von  Berlichingen,  Tor- 
luato  Tasso,  Egmont,  Iphigenia,  Clavigo, 
W^ayward  Lover,  and  Fellow  Culprits. 

Vol.  IX. —  Wilhelm  Meister's  Travels. 
Complete  Edition. 

Vol.  X.  —  Tour  in  Italy.  Two  Parts. 
\nd  Second  Residence  in  Rome. 

Vol.  XI. — Miscellaneous  Travels,  Letters 
rom  Switzerland,  Campaign  in  France, 
piege  of  Mainz,  and  Rhine  Tour. 

Vol.  XII. — liarly  and  Miscellaneous 
Letters,  including  Letters  to  his  Mother, 
|vith  Biography  and  Notes. 

Vol .XIII . — Correspondence  with  Zelter. 

-  Correspondence  with   Schiller. 

vols. — See  Schiller, 

)LDSMITH'S  Works.    5  vols.    N.S. 

Vol.  I. — Life, Vicar  of  Wakefield,  Essays, 
Jid  Letters. 

Vol.  II. — Poems,  Plays,  Bee,  Cock  Lane 
Jhost. 

Vol.  III.— The  Citizen  of  the  World, 
'olite  Learning  in  Europe. 

Vol.  IV. — Biographies,  Criticisms,  Later 
Issays. 

Vol.  V.  —  Prefaces,  Natural  History, 
■etters,  Goody  Two-Shoes,  Index. 

lEENE,  MARLOW,  and   BEN 

ONSON  (Poems  oQ.  With  Notes  and 
[emoirs  by  R.  Bell.     A'.  S. 

EGORY'S    (Dr.)    The    Evidences, 

oclrines,  and  Duties  of  the  Christian  Re- 
gion. 

IMM'S  Household  Tales.  With  the 
riginal  Notes.  Trans,  by  Mrs.  A.  Hunt, 
itroduction  by  Andrew  Lang,  M.A.  2 
jIs.     A^  .S". 


QUIZOT'S  History  of  Representative 

Government  in  Europe.     Trans,  by  A.  R. 

Scoble. 

English  Revolution  of  1640.  From 

the  Accession  of  Charles  I.  to  his  Death. 
Trans,  by  W.  Hazlitt.     Portrait, 

History  of  Civilisation.    From  the 

Roman  Empire  to  the  French  Revolution. 
Trans,  by  \V.  Hazlitt.     Portraits.     3  vols. 

HALL'S   (Rev.  Robert)   W^orks  and 

Remains.  Memoir  by  Dr.  Gregory  and 
Essay  by  J.  Foster.     Portrait. 

HAUFF'S  Tales.  The  Caravan  — The 
Sheikh  of  Alexandria  —  The  Inn  in  the 
Spessart.     Translated  by  Prof.  S.  Mendel. 

N.  S. 

HAWTHORNE'S  Tales.    3  vols.    N.  S. 

Vol.  I. — Twice-told  Tales,  and  the  Snow 
Image. 

Vol.  II. — Scarlet  Letter,  and  the  House 
with  Seven  Gables. 

Vol.  III. — Transformation,  and  Blithe- 
dale  Romance. 

HAZLITT'S  (W.)  Works.   7  vols.  A^.. 9. 

Table-Talk. 

The  Literature    of  the   Age    of 

Elizabeth  and  Characters  of  Shakespeare's 
Plays.     N.  S. 

English  Poets  and  English  Comic 

Writers.     N.  S. 

The  Plain  Speaker.    Opinions  on 

Books,  Men,  and  Things.    N.  S. 

Round     Table.      Conversations  _  of 

James  Northcote,  R.A.  ;  Characteristics. 
N.S. 

Sketches  and  Essays,  and  Winter- 
slow.     ^V.  6'. 

Spirit    of   the    Age ;    or.    Contem- 
porary   Portraits.      To   which   are  added 
Free  Thoughts  on  Public  Aftairs,  and  a 
Letter  to  William  Gifford.     New  Edition 
by  W.  Carew  Hazlitt.     AT.  S. 

HEINE'S  Poems.  'Translated  in  the 
original  Metres,  with  Life  by  E.  A.  Bow- 
ring,  C.B.     N.  S. 

Travel-Pictures.    The  Tour  in  the 

Harz,  Norderney,  and  Book  of  Ideas,  to- 
gether with  the  Romantic  School.  Trans, 
by  F.  Storr.  With  Maps  and  Appendices. 
A'.  6-. 

HOFFMANN'S  Works.  The  Serapion 
Brethren.  Vol.  I.  Trans,  by  Lt.-Col. 
Ewiiig.     A'.  -S".  [I'^ol.  II.  in  the  press. 


BOHR'S  LIBRARIES. 


1 


UGO'S  (Victor)  Dramatic  Works;    ' 

Hernani — Ruy  Bias — TheKing's  Diversion. 
IVanslated  by  Mrs.  Newton  Crosland  and    . 
V.  L.  Slous.    N.  S. 

—  Poems,  chiefly  Lyrical.     Collected  by    ' 
H.  L.  Williams.     A\^.  ! 

This  volume  contains  contributions  from 
F.  S.  Mahoney,  G.  W.  M.  Reynolds, 
Andrew  Lang,  Edwin  Arnold,  Mrs.  Newton 
orosland,  Miss  Fanny  Kemble,  Bishop 
(Alexander,  Prof.  Dowden,  &c. 

UNGAKY:   its  History  and  Revo- 

ution,  with  Memoir  of  Kossuth.    Portrait. 

UTCHINSON    (Colonel).    Memoirs 

of.  By  his  Widow,  with  her  Autobio- 
graphy, and  the  Siege  of  Lathom  House. 
Portrait.     N.  S. 

IVTNG'S    (Washington)    Complete 

Works.     15  vols.     N.  S. 

—  Life  and  Letters.  By  his  Nephew, 
Pierre  E.  Irving.  With  Index  and  a 
Portrait.     2  vols.     N.  S. 

VMES'S  (G.  P.  R.)  Life  of  Richard 

Coeur  de  Lion.  Portraits  of  Richard  and 
Philip  Augustus.     2  vols. 

—  Louis  XIV.    Portraits.     2  vols. 

A.MESON    (Mrs.)     Shakespeare's 

Heroines.    Characteristics  of  Women.    By    1 
Mrs.  Jameson.     N.  S. 

BAN  PAUL.— 6-^g  Richter.  j 

DNSON  (Ben).  Yq^xda  of,— See  Greene.    \ 

CJNIUS'S  Letters.  With  Woodfall's 
Notes.  An  Essay  on  the  Authorship.  Fac- 
similes of  Handwriting.     2  vols.     N.  S. 

A  FONTAINE'S  Fables.  In  English 
Verse,  with  Essay  on  the  Fabulists.  By 
Elizur  Wright.    N.  S. 

AMARTINE'S    The    Girondists,  or 

Personal  Memoirs  of  the  Patriots  of  the 
French  Revolution.  Trans,  by  H.  T. 
Ryde.  Portraits  of  Robespierre,  Madame 
Roland,  and  Charlotte  Corday.     3  vols. 

—  The    Restoration   of  Monarchy 

in   France  (a  Sequel   to  The   Girondists). 

5  Portraits.     4  vols. 

—  The  French  Revolution  of  1848. 

6  Portraits. 

AMB'S  (Charles)  Elia  and  Eliana. 

Complete  Edition.     Portrait.    N.  S. 

—  Specimens  of  English  Dramatic 

Poets  of  the  time  of  Elizabeth.  Notes, 
with  the  Extracts  from  the  Garrick  Plays. 
N.S. 

—  Talfourd's   Letters  of  Charles 

Lamb.  New  Edition,  by  W.  Carew 
Hazlitt.     2  vols.    N.  S. 


LANZI'S    History   of   Painting   in^ 

Italy,  from  the  Period  of  the  Revival  of 
the  Fine  Arts  to  the  End  of  the  i8tli 
Century.  With  Memoir  of  the  Author, 
Portraits  of  Raffaelle,  Titian,  and  Cor- 
reggio,  after  the  Artists  themselves.  Trans* 
by  T.  Roscoe.     3  vols. 

LAPPENBERG'S  England  under  the 

Anglo-Saxon  Kings.  Trans,  by  B.Thorpe, 
F.S.A.     2  vols.     N.S. 

LESSING'S  Dramatic  Works.    Com- 

plete.  By  E.  Bell,  M.A.  With  Memoir' 
by  H.  Zimmern.     Portrait.     2  vols.   N.  S. 

Laokoon,  Dramatic  Notes,  and  L 

Representation  of  Death  by  the  Ancients.  I 
Frontispiece.     N.  S.  j 

LOCKE'S  Philosophical  Works,  con-  . 
taining  Human  Understanding,  with  Bishop 
of  Worcester,  Malebranche's  Opinions,  Na- 
tural Philosophy,  Reading  and  Study. 
With  Preliminary  Discourse,  Analysis,  and 
Notes,  by  J.  A.  St.  John.  Portrait.  2  vok. 
N.  S. 

Life  and  Letters,  with  Extracts  fronj-  - 

his  Common-place  Books.     By  Lord  King  ! 

LOCKHART  (J.  G.)-^-^^  Bums. 

LONSDALE  (Lord).— .J^^  Carre!. 

LUTHER'S  Table-Talk.  Trans,  by  W 
Hazlitt.  With  Life  by  A.  Chalmers,  am 
Luther's  Catechism.  Portrait  afte 
Cranach.     N,  S. 

Autobiography. — See  MicheUt. 

MACHIAVELLI'S    History    of  Flo 

rence,  The  Prinxe,  Savonarola,  Histories 
Tracts,  and  Memoir.     Portrait.     N.  S. 

MARLOWE.    Poems  of.— See  Greem. 

MARTINEA.U'S     (Harriet)    Histor; 

of  England  (including  History  of  the  Peacf 
from  1800-1846.     5  vols.    N.S. 

MENZEL'S   History   of  Germanj 

from  the  Earliest  Period  to  the  Crimea 
War.     3  Portraits.     3  vols. 

MICHELET'S 

Luther.      Trans. 
Notes.     N.  S. 

The  French   Revolution 

Flight  of  the  King  in  1791.     N.  S. 

MIGNET'S  The  French  Revolutloi' 

from  1789  to  1814.     Portrait  of  Napoleo 

N.S. 

MILTON'S  Prose  Works.  With  Pr 
face,  Preliminary  Remarks  by  J.  A.  S 
John,  and  Index.     5  vols. 

MITFORD'S  (Miss)  Our  VUlftg 
Sketches  of  Rural  Character  and  Scener 
2  Engravings.     2  vols.     A^.  S. 


Autobiography  c 
by  W.   Hazlitt.     Wit 


to  tt 


i 


STANDARD  LIBRARY. 


MOLIERE'S    Dramatic    "Works.     Ii 

English  Prose,  by  C.  H.  Wall.  With  a 
Life  and  a  Portrait.     3  vols.     N.  S. 

'  It  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  we  have 
here  probably  as  good  a  translation  of 
Moliere  as  can  be   given.' — Academy. 

MONTAGU.    Letters  and  'Works  of 

Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montagu.  Lord 
Wharncliffe's  Third  Edition.  Edited  by 
W.  Moy  Thomas.  With  steel  plates.  2 
vols.     e^s.  each.     N.  S. 

VIONTESQUIEU'S    Spirit   of  Laws. 

Revised  Edition,  with  D'Alembert's  Analy- 
sis, Notes,  and  Memoir.     2  vols.     -A^.  S. 

WIANDER    (Dr.  A.)    History  of  the 

Christian  Religion  and  Church.  Trans,  by 
J.  Torrey.     With  Short  Memoir.     10  vols. 

—  Life  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  its  His- 
torical Connexion  and  Development.   N.  S. 

—  The    Planting  and  Training  of 

the  Christian  Church  by  the  Apostles. 
With  the  Antignosticus,  or  Spirit  of  Ter- 
tullian.     Trans,  by  J.  E.  Ryland.     2  vols. 

—  Lectures     on     the    History    of 

Christian  Dogmas.  Trans,  by  J.  E.  Ry- 
land.    2  vols. 

—  Memorials  of  Christian  Life  in 

the  Early  and  Middle  Ages ;  including 
Light  in  Dark  Places.  Trans,  by  J.  E. 
Ryland. 

)CKLEY  (S.)  History  of  the  Sara- 
cens and  their  Conquests  in  Syria,  Persia, 
and  Egypt.  Comprising  the  Lives  of 
Mohammed  and  his  Successors  to  the 
Death  of  Abdalmelik,  the  Eleventh  Caliph. 
By  Simon  Ockley,  B.D.,  Prof,  of  Arabic 
in  Univ.  of  Cambridge.  Portrait  of  Mo- 
hammed. 

'ERCY'S  Reliques  of  Ancient  Eng- 
lish Poetry,  consisting  of  Ballads,  Songs, 
and  other  Pieces  of  our  earlier  Poets,  with 
some  few  of  later  date.  With  Essay  on 
Ancient  Minstrels,  and  Glossary.  2  vols. 
N.S. 

'HILIP   DE  COMMINES.    Memoirs 

of.  Containing  the  Histories  of  Louis  XI. 
and  Charles  VIII.,  and  Charles  the  Bold, 
Duke  of  Burgundy.  With  the  History  of 
Louis  XL,  by  J.  de  Troyes.  With  a  Life 
and  Notes  by  A.  R.  Scoble.  Portraits. 
2  vols. 

»LUTARCH'S  LIVES.  Newly  Trans- 
lated, with  Notes  and  Life,  by  A 
Stewart,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  Trinity 
College,  Cambridge,  and  G.  Long,  M.A. 
4  vols.     A^.  JT. 

*OETRY  OF  AMERICA.    Selections 

from  One  Hundred  Poets,  from  1776  to 
i876._  With  Introductory  Review,  and 
Specimens  of  Negro  Melody,  by  W.  J. 
Lmton.     Portrait  of  W.  Whitman.     N.  S. 


RANEE  (L.)    History  of  the  Popes, 

their  Church  and  State,  and  their  Conflicts 
with  Protestantism  in  the  16th  and  17th 
Centuries.  Trans,  by  E.  Foster.  Portraits 
of  Julius  II.  (after  Raphael),  Innocent  X. 
(after  Velasquez),  and  Clement  VII.  (after 
Titian).     3  vols.     N.  S. 

History  of  Servia.    Trans,  by  Mrs. 

Kerr.  To  which  is  added,  The  Slave  Pro- 
vinces of  Turkey,  by  Cyprien  Robert.  N.  S. 

History  of  the  Latin  and  Teu- 

tonic  Nations.  1494-1514.  Trans,  by 
P.  A.  Ashworth,  translator  of  Dr.  Gneist's 
*  History  of  the  English  Constitution.'  N.S. 

REUMONT  (Alfred  de).— 6"<'_'  Lara/as. 

REYNOLDS' (Sir  J.)  Literary  Works. 

With  Memoir  and  Remarks  by  H.  W. 
Beechy.     2  vols.     //.  S. 

RICHTER   (Jean    Paul).     Levana, 

a  Treatise  on  Education  ;  together  with  the 
Autobiography,  and  a  short  Memoir.    N.S, 

Flower,  Fruit,  and  Thorn  Pieces, 

or  the  Wedded  Life,  Death,  and  Marriage 
of  Siebenkaes.  Translated  by  Alex.  Ewing. 
N.  S. 

The  only  complete  English  translation. 

ROSCOE'S  (W.)  Life  of  Leo  X.,  with 
Notes,  Historical  Documents,  and  Disser- 
tation on  Lucretia  Borgia.  3  Portraits. 
2  vols. 

Lorenzo    de'  Medici,  called    'The 

Magnificent,'  with  Copyright  Notes, 
Poems,  Letters,  &c.  With  Memoir  of 
Roscoe  and  Portrait  of  Lorenzo. 

RUSSIA,     History    of,    from    the 

earliest  Period  to  the  Crimean  War.  By 
W.  K.  Kelly.     3  Portraits.     2  vols. 

SCHILLER'S  Works.    6  vols.    N.  S. 

Vol.  I.— Thirty  Years'  War— Revolt  in 
the  Netherlands.  Rev  A.  J.  W.  Morrison, 
M.A.     Portrait. 

Vol.  II. — Revolt  in  the  Netherlands, c^w- 
pletcd — Wallenstein.  By  J.  Churchill  and 
S.  T.  Coleridge. — William  Tell.  Sir  Theo- 
dore Martin.     Engraving  (after  Vandyck). 

Vol.  III.— Don  Carlos.  R.  D.  Boylan 
— Mary  Stuart.  Mellish  —  Maid  of  Or- 
leans. Anna  Swanwick — Bride  of  Mes- 
sina. A.  Lodge,  M.A.  Together  with  the 
Use  of  the  Chorus  in  Tragedy  (a  short 
Essay).     Engravings. 

These  Dramas  are  all  translated  in  metre. 

Vol.  IV. — Robbers — Fiesco — Love  and 
Intrigue — Demetrius — Ghost  Seer — Sport 
of  Divinity. 

The  Dramas  in  this  volume  are  in  prose. 

Vol.  v.— Poems.     E.  A.  Bowring,  C.B. 

Vol.  VI. — Essays,  vEsthetical  and  Philo- 
sophical, including  the  Dissertation  on  the 
Connexion  between  the  Animal  and  Spiri- 
tual in  Man. 


BOHN'S  LIBRARIES. 


IILLER   and   GOETHE.     Corre- 

ondence  between,  from  a.d.  1794-1805. 
ith  Short  Notes  by  L.  Dora  Schmitz. 
vols.     N.  S. 

ILEGEL'S   (r.)    Lectures   on  the 

lilosophy  of  Life  and  the  Philosophy  of 
inguage.     By  A.  J.  W.  Morrison. 

The  History  of  Literature,  Ancient 
id  Modern. 

The  Philosophy  of  History.  With 

Memoir  and  Portrait. 

•  Modern  History,  with  the  Lectures 
ititled  Ca;sar  and  Alexander,  and  The 
eginning  of  our  History.  By  L.  Purcel 
id  R.  H.  Whitelock. 

i£sthetic    and    Miscellaneous 

'^orks,  containing  Letters  on  Christian 
rt,  Essay  on  Gothic  Architecture,  Re- 
arks  on  the  Romance  Poetry  of  the  Mid- 
e  Ages,  on  Shakspeare,  the  Limits  of  the 
eautiful,  and  on  the  Language  and  Wis- 
jm  of  the  Indians.     By  E.  J.  Millington. 

EILEGEL   (A.  W.)    Dramatic  Art 

id  Literature.  By  J.  Black.  With  Me- 
oir  by  A.  J.  W.  Morrison.     Portrait. 

HUMANN  (Robert),  His  Life  and 

i^orks.  By  A.  Reissmann.  Trans,  by 
..  L.  Alger.     N.  S. 

AKESPEARE'S    Dramatic   Art. 

he  History  and  Character  of  Shakspeare's 
lays.  By  Dr.  H.  Ulrici.  Trans,  by  L. 
»ora  Schmitz.     2  vols.     N.  S. 

ERIDAN'S  Dramatic  Works.  With 
lemoir.    Portrait  (after  Reynolds).    N.  S. 

EAT  (Rev.  W.  yV,)—See  Chaucer. 

SMONDI'S  History  of  the  Litera- 

ire  of  the  vSouth  of  Europe.  With  Notes 
nd  Memoir  by  T.  Roscoe.  Portraits  of 
ismondi  and  Dante.  2  vols. 
The  specimens  of  early  French,  Italian, 
panish,  and  Portugese  Poetry,  in  English 
'erse,  by  Gary  and  otiiers. 

[ITH'S    (Adam)    The    Wealth    of 

■lations.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  and 
'auses  of.  Reprinted  from  the  Sixth 
edition.  With  an  Introduction  by  Ernest 
?eIforl  Bax.     2  vols..     A'.  .S". 


SMITH'S  (Adam)  Theory  of  Moral 

Sentiments  ;  with  Essay  on  the  First  For- 
mation of  Languages,  and  Critical  Memoir 
by  Dugald  Stewart. 

SMYTH'S   (Professor)   Lectures    on 

Modern  History  ;  from  the  Irruption  of  the  I 
Northern  Nations  to  the  close  of  the  Ameri- 
can Revolution.     2  vols. 

— ;-  Lectures  on  the  French  Revolu- 
tion.    With  Index.     2  vols. 

SOUTHEY.-6V«r  CowJ>er,  Wesley,  aftd 
{I lliist*-ated  Library)  Nelso7i. 

STURM'S    Morning    Communinni 

with  God,  or  Devotional  Meditations  for 
Every  Day.  Trans,  by  W.  Johnstone,  M.A. 

SULLY.    Memoirs  of  the  Duke  of, 

Prime  Minister  tp  Henry  the  Great.    With  ■ 
Notes  and  Historical  Introduction.    4  Por- 
traits.   4  vols. 

TAYLOR'S    (Bishop    Jeremy)    Holy 

Living  and  Dying,  with  Prayers,  contain- 
ing the  Whole  Duty  of  a  Christian  and  the 
parts  of  Devotion  fitted  to  all  Occasions. 
Portrait.     N.  S. 

THIERRY'S  Conquest  of  England  by 

the  Normans  ;  its  Causes,  and  its  Conse- 
quences in  England  and  the  Continent. 
By  W.  Hazlitt.  With  short  Memoir.  2  Por- 
traits.     2  vols.    N.  S. 

TROYE'S   (Jean 

Contniines. 

ULRICI  (Dr.)— ^tr  Shakespeare. 

V  AS  ARI.  Lives  of  the  most  Eminent 

Painters,  Sculptors,  and  Architects.  By 
Mrs.  J.  Foster,  with  selected  Notes.  Por- 
trait. 6  vols..  Vol.  VI.  being  an  additional 
Volume  of  Notes  by  J.  P.  Richter.     A'.  .S". 

WERNER'S   Templars   in    Cyprus. 

Trans,  by  E.  A.  M.  Lewis.     A'.  S. 

WESLEY,  the  Life  of.  and  the  Rise 

and  Progress  of  Methoaisrn.  By  Robert 
Southey.     Portrait.     55-.     N.  S. 

W^HEATLEY.  A  Rational  Illustra- 
tion of  the  Book  of  Common  Prayer,  being 
the  Substance  of  everything  Liturgical  in 
all  former  Ritualist  Commentators,  upon  tlft 
subject.     Frontispiece.     A'.  S.  ' 


de).  — .y^r^   Philip  de 


HISTORICAL  AND  PHILOSOPHICAL  LIBRARIES. 


HISTORICAL    LIBRARY. 

22  Volumes  at  ^s.  each.     {^l.  los.  per  set.) 


JVELYN'S  Diary  and  Correspond- 

dcnce,  with  the  Private  Correspondence  of 
Charles  I.  and  Sir  Edward  Nicholas,  and 
betw«en  Sir  Edward  Hyde  (Earl  of  Claren- 
don) and  Sir  Richard  Browne.  Edited  from 
the  Original  MSS.  by  W.  Bray,  F.A.S. 
4  vols.  N.  S.  45  Engravings  (after  Van- 
dyke, Lely,  Kneller,  and  Jamieson,  &c.). 

N.B. — This  edition  contains  130  letters 
from  Evelyn  and  his  wife,  contained  in  no 
other  edition. 

•EPYS'  Diary  and  Correspondence. 

With  Life  and  Notes,  by  Lord  Braybrooke. 
4  vols.  N.  S.  With  Appendix  containing 
additional  Letters,  an  Index,  and  31  En- 
gravings (after  Vandyke,  Sir  P.  Lely, 
Holbein,  Kneller,  &.C.). 


JESSE'S    Memoirs    of  the  Court  of 

England  under  the  Stuarts,  including  the 
Protectorate.  3  vols.  With  Index  and  42 
Portraits  (after  Vandyke,  Lely,  &c.). 

Memoirs  of  the  Pretenders  and 

their  Adherents.    7  Portraits. 

NU GENT'S  (Lord)  Memorials  of 
Hampden,  his  Party  and  Times.  With 
Memoir.  12  Portraits  (after  Vandyke 
and  others).     N.  S. 

STRICKLAND'S  (Agnes)  Lives  of  the 
Queens  of  England  from  the  Norman 
Conquest.  From  authentic  Documents, 
public  and  private.  6  Portraits.  6  vols. 
N.S. 

Life   of  Mary  Queen    of  Scots. 

2  Portraits.     2  vols.     jV.  S. 

Lives  of  the  Tudor  and  Stuart 

Princesses.     With  2  Portraits.      -V.  6". 


PHILOSOPHICAL    LIBRARY. 

16  Vo/s.  at  5^.  each,  excepting  those  marked  other-wise.     (3/.  16^5.  per  set^ 


iACON'S  Novum  Organum  and  Ad- 
vancement of  Learning.  With  Notes  by 
J.  Devey,  M.A. 

lAX.     A  Handbook  of  the   History 

of  Philosophy,  for  the  use  of  Students. 
By  i:.  Belfort  Bax,  Editor  of  Kant's 
'  Prolegomena.'  ^s.  N.  S. 
OMTE'S  Philosophy  of  the  Sciences. 
An  Exposition  of  the  Principles  of  the 
Coitrs  tic  F  kilo  Sophie  Positive.  By  G.  H. 
Lewes,  Author  of  '  The  Life  of  Goethe.' 

•RAPER  (Dr.  J.  W.)    A  History  of 

the  Intellectual  Development  of  Europe. 
2  vols.     ^V.  S. 

[EGEL'S  Philosophy  of  History.    By 

j.  Sibree,  M.A. 

:ant'S    Critique    of  Pure  Reason. 

By  J.  M.  D.  Meiklejohn.     N.  S. 
—  Prolegomena  and  Metaphysical 

Foundations  of  Natural  Science,  with  Bio- 
graphy and  Memoir  by  E.  Belfort  Bax. 
Portrait.     N.  S. 


LOGIC,  or  the  Science  of  Inference. 

A  Popular  Manual.     By  J.  Devey. 

MILLER  (Professor).  History  Philo- 
sophically Illustrated,  from  the  Fall  of  the 
Roman  Empire  to  the  French  Revolution. 
With  Memoir.     4  vols.     3^.  dd.  each. 

SPINOZA'S  Chief  Works.  Trans,  with 
Introduction  by  R.  H.  M.  Elwe^j.  2  vols. 
N.S. 

Vol.    I. — Tractatus  Theologico-Politicui 
—  Political  Treatise. 

Vol.    II. —  Improvement   of  the    Under- 
standing—  Ethics  — Letters. 

TENNEMANN'S  Manual  of  the  His- 
tory of  Philosophy.  Trans,  by  Rev.  A. 
Johnson,  M..\. 


BOHN'S  LIBRARIES. 


THEOLOGICAL    LIBRARY. 

Vols,  at  5 J.  each^  excepting  those  marked  otherwise.     (3/.  13^.  dd.  per  set.) 


EK.     Introduction   to    the   Old 

tament.  By  Friedrich  Bleek.  Trans. 
ler  the  supervision  of  Rev.  E.  Venables, 
;identiary  Canon  of  Lincoln.  2  vols. 
S. 

LLING"WORTH'S    Religion    of 

testants.     3^.  6d. 

BBIUS.     Ecclesiastical   History 

^usebius  Pamphilius,  Bishop  of  Caesarea. 
ns.  by  Rev.  C.  F.  Cruse,  M.A.  With 
tes,  Life,  and  Chronological  Tables. 

GRIUS.    History  of  the  Church.    I 

ee  Theodoret. 

IDWICK.  History  of  the  Articles 

Religion  ;  to  which  is  added  a  Series  of 
:unnents  from  a.d.  1536  to  a.d.  1615. 
,  by  Rev.  F.  Proctor.     N,  S. 

FRY'S  (Matthew)  Exposition  of 

Book  of  Psalms.    Numerous  Woodcuts. 

RSON  (John,  D.D.)    Exposition 

he  Creed.  Edit,  by  E.  Walford,  M.A. 
th  Notes,  Analysis,  and  Indexes.     N.  S. 


PHILO-JUD^US,    Works    of.      The 

Contemporary  of  Josephus.  Trans,  by 
C.  D.  Yonge.     4  vols. 

PHILOSTORGIUS.    Ecclesiastical 

History  of. — See  Sozovien. 

SOCRATES'  Ecclesiastical  History, 

Comprising  a  History  of  the  Church  from 
Constantine,  a.d.  305,  to  the  38th  year  of 
Theodosius  II.  With  Short  Account  of 
the  Author,  and  selected  Notes. 

SOZ OMEN'S  Ecclesiastical  History. 

A.D.  324-440.  With  Notes,  Prefatory  Re- 
marks by  Valesius,  and  Short  Memoir. 
Together  vv-ith  the  Ecclesiastical  His- 
tory OF  Philostorgius,  as  epitomised  by 
Photius.  Trans,  by  Rev.  E.  Walford,  M.A. 
With  Notes  and  brief  Life. 

THEODORET  and  EVAGRIUS.    His- 

tories  of  the  Church  from  a.d.  332  to  the 
Death  of  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,  a.d. 
427  ;  and  from  a.d.  431  to  a.d.  544.  With 
Memoirs. 

WIESELER'S  (Karl)   Chronological 

Synopsis  of  the  Four  Gospels.  Trans,  by 
Rev.  Canon  Venables.     N.  S. 


ANTIQUARIAN    LIBRARY. 

35  Vols,  at  5J-.  each.     (8/.  i^s.  per  set.) 


^LO-SAXON   CHRONICLE.  —  See 

ie. 

ER'S  Life  of  Alfred.— 6"^^  Six  O.  E. 

'^onicles. 

E'S    (Venerable)    Ecclesiastical 

story  of  England.  Together  with  the 
glo-Saxon  Chronicle.  With  Notes, 
)rt  Life,  Analysis,  and  Map.  Edit,  by 
\.  Giles,  D.C.L. 

THIUS'S  Consolation  of  Phllo- 

hy.  King  Alfred's  Anglo-Saxon  Ver- 
1  of.  With  an  English  Translation  on 
losite  pages,  Notes,  Introduction,  and 
issary,  by  Rev.  S.  Fox,  M.A.  To 
ich  is  added  the  Anglo-Saxon  Version  of 
Metres  of  Boethiijs,  with  a  free 
inslation  by  Martin  F.  Tupper,  D.C.L. 

.ND'S     Popular    Antiquities    of 

^land,  Scotland,  and  Ireland.  Illus- 
:ing  the  Origin  of  our  Vulgar  and  Pro- 
cial  Customs,  Ceremonies,  and  Super- 
ions.  By  Sir  Henry  Ellis,  K.H.,  F.R.S. 
•ntispiece.    3  vols. 


CHRONICLES    of  the    CRUSADES. 

Contemporary  Narratives  of  Richard  Coeur 
de  Lion,  by  Richard  of  Devizes  and  Geof- 
frey de  Vinsauf;  and  of  the  Crusade  at 
Saint  Louis,  by  Lord  John  de  Joinville. 
With  Short  Notes.  Illuminated  Frontis- 
piece from  an  old  MS. 

DYER'S  (T.  F.  T.)    British  Popular 

Customs,  Present  and  Past.  An  Account 
of  the  various  Games  and  Customs  asso- 
ciated with  different  Days  of  the  Year  in 
the  British  Isles,  arranged  according  to  the 
Calendar.  By  the  Rev.  T.  F.  Thiselton 
Dyer,  M.A. 

EARLY  TRAVELS  IN  PALESTINE. 

Comprising  the  Narratives  of  Arculf, 
Willibald,  Bernard,  Saewulf,  Sigurd,  Ben- 
jamin of  Tudela,  Sir  John  Maundeville, 
De  la  Brocquiere,  and  Maundrell ;  all  un-j 
abridged.  With  Introduction  and  Note? 
by  Thomas  Wright.     Map  of  Jerusalem. 


ANTIQUARIAN  LIBRARY. 


ELLIS  (G.)  Specimens  of  Early  En- 
glish Metrical  Romances,  relatinsj  to 
Arthur,  Merlin,  Guy  of  Warwick,  Richard 
Coeur  de  Lion,  Charlemagne,  Roland,  &c. 
&c.  With  Historical  Introduction  by  J.O. 
Halliwell,  F.R.S.  Illuminated  Frontis- 
piece from  an  old  MS. 

ETHEL"WERD.     Chronicle    oi.  —  See 

Six  O.  E.  Chronicles. 

FLORENCE     OF    ^WORCESTER'S 

Chronicle,  with  the  Two  Continuations  : 
comprising  Annals  of  English  History 
from  the  Departure  of  the  Romans  to  the 
Reign  of  Edward  I.  Trans.,  with  Notes, 
by  Thomas  Forester,  M.A. 

GEOFFREY    OF    MONMOUTH. 

Chronicle  of. — See  Six  O.  E.  Chronicles. 

GESTA  ROMANORUM,  or  Enter- 
taining Moral  Stories  invented  by  the 
Monks.  Trans,  with  Notes  by  the  Rev. 
Charles  Swan.     Edit,  by  W.  Hooper,  M.A. 

GILD  AS.    Chronicle  of.— ^^^  Six  O.  E. 

Chronicles. 

GIRALDUS  CAMBRENSIS'  Histori- 
cal Works.  Containing  Topography  of 
Ireland,  and  History  of  the  Conquest  of 
Ireland,  by  Th.  Forester,  M.A.  Itinerary 
through  Wales,  and  Description  of  Wales, 
by  Sir  R.  Colt  Hoare. 

HENRY  OF  HUNTINGDON'S  His- 
tory of  the  English,  from  the  Roman  In- 
vasion to  the  Accession  of  Henry  II.  ; 
with  the  Acts  of  King  Stephen,  and  the 
Letter  to  Walter.  By  T.  Forester,  M.A. 
Frontispiece  from  au  old  MS. 

INGULPH'S  Chronicles  of  the  Abbey 

of  Croyland,  with  the  Continuation  by 
Peter  of  Blois  and  others.  Trans,  with 
Notes  by  H.  T.  Riley,  B.A. 

KEIGHTLEY'S  (Thomas)  Fairy  My- 
thology, illustrative  of  the  Romance  and 
Superstition  of  Various  Countries.  Frontis- 
piece by  Cruikshank.     N.  S. 

LEPSIUS'S    Letters   from    Egypt, 

Ethiopia,  and  the  Peninsula  of  Sinai  ;  to 
which  are  added.  Extracts  from  his 
Chronology  of  the  Egyptians,  with  refer- 
ence to  the  Exodus  of  the  Israelites.  By 
L.  and  J.  B.  Horner.  Maps  and  Coloured 
View  of  Mount  Barkal. 

MALLET'S  Northern  Antiquities,  or 

an  Historical  Account  of  the  Manners, 
Customs,  Religions,  and  Literature  of  the 
Ancient  Scandinavians.  Trans,  by  Bishop 
Percy.  With  Translation  of  the  Prose 
Edda,  and  Notes  by  J.  A.  Blackwell. 
Also  an  Abstract  of  the  '  Eyrbyggia  Saga  ' 
by  Sir  Walter  Scott.  With  Glossary 
jtnd  Coloured  Frontispiece. 


MARCO  POLO'S  Travels ;  with  N( 
and    Introduction.      Edit,   by  T.    Wrij 

MATTHEW    PARIS'S    English    E 

tory,  from  1235  to  1273.  By  Rev.  J. 
Giles,  D.C.L.  With  Frontispiece.  3  vol: 
See  also  Roger  of  Wendover. 

MATTHEW    OF    WESTMINSTE! 

Flowers  of  History,  especially  such  as 
late  to  the  affairs  of  Britain,  from  the 
ginning  of  the  World  to  a.d.   1307. 
C.  D.  Yonge.     2  vols. 

NENNIUS.  Chronicle  ol,—  See  . 
O.  E.  Chronicles. 

ORDERICUS  VITALIS'  Ecclesiasti 

History  of  England  and  Normandy.  V 
Notes,  Introduction  of  Guizot,  and 
Critical  Notice  of  M.  Delille,  by 
Forester,  M.A.  To  which  is  added 
Chronicle  OF  St.  EvRouLT.  WithG( 
ral  and  Chronological  Indexes.     4  vols 

PAULFS  (Dr.  R.)  Life  of  Alfred 

Great.      To   which   is   appended   Alfr 
Anglo-Saxon  Version  of  Orosius.  V 
literal  Translation  interpaged.  Notes, 
an  Anglo-Saxon  Grammar  and  Gloss; 
by  B.  Thorpe,  Esq.     Frontispiece. 

RICHARD    OF    CIRENCESTl 

Chronicle  of. — See  Six  O.  E.  Chronich 

ROGER  DE  HOVEDEN'S  Annalg 

English  History,  comprising  the  Hisi 
of  England  and  of  other  Countries  of 
rope  from  a.d.  732  to  a.d.  1201.  V 
Notes  by  H.  T.  Riley,  B.A.     2  vols. 

ROGER  OF  W^ENDOVER'S  Flow 

of  History,  comprising  the  History 
England  from  the  Descent  of  the  Saxon 
a.d.  1235,  formerly  ascribed  to  Mattl 
Paris.  With  Notes  and  Index  by  J. 
Giles,  D.C.L.     2  vols. 

SIX  OLD  ENGLISH  CHRONICLl 

viz.,  Asser's  Life  of  Alfred  and  the  Chr 
cles  of  Ethelwerd,  Gildas,  Nennius,  G 
frey  of  Monmouth,  and  Richard  of  Ci 
cester.  Edit.,  with  Notes,  by  J.  A.  G 
D.C.  L.     Portrait  of  Alfred. 

W^ILLIAM     OF     MALMESBUR 

Chronicle  of  the  Kings  of  England,  f 
the  Earliest  Period  to  King  Stephen. 
Rev.  J.  Sharpe.      With  Notes  by  J. 
Giles,  D.CL.     Frontispiece. 

YULE-TIDE  STORIES.  A  Collec 
of  Scandinavian  and  North-German  Pc 
lar  Tales  and  Traditions,  from  the  Swed 
Danish,  and  German.    Edit,  by  B.  Thoi 


BOHN'S  LIBRARIES. 


ILLUSTRATED    LIBRARY. 

Vols,  at  5J-.  each,  excepting  those  marked  otherwise.     (23/.  dfS.per  set.) 


N'S   (Joseph,  R.N.)   Battles  of 

British  Navy.  Revised  edition,  with 
ces  of  Names  and  Events,  and  57  Por- 
and  Plans.     2  vols. 

RSEN'S   Danish   Fairy  Tales. 

Caroline  Peachey.  With  Short  Life 
20  Wood  Engravings. 

JTO'S     Orlando     Furioso.     In 

ish  Verse  by  W.  S.  Rose.  With  Notes 
ihort  Memoir.     Portrait  after  Titian, 

4  Steel  Engravings.     2  vols. 

STEIN'S  Cage   and   Chamber 

:  their  Natural  History,  Habits,  &c. 
ther  with  Sweet's  British  War- 
5.     45  Plates  and  Woodcuts.     N.  S. 

with  the  Plates  Coloured,  7^.  td. 

MI'S  Nineveh  and  its  Palaces. 

Discoveries  of  Botia  and  Layard 
;d  to  the  Elucidation  of  Holy  Writ. 
tes  and  294  Woodcuts.     N.  S. 

ER'S     Hudibras,    with    Variorum 

5  and  Biography.  Portrait  and  28 
rations. 

ERMOLE'S  Evenings  at  Had- 

tiall.  Romantic  Tales  of  the  Olden 
s.  With  24  Steel  Engravings  after 
rmole. 

A.,  Pictorial,  Descriptive,  and 

irical,  with  some  account  of  Ava  and 
urmese,  Siam,  and  Anam.  Map,  and 
^  100  Illustrations. 

£'S   (G.  L.)   Pursuit    of  Know- 
under    Difficulties.      Illustrated    by 
dotes  and  Memoirs.  Numerous  Wood- 
ortraits.     N.  S. 

■CSHANK'S  Three  Courses  and 

isert ;  comprising  three  Sets  of  Tales, 
Country,    Irish,  and    Legal  ;   and  a 
ige.     With  50  Illustrations  by  Cruik- 
:.     N.  S. 

anch  and  Judy.  The  Dialogue  of 
uppet  Show  ;  an  Account  of  its  Origin, 
4  Illustrations  by  Cruikshank.  N.  S. 
iih  Coloured  Plates.     7^.  (>d. 

DN'S   Christian   Iconography ; 

story  of  Christian  Art  in  the  Middle 
By  the  late  A.  N.  Didron.  Trans. 
.  J.  Millington,  and  completed,  with 
;ions  and  Appendices,  by  Margaret 
s.  2  vols.  With  numerous  Illustrations. 
.  \.  The  History  of  the  Nimbus,  the 
)le,  and  the  Glory  ;  Representations 
Persons  of  the  Trinity. 
.  II.  The  Trinity;  Angels;  Devils; 
ioui ;  The  Christian  Scheme.    Appen- 


DANTE,  in  English  Verse,  by  I.  C.Wright, 
M.A.  With  Introduction  and  Memoir. 
Portrait  and  34  Steel  Engravings  after 
Flaxman.     N.  S, 

DYER  (Dr.  T.  H.)  Pompeii :  its  Build- 
ings and  Antiquities.  An  Account  of  the 
City,  with  full  Description  of  the  Remains 
and  Recent  Excavations,  and  an  Itinerary 
for  Visitors,  By  T,  H.  Dyer,  LL.D. 
Nearly  300  Wood  Engravings,  Map,  and 
Plan.     -]$.  6d.    N.  S. 

Rome :    History    of   the    City,    with 

Introduction  on  recent  Excavations.  8 
Engravings,  Frontispiece,  and  2  Maps. 

GIL    BLAS.     The   Adventures   of. 

From  the  French  of  Lesage  by  Smollett. 
24  Engravings  after  Smirke,  and  10  Etch- 
ings by  Cruikshank.     612  pages.     65'. 

GRIMM'S  Gammer  Grethel;  or,  Ger- 
man Fairy  Tales  and  Popular  Stories, 
containing  42  Fairy  Tales.  By  Edgar 
Taylor.  Numerous  Woodcuts  after  Cruik- 
shank and  Ludwig  Grimm.     3J.  6d. 

HOLBEIN'S    Dance    of    Death   and 

Bible  Cuts.  Upwards  of  150  Subjects,  en- 
graved in  facsimile,  with  Introduction  and 
Descriptions  by  the  late  Francis  Douce 
and  Dr.  Dibdin.     js.  6d. 

HOWITT'S  (Mary)  Pictorial  Calen- 

dar  of  the  Seasons  ;  embodying  Aikin's 
Calendar  of  Nature.  Upwards  of  100 
Woodcuts. 

INDIA,   Pictorial,   Descriptive,   and 

Historical,  from  the  Earliest  Times.  100 
Engravings  on  Wood  and  Map. 

JESSE'S  Anecdotes  of  Dogs.  With 
40  Woodcuts  after  Harvey,  Bewick,  and 
others.     A^.  6". 

With   34   additional   Steel    Engravings 

after  Cooper,  Landseer,  &c.    7s.  6d.    N.  S. 

KING'S  (C.  W.)    Natural  History  of 

Gems    or    Decorative    Stones.       Illustra- 
tions,    6s. 
Natural    History    of    Precious 

Stones  and  Metals.     Illustrations.     6s. 

KITTO'S  Scripture  Lands.  Described 
in  a  series  of  Historical,  Geographical,  and 
Topographical  Sketches.     42  Maps. 

With  the  Maps  coloured,  js.  6d. 

KRUMMACHER'S  Parables.  40  lUus- 
trations, 

LINDSAY'S  (Lord)  Letters  on  Egypt, 

Edom,  and  the  Holy  Land.  36  Wood 
Engravingb  and  2  Maps. 


ILLUSTRATED  LIBRARY. 


LODGE'S    Portraits    of   Illustrious 

Personages  of  Great  Britain,  with  Bio- 
graphical and  Historical  Memoirs.  240 
Portraits  engraved  on  Steel,  with  the 
respective  Biographies  unabridged.  Com- 
plete in  8  vols. 

LONGFELLOW'S    Poetical    Works, 

including  his  Translations  and  Notes.  24 
full-page  Woodcuts  by  Birket  Foster  and 
others,  and  a  Portrait.     A''.  S. 

Without  the  Illustrations,  3^.6^.    N.S. 

- —  Prose  Works.  With  16  full-page 
Woodcuts  by  Birket  Foster  and  others. 

LOUDON'S  (Mrs.)  Entertaining  Na- 
turalist. Popular  Descriptions,  Tales,  and 
Anecdotes,  of  more  than  500  Animals. 
Numerous  Woodcuts,     N.  S. 

MARRY AT'S  (Capt.,  R.N.)  Master- 
man  Ready  ;  or,  the  Wreck  of  the  Pacific. 
(Written  for  Young  People.)  With  93 
Woodcuts.     3J.  td.    N.  S. 

Mission;   or,  Scenes  in  Africa. 

(Written  for  Young  People.)  Illustrated 
by  Gilbert  and  Dalziel.     35-.  (^d.     N.  S. 

• Pirate  and  Three  Cutters.  (Writ- 
ten for  Young  People.)  With  a  Memoir. 
8  Steel  Engravings  after  Clarkson  Stan- 
field,  R.A.     3j.  dd.     N.  S. 

Privateersman.    Adventures  by  Sea 

and  Land  One  Hundred  Years  Ago. 
(Written  for  Young  People.)  8  Steel  En- 
gravings.    3J.  td.     N.  S. 

Settlers  in  Canada.    (Written  for 

Young  People.)  10  Engravings  by  Gilbert 
and  Dalziel.     3^.  6d.    N.  S. 

Poor     Jack.      (Written     for     Young 

People.)  With  16  Illustrations  after  Clark- 
son  Stanfield,  R.A.     3^.  6d.     N.  S. 

MAXWELL'S  Victories  of  Welling- 
ton and  the  British  Armies.  Frontispiece 
and  4  Portraits. 

MICHAEL  ANGELO  and  RAPHAEL, 

Their  Lives  and  Works.  By  Duppa  and 
Quatremere  de  Quincy.  Portraits  and 
Engravings,  including  the  Last  Judgment, 
and  Cartoons.     xV.  S. 

MILLER'S  History  of  the  Anglo- 
Saxons,  from  the  Earliest  Period  to  tlie 
Norman  Conquest.  Portrait  of  Alfred,  Map 
of  Saxon  Britain,  and  12  Steel  Engravings. 

MILTON'S  Poetical  W^orks,  with  a 
Memoir  and  Notes  by  J.  Montgomery,  an 
Index  to  Paradise  Lost,  Todd's  Verbal 
Index  to  all  the  Poems,  and  Notes.  120 
Wood  Engravings.     2  vols.     A'^.  ,5". 

MUDIE'S  History  of  British  Birds. 

Revised  by  W.  C.  L.  Martin.  52  Figures  of 
Birds  and  7  Plates  of  Eggs.     2  vols.     N.S. 

^—  With  the  Plates  coloured,  7^.  6d.  per  vol. 


NAVAL    and   MILITARY    HER< 

of  Great  Britain  ;  a  Record  of  Br 
Valour  on  every  Day  in  the  year,  : 
William  the  Conqueror  to  the  Battl 
Inkermann.  By  Major  Johns,  R.M., 
Lieut.  P.  H.  Nicolas,  R.M.  Indexes. 
Portraits  after  Holbein,  Reynolds,  &c. 

NICpLINI'S  History  of  the  Jesu 

their  Origin,  Progress,  Doctrines,  and 
signs.     8  Portraits. 

PETRARCH'S    Sonnets,    Triumi 

and  other  Poems,  in  English  Verse.  A 
Life  by  Thomas  Campbell.  Portrait 
15  Steel  Engravings. 

PICKERING'S  History  of  the  Rs 

of  Man,  and  their  Geographical  Disti 
tion  ;  with  An  Analytical  Synopsi 
THE  Natural  Histoky  of  Man.  By 
Hall.     Map  of  the  World  and  12  Plate 

With  the  Plates  coloured,  -js.  6d. 

PICTORIAL     HANDBOOK 

Modern  (Geography  on  a  Popular  I 
Compiled  from  the  best  Authorities,  Enj 
and  Foreign,  by  H.  G.  Bohn.  150  W^ 
cuts  and  51  Maps.     6^. 

With  the  Maps  coloured,  7s.  6d. 

Without  the  Maps,  35.  6d. 

POPE'S  Poetical  W^orks,  inclu. 
Translations.  Edit.,  with  Notes,  bj 
Carruthers.     2  vols. 

Homer's    Iliad,    with    Introduc 

and  Notes  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  ^ 
With  Flaxman's  Designs.     A^  S. 

Homer's  Odyssey,  with  the  Bat 

OF    Fro(;s   and    Mick,   Hymns,    &c., 
oiher  translators,  including  Chapman, 
troduction    and    Notes  by  J.    S.   Wat 
M.A.     With  Flaxman's  Designs.     N.  . 

Life,    including   many  of  his   Letl 

By  R.  Carruthers.   Numerous  Illustrati 

POTTERY    AND     PORCELAIN, 

other  objects  of  Vertu.  Comprising 
Illustrated  Catalogue  of  the  Bernal  1 
lection,  with  the  prices  and  names  of 
Possessors.  Also  an  Introductory  Lee 
on  Pottery  and  Porcelain,  and  an  Engra 
List  of  all  Marks  and  Monograms. 
H.  G.  Bohn.     Numerous  Woodcuts. 

With  coloured  Illustrations,  10s.  6d, 

PROUT'S  (Father)   Reliques.     Ed 

by  Rev.  F.   Mahony.      Copyright  edit 
with    the    Author's    last    corrections 
additions.      21    Etchings  by   D.    Macl 
R.A.     Nearly  600  pages.     5^.     ^V.  6\ 

RECREATIONS  IN  SHOOTING.  M 

some  Account  of  the  Game  found  in 
British  Isles,  and  Directions  for  the  Man2 
ment  of  Dog  and  Gun.     By 'Craven.' 
Woodcuts  and   9    Stael   Engravinja  a 
A.  Cooper,  R.A. 


BOHISrS  LIBRARIES. 


ING'S    History   and   Descrlp- 

of  Wines,  Ancient  and  Modern.  20 
cuts. 

IE.    Insect   Architecture.    Re- 

by   Rev.   J.    Ci.    Wood,  M.A.     186 

cuts.     N.  S. 

rSON  CRUSOE.    With  Memoir  of 
,12  Steel  Engravings  and  74  Wood- 
fter  Stothard  and  Harvey. 
ithout  the  Engravings,  ^i-.  td. 

IN  THE  NINETEENTH  CEN- 

An  Account  in  1817  of  the  Ruins  ~f 
icient  City,  and  Monuments  of  Modern 
;.  By  C.  A.  Eaton.  34  Steel  En- 
igs.     2  vols. 

PE  (S.)    The  History  of  Egypt, 

the  Earliest  Times  till  the  Conquest 
e  Arabs,  a.d.  640.  2  Maps  and  up- 
of  400  Woodcuts.     2  vols.     N.  S. 

lEY'S    Life    of  Nelson.    With 

ional  Notes,  Facsimiles  of  Nelson's 
ig.  Portraits,  Plans,  and  50  Engrav- 
ifter  Birket  Foster,  &c.     N.  S. 

JING'S  (Miss)  Noble  Deeds  of 

:n  ;  or.  Examples  of  Female  Courage, 
ude,  and  Virtue.     With  14  Steel  Por- 
N.S. 

JT  and  REVETT'S  Antiquities 

ens,  and  other  Monuments  of  Greece  ; 
Glossary  of  Terms  used  in  Grecian 
lecture.  71  Steel  Plates  and  numerous 
cuts. 

T'S  British  Warblers.  ^s.—See 

Bechstein. 

5    OF    THE    GENII;    or,    the 

itful  Lessons  of  Horam,  the  Son  of 
-.  Trans,  by  Sir  C.Morrell.  Numer- 
'oodcuts. 

>'S    Jerusalem    Delivered.    In 

;h  .Spenserian  Verse,  with  Life,  by 
Wiffen.  With  8  Engravings  and  24 
cuts.     N.  S. 


W^ALKER'S  Manly  Exercises;  con- 
tainin^  Skating,  Riding,  Driving,  Hunting, 
Shooting,  Sailing,  Rowing,  Swimming,  &c. 
44  Engravings  and  numerous  Woodcuts. 

WALTON'S  Complete  Angler,  or  the 

Contemplative  Man's  Recreation,  by  Izaak 
Walton  and  Charles  Cotton.  With  Me- 
moirs and  Notes  by  E.  Jesse.  Also  an 
Account  of  Fishing  Stations,  I'ackle,  &c., 
by  H.  G.  Bohn.  Portrait  and  203  Wood- 
cuts.    N.  S. 

With  26  additional  Engravings  on  Steel, 

"js.  6d. 

Lives  Of  Donne,  Wotton,  Hooker, 

&c.,  with  Notes.  A  New  Edition,  re- 
vised by  A.  H.  Bullen,  with  a  Memoir 
of  Izaak  Walton  by  William  Dowling.  6 
Portraits,  6  Autograph  Sienatures,  &c. 
N.S. 

WELLINGTON,  Life  of.  From  the 
Materials  of  Maxwell.  18  Steel  En- 
gravings. 

Victories  of.— .S'^^  Maxwell. 

W^ESTROPP  (H.  M.)  A  Handbook  of 

Archaeology,  Egyptian,  Greek,  Etruscan, 
Roman.  By  H.  M.  Westropp.  Numerous 
Illustrations.     7^.  6d.     N.  S. 

WHITE'S   Natural   History  of  Sel- 

borne,  with  Observations  on  various  Parts 
of  Nature,  and  the  Naturalists'  Calendar. 
Sir  W.  Jardine.  Edit.,  with  Notes  and 
Memoir,  by  E.  Jesse.    40  Portraits.    N.  S. 

With  the  Plates  coloured,  7^.  6d.  N.  S. 

YOUNG    LADY'S    BOOK,    The.     A 

Manual  of  Recreations,  Arts,  Sciences,  and 
Accomplishments.  1200  Woodcut  Illustra- 
tions,    js.  6d. 

cloth  gilt,  gilt  edges,  gj. 


CLASSICAL   LIBRARY. 

Translations  from  the  Greek  and  Latin. 
'ols.  at  55-.  each^  excepting  those  marked  otherwise.     (24/.  lOJ-.  dd.  per  set.) 


ZLUS,    The    Dramas    of.     In 

;h  Verse  by  Anna  Swanwick.  4th 
1.     N.  S. 

le  Tragedies  of.  In  Prose,  with 
and  Introduction,  by  T.  A.  Buckley, 
Portrait.     3^.  6d. 

ANUS   MARCELLINUS.    His- 

f  Rome  during  the  Reigns  of  Con- 
is,  Julian,  Jovianus,Valentinian,  and 
;,  by  C.  D.  Yonge,  B.A.  Double 
e.     js.  6d. 


ANTONINUS     (M.     Aurelius),     The 

Thoughts  of.  Translated  literally,  with 
Notes,  Biographical  Sketch,  and  Essay  on 
the  Philosophy,  by  George  Long,  M.A. 
3^.  6d.    N.  S. 

APULEIUS,  The  Works  of.  Com- 
.  prising  the  Golden  Ass,  God  of  Socrates, 
Florida,  and  Discourse  of  Magic.  With 
a  Metrical  Version  of  Cupid  and  Psyche, 
and  Mrs.  Tighe's  Psyche.  Frontis- 
piecg. 


CLASSICAL  LIBRARY. 


ARISTOPHANES'  Comedies.  Trans., 
with  Notes  and  Extracts  from  Frere's  and 
other  Metrical  Versions,  by  W.  J.  Hickie. 
Portrait.     2  vols. 

ARISTOTLE'S  Nicomachean  Ethics. 

Trans.,  with  Notes,  Analytical  Introduc- 
tion, and  Questions  for  Students,  by  Ven. 
Archdn.  Browne. 

Politics  and  Economics.    Trans., 

with  Notes,  Analyses,  and  Index,  by  E. 
Walford,  M.A.,  and  an  Essay  and  Life  by 
Dr.  Gillies. 

-  Metaphysics.  Trans.,  with  Notes, 
Analysis,  and  Examination  Questions,  by 
Rev.  John  H.  M'Mahon,  M.A. 

History  of  Animals.  In  Ten  Books. 

Trans.,  with  Notes  and  Index,  by  R. 
Cressvvell,  M.A. 

Organon ;  or,  Logical  Treatises,  and 

the  Introduction  of  Porphyry.  With  Notes, 
Analysis,  and  Introduction,  by  Rev.  O. 
F.  Owen,  M.A.     2  vols.     3s.  td.  each. 

Rhetoric  and  Poetics.  Trans. ,  with 

Hobbes'  Analysis,  Exam.  Questions,  and 
Notes,  by  T.  Buckley,  B.A.     Portrait. 

ATHEN.SUS.    The   Deipnosophists ; 

or,  the  Banquet  of  the  Learned.  By  C.  D. 
Yonge,  B.A.  With  an  Appendix  of  Poeti- 
cal Fragments.     3  vols. 

ATLAS  of  Classical  Geography.    22 

large  Coloured  Maps.  With  a  complete 
Index.     Imp.  8vo.     75.  dd. 

BION. — See  Theocritus. 

C.SSAR.      Commentaries    on    the 

Gallic  and  Civil  Wars,  with  the  Supple- 
mentary Books  attributed  to  Hirtius,  in- 
cluding the  complete  Alexandrian,  African, 
and  Spanish  Wars.  Trans,  with  Notes. 
Portrait. 

CATULLUS,  Tibullus,  and  the  Vigil 

of  Venus.  Trans,  with  Notes  and  Bio- 
graphical Introduction.  To  which  are 
added.  Metrical  Versions  by  Lamb, 
Grainger,  and  others.     Frontispiece. 

CICERO'S  Orations.  Trans,  by  C.  D. 
Yonge,  B.A.     4  vols. 

On  Oratory  and  Orators.    With 

Letters  to  Quintus  and  }5rutus.  Trans., 
with  Notes,  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A. 

On  the  Nature  of  the  Gods,  Divi- 
nation, Fate,  Laws,  a  Republic,  Consul- 
ship. Trans.,  with  Notes,  by  C.  D.  Yonge, 
B.A. 

Academics,  De  Finibus,  and  Tuscu- 

lan  Questions.  By  C.  D.  Yonge,  B.A. 
With  Sketch  of  the  Greek  Philosophers 
mentioned  by  Cicero. 


CICERO'S  Ox9^\on.'&.— Continued. 

Offices;     or,     Moral     Duties. 

Major,  an  Essay  on  Old  Age  ;  Lael 
Essay   on    Friendship ;    Scipio's    I 
Paradoxes ;    Letter  to  Quintus  on 
trates.     Trans.,  with  Notes,  by  C. 
monds.     Portrait.     3^.  dd. 

DEMOSTHENES'    Orations. 

with  Notes,  Arguments,  a  Chronc 
Abstract,  and  Appendices,  by  C. 
Kennedy.     5  vols. 

DICTIONARY  of  LATIN  and  G] 

Quotations  ;  including  Proverbs,  IVI 
Mottoes,  Law  Terms  and  Phrases, 
the  Quantities  marked,  and  English 
lations. 

With  Index  Verborum  (622  page 

Index  Verborum  to  the  above,  v 

Quantities  and  Accents  marked  (56 
limp  cloth.     IS. 

DIOGENES    LAERTIUS.    Live 

Opinions  of  the  Ancient  Philos 
Trans.,  with  Notes,  by  C.  D.  Yong 

EPICTETUS.      The    Discourse 

With  the  Encheiridion  and  Fra| 
With  Notes,  Life,  and  View  of  his 
sophy,  by  George  Long,  M.A.     N. 

EURIPIDES.  Trans.,  with  Notes  ; 
troduction,  by  T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A 
trait.     2  vols. 

GREEK     ANTHOLOGY.       In    ] 

Prose  by  G.  Surges,  M.A.  With  ]\ 
Versions  by  Bland,  Merivale,  Lor 
man,  &c. 

GREEK  ROMANCES  of  HeliO( 

Longus,  and  Achilles  Tatius ;  vi; 
Adventures  of  Theagenes  and  Ch; 
Amours  of  Daphnis  and  Chloe  ;  anc 
of  Clitopho  and  Leucippe.  Trans 
Notes,  by  Rev.  R.  Smith,  M.A. 

HERODOTUS.  Literally  trans,  b 
Henry  Gary,  M.A.     Portrait. 

HESIOp,     CALLIMACHUS 

Theognis.       In    Prose,    with    Not 
Biographical   Notices   by  Rev.   J. 
M.A.     Together   with    the    Metric; 
sions  of  Hesiod,  by  Elton  ;    Callir 
by  Tytler ;  and  Theognis,  by  Frere 

HOMER'S  Iliad.  In  English  Pro; 
Notes  by  T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A.     Pi 

Odyssey,     Hymns,      Epigram 

Battle  of  the  Frogs  and  Mice.  In  '. 
Prose,  with  Notes  and  Memoir  bj 
Buckley,  B.A. 

HORACE.  In  Prose  by  Smart,  witl 
selected  by  T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A 
trait.     35.  dd. 

JULIAN    THE    EMPEROR. 

Rev.  C.  W.  King,  M.A. 


BUHN'^  LIBRARIES. 


CORNELIUS  NEPOS,  and 

IS.     Trans.,  with  Notes,  by  Rev. 
itson,  M.A. 

.L,      PERSIUS,     SULPICIA, 

cilius.  In  Prose,  with  Notes, 
)gical  Tables,  Arguments,  by  L. 
d.A.  To  which  is  added  the  Me- 
jrsion  of  Juvenal  and  Persius  by 
Frontispiece. 

["he  History  of  Rome.    Trans. 
ipillan   and  others.     4  vols.     Por- 


In    Prose,    with 


J    Pharsalia. 
'  H.T.  Riley. 

'S  Dialogues  of  the  Gods, 

a  Gods,  and  of  the  Dead.  Trans, 
.rd  Williams,  M.A. 

lUS.     In  Prose,  with  Notes  and 
lical   Introduction  by  Rev.  J.   S. 
M.A.     To    which   is  added   the 
Version  by  J.  M.  Good. 

L'S  Epigrams,  complete.  In 
'ith  Verse  Translations  selected 
glish  Poets,  and  other  sources. 
I.  (670  pages),    js.  6d. 

rS. — See  Theocritus. 


Works,     complete. 
;es  and  Introduction. 


In    Prose, 
3  vols. 


IAS'  Description  of  Greece. 

;d  into  English,  witli  Notes  and 
By  Arthur  Richard  Shilleto,  M.  A., 
;  Scholar  of  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
2  vols. 

IS.    Bentley's  Dissertations 

Epistles  of  Phalaris,  Themisto- 
rates,  Euripides,  and  the  Fables 
.  With  Introduction  and  Notes 
W.  Wagner,  Ph.D. 

In  Prose,  with  Introduction 
2S  by  Dawson  W.  Turner.  To- 
th  the  Metrical  Version  by  Abra- 
>re.     Portrait. 

Works.  Trans.,  with  Intro- 
nd  Notes.     6  vols. 

)gues.  A  Summary  and  Analysis 
1  Analytical  Index  to  the  Greek 
odern  editions  and  to  the  above 
ns,  by  A.  Day,  LL.D. 

S'S  Comedies.  In  Prose,  with 
id   Index  by  H.  T.   Riley,  B.A. 


Natural  History.  Trans., 
is,  by  J.  Bostock,  M.D.,  F.R.S., 
.  Riley,  B.A.     6  vols. 


PLINY.     The   Letters   of  Pliny  the 

Younger.     Melmoth's  Translation,  revised, 
with  Notes  and  short  Life,  by  Rev.  F.  C. 
T.  Bosanquet,  M.A. 
PLUTARCH'S    Morals.      Theosophical 
Essays.  Trans,  by  C.  W.  King,  M.A.  N.S. 

Lives.     See  page  7. 

PROPERTIUS,  The  Elegies  of.  With 
Notes,  Literally  translated  by  the  Rev.  P. 
J.  F.  Gantillon,  M.A.,  with  metrical  ver- 
sions of  Select  Elegies  by  Nott  and  Elton. 
3^.  6d. 

QUINTILIAN'S  Institutes  of  Oratory. 
Trans.,  with  Notes  and  Biographical 
Notice,  by  Rev.  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A. 
2  vols. 

SALLUST,  FLORUS,  and  VELLEIUS 
Paterculus.  Trans.,  with  Notes  and  Bio- 
graphical Notices,  by  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A. 

SENECA  DE  BENEFICIIS.  Newly 
translated  by  Aubrey  Stewart,  M.A. 
35.  6d.     N.  S. 

SENECA'S  Minor  Works.  Translated 
by  A.  Stewart,  M.A.  [In  the  press. 

SOPHOCLES.    The  Tragedies  of.    In 

Prose,  with  Notes,  Arguments,  and  Intro- 
duction. Portrait. 
STR ABO'S  Geography.  Trans,,  with 
Notes,  by  W.  Falconer,  M.A.,  and  H.  C 
Hamilton.  Copious  Index,  giving  Ancient 
and  Modern  Names.     3  vols. 

SUETONIUS'   Lives   of  the   Twelve 

Cajsars  and  Lives  of  the  Grammarians. 
The  Translation  of  Thomson,  revised,  with 
Notes,  by  T.  Forester. 

TACITUS.      The  W^orks   of.     Trans., 

with  Notes.     2  vols. 

TERENCE  and  PH^fflDRUS.  In  Eng- 
lish Prose,  with  Notes  and  Arguments,  by 
H.  T.  Riley,  B.A.  To  which  is  added 
Smart's  Metrical  Version  of  Phaedrus. 
With  Frontispiece. 

THEOCRITUS,     BION,     MOSCHUS, 

and  Tyriajus.  In  Prose,  with  Notes  and 
Arguments,  by  Rev.  J.  Banks,  M.A.  To 
which  are  appended  the  Mktkical  Vkr- 
siONS  of  Chapman.    Portrait  of  Theocritus. 

THUCYDIDES.    The  Peloponnesian 

War.      Trans.,    with   Notes,  by    Rev.   H. 

Dale.     Portrait.     2  vols.     3J.  6d.  each. 
TYRTiEUS.— 6V^  Theocritus. 
VIRGIL.     The  Works  of.      In  Prose. 

with  Notes  by  Davidson.      Revised,  with 

additional  Notes  and  Biographical  Notice. 

by  T.  A.  Buckley,  B.A.     Portrait.     3*.  6a. 

XENOPHON'S  Works.  Trans.,  with 
Notes,  by  J.  S.  Watson,  M.A.,  and  others. 
Portrait.     In  3  vols. 


COLLEGIATE  SERIES  AND  SCIENTIFIC  LIBRARY. 


COLLEGIATE     SERIES. 

lo  Vols,  at  <fS.  each.     {2I.  los.  per  set.) 


DANTE.  The  Inferno.  Prose  Trans., 
with  the  Text  of  the  Original  on  the  same 
page,  and  Explanatory  Notes,  by  John 
A.  Carlyle,  M.D.     Portrait.     N.  S. 

The  Purgatorio.    Prose  Trans.,  with 

the  Original  on  the  same  page,  and  Ex- 
planatory Notes,  by  W.  S.  Dugdale.   N.  S. 

NEW  TESTAMENT  (The)  in  Greek. 

Griesbach's  Text,  with  the  Readings  of 
Mill  and  Scholz  at  the  foot  of  the  page,  and 
Parallel  References  in  the  margin.  Also  a 
Critical  Introduction  and  Chronological 
Tables.  Two  Fac-similes  of  Greek  Manu- 
scripts.    650  pages.     3^.  (id. 

or  bound  up  with  a  Greek  and  English 

Lexicon  to  the  New  Testament  (250  pages 
additional,  making  in  all  900J.     5^. 

The   Lexicon    may  be  had  separately, 
price  2j. 


DOBREE'S  Adversaria. 

Greek  and  Latin  Classics.) 
late  Prof.  Wagner.     2  vols. 


(Notes  on  the 
Edited  by  the 


DONALDSON  (Dr.)    The  Thea 

the  Greeks.  With  Supplementary  1 
on  the  Language,  Metres,  and  Pro 
the  Greek  Dramatists.  Numeroui 
trations  and  3  Plans.  By  J.  W.  I 
son,  D.D.     N.S. 

KEIGHTLEY'S  (Thomas)  Myth 
of  Ancient  Greece  and  Italy.  Rev 
Leonhard  Schmitz,  Ph.D.,  LL.] 
Plates.     A".  S. 

HERODOTUS,   Notes   on.     Or 

and  Selected  from  the  best  Commei 
By  D.  W.  Turner,  M.A.    Coloured 

Analysis  and  Summary  o 

a  Svmchronistical  Table  of  Events— 
of  Weights,  Measures,  Money,  ar 
tances  —  an  Outline  of  the  Histoi 
Geography — and  the  Dates  complet 
Gaisford,  Baehr,  &c.     By  J.  T.  Wh 

THUCYDIDES.     An    Analyslt 

Summary  of.  With  Chronological 
of  Events,  &c.,  by  J.  T.  Wheeler. 


SCIENTIFIC    LIBRARY. 

56  Vols,  at  5^.  each^  excepting  those  marked  othet'wise.     (14/.  los.  6cf.  per 


AGASSIZ    and   GOULD.    Outline  of 

Comparative  Physiology  touching  the 
Structure  and  Development  of  the  Races 
of  Animals  living  and  extinct.  For  Schools 
and  Colleges.  Enlarged  by  Dr.  Wright. 
With  Index  and  300  Illustrative  Woodcuts. 

BOLLEY'S    Manual    of   Technical 

Analysis ;  a  Guide  for  the  Testing  and 
Valuation  of  the  various  Natural  and 
Artificial  Substances  employed  in  the  Arts 
and  Domestic  Economy,  founded  on  the 
work  of  Dr.  Bolley.  Edit,  by  Dr.  Paul. 
100  Woodcuts. 

BRIDQEWATER  TREATISES. 

—7-  Bell  (Sir  Charles)  on  the  Hand ; 

its  Mechanism  and  Vital  Endowments,  as 
evincing  Design.  Preceded  by  an  Account 
of  the  Author's  Discoveries  in  the  Nervous 
System  by  A.  Shaw.    Numerous  Woodcuts. 

Kirby  on   the  History,  Habits, 

and  Instincts  of  Animals.  With  Notes  by 
T.  Rymer  Jones.     100  Woodcuts.     2  vols. 

Whewell's    Astronomy    and 

General  Physics,  considered  with  reference 
to  Natural  Theology.  Portrait  of  the  Earl 
of  Bridgewater.     35.  6d. 


BRIDGEWATER    TREATL 

Continued. 
Chalmers  on  the  Adaptat: 

External  Nature  lo  the  Moral  and 
lectual  Constitution  of  Man.  With  I 
by  Rev.  Dr.  Cumming.     Portrait. 

Front's  Treatise  on  Chem 

Meteorology,  and  the  Function  of 
tion,  with  reference  to  Natural  Thi 
Edit,  by  Dr.  J.  W.  Griffith.     2  Maj 

Buckland's  Geology  and  R 

alogy.      With  Additions  by  Prof. 
Prof.  Phillips,  and  R.  Brown.     Me 
Buckland.    Portrait.    2  vols.    15^. 
Text.     Vol.  II.  90  large  plates  with 
press. 

Roget's  Animal   and  Veg< 

Physiology.  463  Woodcuts.  2  vo 
each. 

Kidd  on  the  Adaptation  c 

temal  Nature  to  the  Physical  Condi 
Man.     3 J.  6d. 

CARPENTER'S  (Dr.  W.  B.)  Zo< 
A  Systematic  View  of  the  Structur 
bits.  Instincts,  and  Uses  of  the  pi 
Families  of  the  Animal  Kingdom, 
th«  chief  Forms  of  Fossil  Remaioj 
vis^  by  W.  S.  Dallas,  F.L.S.  Nu; 
Woodcuts.    2  Yol».     tf.  e*ch. 


BOHN'S  LIBRARIES. 


NTER'S  VJ'OYlia,— Continued. 
ihanical  Philosophy,  Astro- 

and  Horology.     A  Popular  Expo- 

i8i  Woodcuts. 
retable  Physiology  and  Sys- 

Botany.  A  complete  Introduction 
Knowledge  of  Plants.  Revised  by 
nkester,  M.D.,  &c.  Numerous 
Its.     6s. 

mal  Physiology.  Revised  Edi- 
,00  Woodcuts.     6^. 

EUL  on  Colour.  Containing 
nciples  of  Harmony  and  Contrast 
urs,  and  their  Application  to  the 
including  Painting,  Decoration, 
ies,  Carpets,  Mosaics,  Glazing, 
J,  Calico  Printing,  Letterpress 
I,  Map  Colouring,  Dress,  Land- 
nd  Flower  Gardening,  &c.  Trans, 
lartel.  Several  Plates. 
1  an  additional  series  of  16  Plates 
urs,  7s.  6d. 

:0SER'S    History   of  Magic. 

by  W.  Howitt.  With  an  Appendix 
lost  remarkable  and  best  authenti- 
Stories  of  Apparitions,  Dreams, 
Sight,  Table-Turning,  and  Spirit- 
g,  &c.     2  vols. 

Introduction  to  Astronomy. 

ocabulary  of  the  Terms  in  present, 
fumerous  Woodcuts.     35.  6d.    N.S. 

(Jabez)  Elements  of  Experi- 

and  Natural  Philosophy.  Being 
5y  Introduction  to  the  Study  of 
lies.  Pneumatics,  Hydrostatics, 
ilics.  Acoustics,  Optics,  Caloric, 
;ity,  Voltaism,  and  Magnetism. 
)odcuts. 

)LDT'S   Cosmos ;    or,  Sketch 

ysical  Description  of  the  Universe, 
by  E.  C.  Otte,  B.  H.  Paul,  and 
Dallas,  F.L.S.  Portrait.  5  vols, 
each,  excepting  vol.  v.,  55. 
sonal  Narrative  of  his  Travels 
2rica  during  the  years  1799-1804. 
with  Notes,  by  T.  Ross.  3  vols. 
ws  of  Nature ;  or,  Contem- 
>  of  the  Sublime  Phenomena  of 
n,  with  Scientific  Illustrations, 
by  E.  C.  Otte. 

5  (Robert)  Poetry  of  Science  ; 

dies  of  the  Physical  Phenomena  of 
By   Robert  Hunt,  Professor  at 
tool  of  Mines. 

S     Scientific    Dialogues.     A 

ir  Introduction  to  the  Arts  and 
:s.  For  Schools  and  Young  People, 
ous  Woodcuts. 

roduction  to  the  Arts  and 
;s,  for  Schools  and  Young  People. 
1  into  Lessons  with  Examination 
ms.    Woodcuts.    3^.  6d. 


JUKES-BROWNE'S  Student's  Hand- 
book of  Physical  Geology.  By  A.  J, 
Jukes-Browne,  of  the  Geological  Survey  of 
England.  With  numerous  Diagrams  and 
Illustrations,  6s.     N.  S. 

The    Student's    Handbook    of 

Historical  Geology.  By  A.  J.  Tukes- 
Brown,  B.A.,  F.G.S.,  of  the  Geological 
Survey  of  England  and  Wales.  With 
numerous  Diagrams  and  Illustrations.    6s. 

N.S. 

KNIGHT'S  (Charles)   Knowledge  is 

Power.  A  Popular  Manual  of  Political 
Economy. 

LECTURES    ON    PAINTING    by   the 

Royal  Academicians,  Barry,  Opie,  Fuseli. 
With  Introductory  Essay  and  Notes  by 
R.  Wornum.     Portrait  of  Fuseli. 

LILLY.    Introduction  to  Astrology. 

With  a  Grammar  of  Astrology  and  Tables 
for  calculating  Nativities,  by  Zadkiel. 

MANTELL'S  (Dr.)  Geological  Ex- 
cursions through  the  Isle  of  Wight  and 
along  the  Dorset  Coast.  Numerous  Wood- 
cuts and  Geological  Map. 

— —  Petrifactions  and  their  Teach- 
ings. Handbook  to  the  Organic  Remains 
in  the  British  Museum.  Numerous  Wood- 
cuts.    6s. 

Wonders    of    Geology ;     or,    a 

Familiar  Exposition  of  Geological  Pheno- 
mena. A  coloured  Geological  Map  of 
England,  Plates,  and  200  Woodcuts.  2 
vols.  js.  6d.  each. 

MORPHY'S  Games  of  Chess,  being 

the  Matches  and  best  Games  played  by  the 
American  Champion,  with  explanatory  and 
analytical  Notes  by  J.  Lowenthal.  With 
short  Memoir  and  Portrait  of  Morphy. 

SCHOUW^'S  Earth,  Plants,  and  Man. 

Popular  Pictures  of  Nature.  And  Ko- 
bell's  Sketches  from  the  Mineral  Kingdom. 
Trans,  by  A.  Henfrey,  F.R.S.  Coloured 
Map  of  the  Geography  of  Plants. 

SMITH'S  (Pye)  Geology  and  Scrip- 
ture ;  or,  the  Relation  between  the  Scriptures 
and  Geological  Science.     With  Memoir. 

STANLEY'S    Classified   Synopsis   of 

the  Principal  Painters  of  the  Dutch  and 
Flemish  Schools,  including  an  Account  of 
some  of  the  early  German  Masters.  By 
George  Stanley. 

STAUNTON'S  Chess-Player's  Hand- 
book. A  Popular  and  Scientific  Intro- 
duction to  the  Game,  with  numerous  Dia- 
grams and  Coloured  Frontispiece.     N.Si, 


I 


REFERENCE  LIBRARY. 


STATJNTON.—Coniim^ed. 

Chess  Praxis.    A  Supplement  to  the 

Chess-player's  Handbook.  Containing  the 
most  important  modern  Improvements  in 
the  Openings  ;  Code  of  Chess  Laws  ;  and 
a  Selection  of  Morphy's  Games.  Annotated. 
636  pages.     Diagrams.     6^. 

Chess-Player's    Companion. 

Comprising  a  Treatise  on  Odds,  Collection 
of  Match  Games,  including  the  French 
Match  with  M.  St.  Amant,  and  a  Selection 
of  Original  Problems-  Diagrams  and  Co- 
loured Frontispiece. 

Chess    Tournament     of    1851. 

A  Collection  of  Games  played  at  this  cele- 
brated assemblage.  With  Introduction 
and  Notes.     Numerous  Diagrams. 


STOCKHARDT'S      Experin 

Chemistry.  A  Handbook  for  the 
of  the  Science  by  simple  Exper 
Edit,  by  C.  W.  Heaton,  F.C.S. 
merous  Woodcuts.     N.  S. 

URE'S  (Dr.  A.)  Cotton  Manufs 

of  Great    Britain,    systematically 
gated  ;   with  an  Introductory  Vie\ 
Comparative  State  in   Foreign  Co 
Revised  by  P.  L.  Simmonds.     i5< 
trations.     2  vols. 

Philosophy    of    Mamifac 

or  an  Exposition  of  the  Scientific, 
and  Commercial  Economy  of  the  ] 
System  of  Great  Britain.  Revi 
P.  L.  Simmonds.  Numerous  I 
800  pages,     ys.  6d. 


ECONOMICS   AND   FINANCE. 

GILBART'S  History,  Principles,  and  Practice  of  Banking.    Revised  to 
A.  S.  Michie,  of  the  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland.    Portrait  of  Gilbart.     2  vols.     los. 


REFERENCE   LIBRARY. 

28  Volumes  at  Various  Prices.     (8/.  los.per  set.) 


BLAIR'S     Chronological     Tables. 

Comprehending  the  Chronology  and  His- 
tory of  the  World,  from  the  Earliest  Times 
to  the  Russian  Treaty  of  Peace,  April  1856. 
By  J .  W.  Rosse.     800  pages.     105. 

Index    of    Dates.      Comprehending 

the  principal  Facts  in  the  Chronology  and 
History  of  the  World,  from  the  Earliest  to 
the  Present,  alphabetically  arranged  ;  being 
a  complete  Index  to  the  foregoing.  By 
J.  W.  Rosse.     2  vols.  55.  each. 

BOHN'S    Dictionary   of  Quotations 

froni  the  English  Poets.  4th  and  cheaper 
Edition.     6s. 

BUCHANAN'S  Dictionary  of  Science 

and  Technical  Terms  used  in  Philosophy, 
Literature,  Professions,  Commerce,  Arts, 
and  Trades.  By  W.  H,  Buchanan,  with 
Supplement.  Edited  by  Jas.  A.  Smith.  6s. 

CHRONICLES  OF  THE  TOMBS.     A 

Select  Collection  of  Epitaphs,  with  Essay 
on  Epitaphs  and  Observations  on  Sepul- 
chral Antiquities.  By  T.  J.  Pettigrew, 
F.R.S.,  F.S.A.     5j. 

CLARK'S    (Hugh)    Introduction    to 

Heraldry.  Revised  by  J.  R.  Planch6.  55. 
950  Illustrations. 

—  With  the  Illustrations  coloured,  i^s. 
N.S. 


COINS,  Manual  of.— See  Hump. 
DATES,  Index  of.— ^^^  Blair. 

DICTIONARY  of  Obsolete  an 

vincial  English.  Containing  Wor 
English  Writers  previous  to  tl 
Century.  By  Thomas  Wright, 
F.S.A.,  &c.     2  vols.  5^.  each. 

EPIGRAMMATISTS  (The).     A 

tion  from  the  Epigrammatic  Litei 
Ancient,  Mediaeval,  and  Modern 
With  Introduction,  Notes,  Obsei 
Illustrations,  an  Appendix  on  Wo 
nected  with  Epigrammatic  Lii 
by  Rev.  H.  Dodd,  M.A.     6s.     N. 

GAMES,    Handbook    of.      Coi 

Treatises  on  above  40  Games  of 
Skill,    and    Manual    Dexterity,    ii 
Whist,  Billiards,  &c.     Edit,  by  K 
Bohn.     Numerous  Diagrams.     55 

HENFREY'S     Giiide    to     I 

Coins.  Revised  Edition,  by  C.  F 
M.A.,  F.S.A.  With  an  Historic 
duction.     6s.    N.  S. 

HUMPHREYS'     Coin    Coll 

Manual.      An   Historical  Accour 
Progress   of   Coinage    from    the 
Time,  by  H.  N.  Humphreys,     i 
trations.     2  vols.  55.  each.     A'.  S. 


BONN'S  LIBRARIES. 


ES'  Bibliographer's  Mannal 

sh  Literature.     Containing  an  Ac- 

r  Rare  and   Curious   Books   pub- 

or  relating  to  Great  Britain  and 

from  the    Invention  of  Printing, 

ographical    Notices    and    Prices, 

'.  Lowndes.     Parts  I.-X.  ^A  to  Z), 

!ach.     Part  XI.  (Appendix  Vol.), 

the    II    parts   in    4    vols.,   half 

,  2/.  25. 

EfE,  Handbook  of  Domestic, 

y  Arranged.     By  Dr.  H.  Davies. 

NAMES  OF  FICTION. 
.ry  of.  Including  also  Familiar 
yms,  Surnames  bestowed  on  Emi- 
n,  &c.     By  W.  A.  Wheeler,  M.A. 


POLITICAL     CYCLOPJEDIA.       A 

Dictionary  of  Political,  Constitutional, 
Statistical,  and  Forensic  Knowledge  ; 
forming  a  Work  of  Reference  on  subjects 
of  Civil  Administration,  Political  Economy, 
Finance,  Commerca,  Laws,  and  Social 
Relations.     4  vols.  35.  (>d.  each. 

PROVERBS,  Handbook  of.  Con- 
taining an  entire  Republication  of  Ray's 
Collection,  with  Additions  from  Foreign 
Languages  and  Sayings,  Sentences, 
Maxims,  and  Phrases.     55. 

A  Polyglot  of  Foreign.  Com- 
prising French,  Italian,  German,  Dutch, 
Spanish,  Portuguese,  and  Danish.  With 
English  Translations.     55^. 

SYNONYMS  and    ANTONYMS;    or, 

Kindred  Words  and  their  Opposites,  Col- 
lected and  Contrasted  by  Ven.  C.  J. 
Smith,  M.A.     55.     N.  S. 

WRIGHT  {T\i.)—See  Dictionary. 


NOVELISTS'    LIBRARY. 


\es  at  3J.  dd.  each,  excepting  those  inarked  otherwise.   (2/.  \s.  6d.  per  set.) 


r'S  Evelina ;  or,  a  Young 
Entrance  into  the  World.  By  F. 
(Mme.  D'Arblay).  With  Intro- 
and  Notes  by  A.  R.  Ellis,  Author 
estra,'  &c.  N.  S. 
;ilia.  With  Introduction  and 
y  A.  R.  Ellis.     2  vols.     N,  S. 

Egyptian  Princess.     Trans. 

;a  Buchheim.     N.  S, 

TG'S    Joseph   Andrew^s  and 

nd  Mr.  Abraham  Adams.  With 
.  Biography.  Cruikshank' s  Illus- 
.     N.  S. 

jlia.  Roscoe's  Edition,  revised. 
ank's  Illustrations.     5^.     N.  S. 


TIE'LBTNG.— Continued. 

— -  History  of  Tom  Jones,  a  Found- 
ling. Roscoe's  Edition.  Cruikshank' s 
Illustrations.     2  vols.     N.  S. 


GROSSI'S    Marco 

by  A.  F.  D.     N.  S. 


Visconti.      Trans. 


MANZONI.     The   Betrothed:    being 
a    Translation    of    '  I     Promessi     Sposi. 
Numerous  Woodcuts,     i  vol.  (732  pages 
55.    N.S. 

STOWE  (Mrs.  H.  B.)     Uncle  Tom's 

Cabin  ;  or.  Life  among  the  Lowly.     8  fuli- 
page  Illustrations.     N.  S. 


ARTISTS'    LIBRARY. 

7  Volumes  at  Various  Prices,     (i/.  iSs.  6d.  per  set.) 


ir  Charles).     The  Anatomy 

ilosophy  of    Expression,   as   Con- 
^ith  the  Fine  Arts.     5s.     N.  S. 

SJ".      History   of  Arms   and 

from   the    Earliest    Period.      By 

Demmin.       Trans,     by    C.    C. 

M.A.,    Assistant    Keeper,    S.    K. 

I.    1900  Illustrations.    "js.Sd.   N.S. 

►LT'S  Costume  in  England. 

dition.     Enlarged  and  Revised  by 

I.    H.   A.    Dillon,    F.S.A.      With 

an  700   Engravings.      2   vols.   5^. 

V.S. 

,  History.     VoL     I.  Glossary. 


FLAXMAN.    Lectures  on  Sculpture. 

With  Three  Addresses  to  the  R.A.  by  Sir 
R.  Westmacott,  R.A.,  and  Memoir  of 
Flaxman.  Portrait  and  53  Plates.   6s.  N.S. 

H EATON'S    Concise    History    of 

Painting.  [In  t)ie press. 

LEONARDO    DA    VINCI'S   Treatise 

on  Painting.  Trans,  by  J.  F.  Rigaud,  R.A. 
With  a  Life  and  an  Account  of  his  Works 
by  J.  W.  Brown.  Numerous  Plates.  5*. 
N.S. 
PLANCHE'S  History  of  British 
Costume,  from  the  Earliest  Time  to  the 
19th  Centur>'.  By  J.  R.  Planch6.  400 
Illustrations.     55.     N.  S. 


(  21  ) 

BOHN^S   CHEAP   SERIE: 

PRICE  ONE  SHILLING  EACH. 


A  Series  of  Complete  Stories  or  Essays,  mostly  reprinted  fron. 
in  Bohn's  Libraries,  and  neatly  bound  in  stiff  paper  cove^ 
with  cut  ed^es,  suitable  for  Railway  Reading. 


I 


ASCHAM  [ROGER).— 

SCHOLEMASTER,    By  Professor  Mayor. 

CARPENTER  {DR.   IV.  B.).~- 

PHYSIOLOGY     OF     TEMPERANCE     AND     TOTAL 
STINENCE. 

EMERSON.— 

ENGLAND  AND  ENGLISH  CHARACTERISTICS.    Lc 
on  the  Race,  Ability,  Manners,  Truth,  Character,  Wealth,  Religion, 

NATURE  :  An  Essay.     To  which  are  added  Orations,  Le 

and  Addresses. 

REPRESENTATIVE  MEN  :  Seven  Lectures  on  Plato, 
DENBORG,  Montaigne,  Shakespeare,  Napoleon,  and  Goethe. 

TWENTY  ESSAYS  on  Various  Subjects. 
THE  CONDUCT  OF  LIFE. 

FRANKLIN  {BENfAMIN).— 

AUTOBIOGRAPHY.     Edited  by  J.  Sparks. 

HA  WTHORNE  [NA  THANIEL).— 

TWICE-TOLD  TALES.     Two  Vols,  in  One. 

SNOW  IMAGE,  and  other  Tales. 

SCARLET  LETTER. 

HOUSE  WITH  THE  SEVEN  GABLES. 

TRANSFORMATION  ;  or  the  Marble  Fawn.     Two  Parts 

HAZLITT  {W.).— 

TABLE-TALK  :  Essays  on  Men  and  Manners.     Three  Pai 

PLAIN    SPEAKER  :    Opinions   on  Books,    Men,    and    1 
Three  Parts. 

LECTURES  ON  THE  ENGLISH  COMIC  WRITERS 

LECTURES  ON  THE  ENGLISH  POETS. 


BONN'S  CHEAP  SERIES. 


TT  {W.).— Continued. 

:tures  on  the  characters  of  shake- 

SPEARE'S  PLAYS. 

:tures  on  the  literature  of  the  age  of 

ELIZABETH,  chiefly  Dramatic. 

G  [WASHINGTON).— 

E  OF  MOHAMMED.     With  Portrait. 

'ES  OF  SUCCESSORS  OF  MOHAMMED. 

E  OF  GOLDSMITH. 

STCH-BOOK. 

LES  OF  A  TRAVELLER. 

UR  ON  THE  PRAIRIES. 

NTQUESTS  OF  GRANADA  AND  SPAIN.     Two  Parts. 

'E  AND  VOYAGES  OF  COLUMBUS.     Two  Parts. 

MPANIONS    OF    COLUMBUS  :    Their  Voyages  and  Dis- 
coveries. 

VENTURES  OF  CAPTAIN  BONNEVILLE  in  the  Rocky 

Mountains  and  the  Far  West. 

ICKERBOCKER'S  HISTORY  OF  NEW  YORK,  from  the 

Beginning  of  the  World  to  the  End  of  the  Dutch  Dynasty. 

LES  OF  THE  ALHAMBRA. 

NQUEST     OF    FLORIDA    UNDER    HERNANDO    DE 
SOTO. 

BOTSFORD  AND  NEWSTEAD  ABBEY. 

LMAGUNDI  ;    or,    The    Whim -Whams    and    Opinions    of 

Launcelot  Langstaff,  Esq. 

ACEBRIDGE  HALL  ;  or.  The  Humourists. 

rORIA  ;  or.  Anecdotes  of  an  Enterprise  beyond  the  Rocky 

Mountains. 

)LFERT'S  ROOST,  and  Other  Tales. 

{CHARLES).— 

SAYS  OF  ELIA.     With  a  Portrait. 
ST  ESSAYS  OF  ELIA. 
lANA.     With  Biographical  Sketch. 

YAT  {CAPTAIN). 

lATE  AND  THE  THREE  CUTTERS.    With  a  Memoir  of 
the  Author. 


(  23  ) 

The  only  authorised  Edition;  no  others  published  in  England  conic 
the  Derivatiotis  and  Etymological  Notes  of  Dr.  Mahn^  who 
devoted  several  years  to  this  portion  of  the  Work. 

•WEBSTER'S     DICTIONARY 

OF   THE    ENGLISH    LANGUAGE. 

Thoroughly  revised  and  improved  by  Chauncey  A.  Goodrich,  D.D.,  LL.] 
and  Noah  Porter,  D.D.,  of  Yale  College. 


THE    GUINEA    DICTIONARY. 

New  Edition  [1880],  v^^ith  a  Supplement  of  upwards  of  4600  New  Words  2 

Meanings. 
1628  Pages.     3000  Illustrations. 

The  features  of  this  volume,  which  render  it  perhaps  the  most  us€ 
Dictionary  for  general  reference  extant,  as  it  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  cheap 
books  ever  published,  are  as  follows  : — 

1.  Completeness. — It  contains  114,000  words. 

2.  Accuracy  of  Definition. 

3.  Scientific  and  Technical  Terms. 

4.  Etymology. 

5.  The  Orthography  is  based,  as  far  as  possible,  on  Fixed  Principl 

6.  Pronunciation. 

7.  The  Illustrative  Citations. 

8.  The  Synonyms. 

9.  The  Illustrations,  which  exceed  3000. 

I,  2ij. ;  half-bound  in  calf,  30^. ;  calf  or  half  russia,  31^.  6^.;  russia,  ; 


I 


{•  ith  New  Biographical  Appendix^  containi7ig  over  9700  Names. 

THE   complete    DICTIONARY 

ins,  in  addition  to  the  above  matter,  several  valuable  Literary  Appendic 
and  70  extra  pages  of  Illustrations,  grouped  and  classified. 
I  vol.  1919  pages,  cloth,  3U.  6^/. 
linly  the  best  practical  English  Dictionary  QyXzxiX: —Quarterly  Review,  18 
Prospectuses ^  luith  Specimen  Pages,  sent  post  free  on  application. 


To  be  obtained  through  all  Booksellers. 


■  BOHN'S     SELECT     LIBRARY 

OF 

STANDARD     ^VORKS. 


The  texts  in  all  cases  will  be  printed  without  abridgment,  and 

where  Introductions,  Biographical  Notices  and  Notes,  are  likely 

'  to  be  of  use  to  the  Student,  they  will  be  given.     The  volumes, 

'  well  printed  and  on  good  paper,  will  be  issued  at  i^.  in  paper 


covers,  and   i^.  6d.  in  cloth. 


NOW  READY. 
T.  Bacon's  Essays.     With  Introduction  and  Notes. 

2.  Lessing's  Laokoon.     Beasley's  Translation,  revised,  with  In  vo- 

duction,  Notes,  &c.,  by  Edward  Bell,  M.A. 

3.  Dante's  Inferno.     Translated,  with  Notes,  by  Rev.  H.  F.  C: 

4.  Goethe's   Faust.     Part  I.     Translated,   \\\ih.   Introduction,    »y 

Anna  Swanwick. 

5.  Goethe's    Boyhood.     Being    Part    I.    of   the    Autobiograj  ly. 

Translated  by  J.  Oxenford. 

6.  Schiller's  Mary  Stuart  and  The  AT  aid  of  Orleans.   Trans- 

lated by  J.  Mellish  and  Anna  Swanwick. 

7.  The  Queen's  English.    By  the  late  Dean  Alford. 

8.  Life  and  Labours  of  the  late  Thomas  Brassey.     By  Sir 

A.  Helps,  K.C.B. 

9.  Plato's  Dialogue's:  The  Apology — Crito — Phaedo— Protagoras. 

With  Introductions. 
TO.  Moliere's  Plays:  The  Miser — Tartufife— The  Shopkeeper  turned 
Gentleman.     With  brief  Memoir. 

11.  Goethe's  Reineke  Fox,  in  English  Hexameters.     By  A.  Rogers. 

12.  Oliver  Goldsmith's  Plays. 

13.  Lessing's  Plays  :  Nathan  the  Wise — Minna  von  Barnhelni. 

14.  Plautus's  Comedies:  Trinummus  —  Menaechmi  —  Aululeria  — 

Captivi. 

To  be  followed  at  intei'vals  of  a  fortnight  by 


The  Battle  Days  of  Waterloo. 


The  Vicar  of  Wakefield, 

Sheridan's  Plays. 

Pauli's   Life  of  Alfred  the 


Pauli's  Life  of  Oliver  Crom- 
well. 

Sterne's    Sentimental  j      Great. 

Journey.  I  Hauff's  C/^ravan 


LONDON:    GEORGE    BELL    AND    SONS. 


London  :  Printed  by  Strangewavs  &  Sons,  Tower  Street,  Cambridge  Circus,W.C. 


•k 


PONTIFICAL  INSTITUTE  OF  MEDIAEVAL  STUDIES 
59  QUEEN'S  PARK  CRESC^N^ 
TORONTO— 5.    CANADA 
7984    • 


