PLUTARCH’S  MORALS. 

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  GREEK  BY  SEVERAL  HANDS. 

CORRECTED  AND  REVISED 
BY 

WILLIAM  W.  GOODWIN,  Ph.  D., 

PKOFESSOB  OF  GREEK  LITERATURE  IN  HARVARD  UNIVERSITY. 

WITH 

AN  INTRODUCTION  BY  RALPH  WALDO  EMERSON. 

VOL.  IV. 


LONDON: 

SAMPSON  LOW,  SON,  AND  MARSTON, 

Crown  Buildings,  188  Fleet  Street, 


1870. 


Wellcome  Library 
for  the  lib  y 

and  Ut  3 


n i 


■.cnie 


J~.CA.AA} 


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  FOURTH. 


WITH  THE  TRANSLATORS’  NAMES. 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE  TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 

By  Robert  Midgley,  M.D.,  and  Coll.  Med.  Lond.  Cand. 

Two  men,  Demetrius  of  Tarsus,  from  England,  and  Clcombrotus  the  Lacedaemonian, 
from  Egypt,  meet  at  Delphi,  3.  Their  conversation  about  what  Cleombrotus  had 
seen  and  heard  in  Egypt,  4.  He  had  visited  the  oracle  of  Jupiter  Ammon,  4.  A 
remarkable  lamp  there,  which  was  never  extinguished,  though  its  supply  of  oil 
was  lessened  continually,  4-6.  The  conversation  turns  on  oracles : why  have  most 
of  the  oracles,  even  in  Greece,  become  silent1?  7.  Formerly  these  oracles  gave 
responses,  8.  What  responses  were  given,  8.  Are  responses  now  withheld,  because 
of  the  great  wickedness  of  the  time  ? 10.  The  gods  are  not  inconstant  or  malev- 
olent, 11.  One  cause  may  be  found  in  the  diminished  population  of  Greece,  12. 
When  there  were  more  men,  there  were  more  responses,  12.  God  himself  has  not 
abolished  divination,  13.  God  is  not  concerned  in  all  human  affairs,  14.  There 
are  beings,  called  Daemons,  intermediate  between  Gods  and  men,  14.  These 
Daemons  were  originally  human  beings,  14.  They  are  not  immortal,  though 
very  long-lived,  15.  A mathematical  computation  of  the  possible  length  of  a 
Daemon’s  life,  15-17.  A Daemon  resembles  an  isosceles  triangle,  17.  A Dae- 
mon compared  to  the  moon,  17,  18.  Daemons  are  employed  by  the  gods  as 
their  agents  and  ministers  in  human  affairs,  particularly  in  matters  of  worship 
and  religious  ceremony,  18.  Human  sacrifices  and  cruel  rites  are  required  by 
malignant  Daemons,  19.  Combat  between  Apollo  and  the  Dragon  Python  for 
the  possession  of  the  oracle  at  Delphi,  20.  Daemons  are  appointed  to  have  the 
care  of  oracles  ; when  the  Daemons  depart,  the  oracles  must  of  course  fail,  21.  That 
Daemons  may  be  mortal,  proved  by  a story  related  by  one  of  the  company : 
“ The  great  god  Pan  is  dead,”  23.  Another  story,  about  the  death  in  Britain  of 
a Daemon,  and  the  terrible  storm  that  followed,  24.  Opinions  of  the  Stoics  con- 
cerning Daemons,  24.  Epicureans  reject  the  idea  of  Daemons,  and  with  it  the 
Divine  Providence,  25.  Story  of  a stranger  encountered  by  Cleombrotus  in  his 
travels,  and  what  he  said  about  Daemons  and  oracles,  26-28.  The  wars  of  the 
Titans  were  battles  of  Daemons  with  Daemons,  27.  Daemons,  though  not  gods, 
like  to  be  called  gods  and  honored  as  such,  28.  How  many  worlds  are  there  ? 
one  hundred  and  eighty-three,  ranged  in  the  form  of  a triangle,  29.  Homer  says 
there  are  five  worlds,  30.  Plato  makes  but  one  world,  28,  31.  Probably  there 
are  several  worlds,  31.  Reasons  for  this  opinion,  32.  There  is  one  supreme  God, 
but  many  inferior  gods,  31,  33.  A plurality  of  worlds  further  discussed,  34,  35. 
A plurality  of  worlds  does  not  involve  the  existence  of  a plurality  of  Jupiters,  36. 
An  infinite  number  of  worlds  is  a chimera  : but  a certain  definite  number  is  quite 
probable;  and  Jupiter  may  pass  from  one  world  to  another,  as  occasion  requires, 


IV 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


to  regulate  its  affairs,  36-38.  As  there  are  five  regular  forms  of  solid  bodies, 
there  are  probably  five  worlds,  38,  39.  Objections  to  this  opinion,  40.  The 
opinion  defended,  41,42.  One,  or  unity;  two,  or  duality,  — are  the  supreme 
principles  of  all  things,  42.  One  and  two  make  three,  an  odd  number ; three  and 
two  make  five ; we  reckon  by  fives,  or  by  twice  five ; all  other  numbers  are  pro- 
duced from  these  ; we  have  five  senses,  and  five  fingers ; the  earth  has  five  zones ; 
the  heaven  has  five  circles  ; for  these  and  similar  reasons  it  is  inferred  that  there 
are  five  worlds  and  no  more,  42-47.  The  silence  of  the  oracles  is  due  to  the  fact 
that  the  Daemons  who  presided  over  them  have  departed,  47.  But  how  did  the 
Daemons  exert  their  power  over  the  oracles  ? 47.  If  the  Daemons,  being  hu- 
man spirits  disembodied,  may  foresee  and  foretell  future  events,  why  may  not 
human  spirits,  embodied,  possess  a similar  power1?  48,  49.  Our  souls  certainly 
are  endued  b}r  nature  with  this  power,  50.  This  power  exists  in  certain  states  or 
dispositions  of  the  body,  assisted  and  enforced  by  certain  exhalations  from  the 
earth,  51,  52.  Such  an  exhalation  issues  from  the  earth  at  Delphi  and  other 
places,  53.  But  these  exhalations  are  subject  to  changes,  caused  by  earthquakes, 
&c.,  53,  54.  From  such  causes  the  oracle  may  fail,  54.  A story  about  an  oracle 
in  Cilicia,  55.  Objections  to  the  views  now  expressed,  56,  57.  If  the  prophetic 
faculty  be  a natural  endowment,  why  do  we  offer  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  in  order 
to  obtain  a response  ? 57.  Because  all  good  comes  from  the  gods ; although  our 
natural  wit  and  reason  may  help  in  obtaining  it,  58-60.  Divination  is  from  God; 
it  is  also  from  wit  and  reason ; it  is  promoted  by  enthusiastic  exhalations 
from  the  earth,  59.  When  all  these  things  concur,  the  oracle  gives  responses ; 
when  any  are  wanting,  the  oracle  is  silent,  60-64. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS,  OR  OF  THE  ANCIENT  RELIGION  AND  PHI- 
LOSOPHY OF  EGYPT. 

By  William  Baxter,  Piiilalethes. 

The  knowledge  of  truth  man’s  greatest  blessing  ; to  be  sought  of  the  gods,  65.  Isis 
the  goddess  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  66.  What  makes  a true  priest  of  Isis  ? 67. 
Why  do  the  priests  of  Isis  shave  their  heads  and  wear  linen  garments  ? 67.  Why 
are  those  priests  scrupulous  about  their  food  ? 68.  Why  is  the  bull  Apis  not 
watered  from  the  Nile  ? 68.  Why  do  the  priests  of  the  Sun  abstain  from  wine, 
or  drink  it  sparingly  ? 69.  Why  do  the  priests  abstain  from  fish  and  from  onions  ? 
70.  They  do  not  sacrifice  the  swine,  71.  They  conceal  their  wisdom  in  enig- 
mas, 72.  Hence  the  enigmas  of  Pythagoras,  72.  Some  of  the  Egyptian  enigmas 
stated,  73.  The  tales  related  of  the  Egyptian  gods  not  to  be  taken  literally,  73. 
A story  about  the  birth  of  Osiris,  74.  Another  about  the  birth  of  Isis  and  other 
deities,  75.  The  great  actions  of  Osiris,  75.  The  manner  of  his  death,  76.  His 
wife  Isis,  her  lamentations,  76-78.  Her  search  for  her  husband,  77.  Finds 
the  body  of  Osiris,  78,  79.  About  Maneros,  the  foster-son  of  Isis,  79.  The  body 
of  Osiris  torn  in  pieces  by  Typlion,  his  murderer,  and  the  members  scattered 
about,  80.  The  members  found  and  interred  in  many  places,  80.  War  between 
Typlion  and  Horus,  the  son  of  Osiris,  80,  81.  These  stories  not  to  be  literally 
understood,  82.  These  gods  were  not  kings  and  mighty  men,  83.  Semiramis, 
Sesostris,  Cyrus,  Alexander,  were  human  beings,  not  deities,  85.  Isis,  Osiris, 
and  Typlion,  were  not  divine  beings,  nor  human,  but  Daemons,  an  intermediate 
genus,  86.  Such  also  were  Saturn,  the  giants  and  Titans  of  the  Greeks,  86.  This 
notion  is  sanctioned  by  Homer,  Hesiod,  Plato,  Xenocrates,  and  Empedocles,  86, 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


V 


87.  Typhon  was  a malignant  Daemon,  88.  Isis  and  Osiris  were  good  Daemons, 
afterwards  changed  into  gods,  88.  Isis  is  the  same  as  Proserpine  ; Serapis  is  Pluto, 

88.  Osiris  is  identical  with  Serapis  and  with  Bacchus,  89.  Osiris  is  also  identical 
with  the  bull  Apis,  90.  The  Egyptians  offer  disrespect  to  Typhon,  91.  They 
maltreat  the  ass  and  animals  and  men  having  red  hair,  because  his  hair  was  red,  91. 
According  to  some,  Osiris  is  the  Nile,  and  Typhon  the  sea ; explanation,  92.  The 
most  learned  hold  Osiris  to  be  the  cause  of  generation,  94.  Proofs  that  Osiris  is 
the  same  as  Bacchus,  95,  96.  The  Phallic  rites,  and  how  they  originated,  96,  97. 
The  Nile,  and  every  thing  humid,  is  the  efflux  of  Osiris,  and  he  is  thus  the  cause 
of  all  tilings,  96,  97.  The  country  bordering  on  the  Nile  is  the  body  of  Isis,  98. 
The  conspiracy  of  Typhon  explained,  99.  The  mourning  of  Isis,  and  her  recovery 
of  the  body  of  Osiris  explained,  100.  Another  explanation  of  Typhon,  Osiris  and 
Isis,  the  heavenly  bodies,  101.  The  eclipse  of  the  moon  is  the  death  of  Osiris, 
104.  Worship  of  the  dog  Anubis,  77,  104.  Typhon  stands  for  the  principle  or 
cause  of  evil,  distress,  and  destruction,  105.  The  Magian  or  Persian  doctrine  of 
two  original  independent  forces  or  powers  ; one  the  source  of  light  or  good,  the 
other  of  darkness  and  evil,  106.  These  maintain  an  incessant  struggle,  107. 
The  final  issue  will  be  happy,  108.  The  same  ideas  are  found  among  the  Chal- 
deans and  the  Greeks,  108.  These  ideas  are  found  also  among  the  Pythagoreans 
and  in  Plato,  109.  Throughout  nature  we  find  the  two  discordant  principles,  which 
are  represented  by  the  names  Osiris  and  Typhon,  109,  110.  The  hieroglyphics 
and  religious  rites  which  refer  to  these  principles,  110-112.  Isis  is  the  feminine 
and  productive  property  of  Nature,  113.  Horus,  son  of  Isis,  represents  the  world 
of  mind,  114.  He  has  a struggle  with  Typhon,  114, 115.  The  three  constituents 
of  the  divine  nature,  115.  Illustrated  by  a triangle,  115.  What  Plato  says  of  the 
production  of  love,  116,  117.  Fables  are  doctrinal  only  in  part,  117.  The  fable 
of  Typhon  further  explained,  118.  Supposed  etymology  of  the  words  Isis,  Osiris, 
Anubis,  and  others,  119-121.  The  sistrum,  or  timbrel,  used  at  the  feasts  of  Isis, 
121.  Isis  and  Osiris  produce  whatever  is  orderly  and  beneficial ; Typhon  is  the 
cause  of  disorder  and  mischief,  122.  These  deities  are  not  peculiar  to  Egypt ; 
all  mankind  have  them,  123.  We  are  not  to  rest  in  the  letter  of  the  accounts 
given  of  these  gods,  124.  Sun,  moon,  earth,  fire,  wind,  water,  are  not  gods,  but 
elements  wielded  by  the  gods,  and  by  which  the  gods  exhibit  and  manifest  them- 
selves, 124.  We  are  to  rise  above  the  symbol  to  the  thing  symbolized,  125. 
We  should  not  confound  the  true  idea  of  God  with  the  appearances  and  changes 
of  external  nature,  126,  127.  The  statues  of  the  gods  are  not  the  gods,  128. 
The  assumption  of  the  forms  of  brute  animals  by  the  gods  is  not  to  be  believed, 
129.  Yet  the  idolatrous  worship  of  the  Egyptians  had  no  better  foundation 
than  this  belief,  129,  130.  Some  reasons  assigned  for  brute  worship,  131,  132. 
God  is  to  be  worshiped  in  Nature,  not  Nature  instead  of  God,  134.  The  sacred 
vestments  of  Isis  and  Osiris ; their  nature  and  use,  135.  Purpose  for  which 
incense  and  perfumes  are  burnt,  136-139. 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM  GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 

By  John  Philips,  Gent. 

Concerning  those  whom  God  is  slow  to  punish.”  This  subject  is  discussed 
between  Plutarch  and  several  of  his  relatives,  Plutarch  being  the  principal 
speaker.  Epicurus  had  just  left  the  company  uttering  invectives  against  the 
justice  of  the  Deity  in  the  government  of  the  world,  140.  It  is  admitted  that  the 


VI 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


delay  of  divine  justice  gives  rise  to  perplexing  thoughts,  141.  Some  of  the 
objections  are,  — (1)  Such  delay  seems  to  proceed  from  indifference  on  the  part 
of  the  Deity  to  the  desert  of  crime  ; (2)  Punishment  long  delayed  fails  to  restrain 
the  commission  of  crime,  as  a speedy  retribution  would  do ; (3)  It  is  often  entirely 
useless  as  a reparation  to  those  who  have  suffered  from  injustice ; (4)  It  embold- 
ens the  transgressor,  141 ; (5)  It  diminishes  in  many  minds  the  belief  of  Divine 
Providence  ; (6)  Punishment  long  delayed  fails  of  any  good  effect  on  the  offender 
himself,  143.  To  what  good  purpose,  then,  do  the  millstones  of  the  gods  grind, 
when  they  grind  so  slowly1?  143.  To  these  objections  it  is  answered  as  follows  : 
It  becomes  us  to  enter  on  such  inquiries  with  great  caution  and  self-distrust, 
because  our  knowledge  of  God  and  of  his  ways  is  extremely  narrow  and  imper- 
fect, 144.  We  are  very  incompetent  judges  of  what  it  is  fit  for  God  to  do,  144. 
God  only  knows  when,  and  in  what  manner,  and  how  much  to  punish,  144.  Those 
who  are  ignorant  of  music  or  of  military  affairs  are  not  competent  judges  of 
those  matters,  144.  No  one  who  is  not  properly  trained  can  wisely  administer 
human  law,  145.  The  remissness  of  which  complaint  is  made  is  true  only  in 
part,  and  is  only  apparent.  So  far  as  it  is  real,  it  may  be  vindicated  by  the  fol- 
lowing considerations:  (1)  The  Deity,  by  being  slow  to  punish,  teaches  us  to 
moderate  our  anger,  and  never  to  punish  in  a passion,  146 ; He  would  lead  us  to 
imitate  his  own  gentleness  and  forbearance,  147;  (2)  The  wicked,  in  consequence 
of  delay,  have  opportunity  to  repent,  and  are  therefore  spared  from  a desire  of 
their  reformation,  148 ; The  summary  justice,  to  which  the  passions  of  men 
incite  them,  excludes  all  regard  to  this  object,  and  degenerates  into  the  mere 
gratification  of  malice  and  revenge,  148 ; The  wisdom  of  the  divine  policy,  so 
different  from  this,  is  fully  justified  by  the  results,  since  history  records  many 
instances  where  men  who,  in  early  life,  were  profligate,  have  afterwards  reformed 
and  become  useful  to  society,  149,  150;  (3)  The  wicked  are  often  permitted  to 
live  and  prosper,  that  Providence  may  bjr  them  execute  its  justice  on  others,  of 
which  instances  are  given,  151,  152  ; (4)  The  wicked  are  sometimes  spared  that 
a noble  and  virtuous  posterity,  proceeding  from  them,  may  bless  the  world,  152; 
(5)  Punishment  is  sometimes  deferred  for  a time  that  the  hand  of  Providence 
may  be  more  conspicuous  in  inflicting  it,  153.  But  the  objection  against  an  over- 
ruling Providence,  founded  on  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  assumes  too  .much; 
the  delay  is  apparent,  rather  than  real,  154.  Retribution  follows  hard  on  the 
steps  of  crime,  in  the  shame,  remorse,  and  inward  suffering  of  the  offender,  154. 
Many  look  with  envy  on  wicked  men  who  seem  to  enjoy  high  prosperity,  while 
those  men  are  soon  to  become  involved  in  the  deepest  misery,  154.  Wicked  men 
suffer  not  a late  but  a long  punishment ; they  suffer  all  the  time,  155.  What  we 
call  delay,  is  not  such  to  the  Deity ; distinctions  of  time  with  him  have  no  place, 
155.  It  is  not  the  last  moment  of  punishment  which  contains  all  the  punish- 
ment, 155.  God  has  the  offender  all  the  while  in  his  power,  and  does  not  suffer 
him  to  rest,  156.  Instances  are  given  of  remorse  suffered  by  the  guilty,  156,  157. 
Were  death  the  extinction  of  our  being,  it  might  still  be  maintained  that  the 
Deity  is  not  remiss  in  punishing  crime,  157.  The  wicked  find,  even  here,  that 
no  real  good  comes  from  their  wickedness,  158.  Self-condemnation,  a dread  of 
censure,  a fear  of  death,  embitter  their  lives,  159.  One  of  the  company  now 
leads  the  conversation  to  a kindred  subject,  the  question  how  the  conduct  of 
Providence  can  be  justified  in  punishing  children  for  the  misconduct  of  their 
parents,  of  which  several  instances  are  quoted,  160,  161.  To  this  it  is  replied : 
(1)  Children  often  derive  advantage  from  the  virtue  and  piety  of  their  fathers; 
it  is  not  therefore  strange  that  they  should  suffer  for  their  wickedness,  163,  164. 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


VII 


(2)  The  law  of  cause  and  effect  comes  in  here,  as  in  other  cases,  though  we  may 
not  fully  explain  it;  children  often  inherit  the  diseases  of  their  parents;  the 
plague  of  Athens  took  its  rise  in  far  distant  Ethiopia,  165.  (3)  The  constitution 

of  society  binds  one  generation  to  another,  and  thus  renders  this  retribution  just, 
as  well  as  inevitable ; every  family,  as  well  as  every  state,  has  a separate  exist- 
ence, a personal  identity  of  its  own,  and  it  is  one  and  the  same  through  succes- 
sive ages  ; hence  the  social  crime  of  one  age  may  properly  work  out  its  legitimate 
results  in  another,  166-168.  (4)  In  all  cases,  God  deals  with  men  according  to  their 
deserts ; if  children  are  virtuous,  they  are  not  harmed  for  what  their  ancestors 
have  done,  169.  But,  says  one  of  the  company,  some  of  your  remarks  imply  the 
immortality  of  the  soul,  168,  169.  Plutarch  answers,  yes ; and  we  have  good 
reason  for  assuming  that  point ; if  we  were  like  the  leaves  which  fall  from  the 
trees  in  autumn,  or  like  the  hot-house  plant  which  has  no  enduring  root;  if  we 
were  brought  into  existence  to  endure  only  for  a day,  it  would  be  unworthy  of 
the  Deity  to  lavish  so  much  care  upon  us,  169.  The  immortality  of  the  soul, 
and  an  overruling  Providence,  are  confirmed  to  us  by  the  same  argument,  170. 
If  the  soul  survives  the  body,  we  may  conclude  that  its  future  state  will  be  one 
of  reward  or  punishment,  because  life  is  a struggle  and  a probation,  170.  Punish- 
ments that  reach  posterity  often  restrain  the  inclinations  of  wicked  persons,  171. 
Children  born  of  diseased  parents  need  to  be  guarded  against  the  hereditary 
disease,  172.  And  children  of  wicked  parents  will  be  themselves  wicked,  unless 
careful  and  timely  restraints  be  placed  upon  them,  173,  174.  God  sees  the  inbred 
corruption  if  we  do  not,  and  often  does  not  wait  till  the  actual  outbreak  before 
animadverting  upon  it,  174,  175.  Dormant  villany  may  be  more  dangerous  than 
open  iniquity,  and  so  may  need  chastisement,  175.  The  innocent  are  never 
punished  for  the  guilty  ; but  if  a man  tread  In  his  father’s  steps,  he  must  succeed 
to  his  punishment,  175,  176.  The  argument  is  enforced  by  the  story  of  a man 
who  lived  a dishonest  and  wicked  life ; who  appeared  to  die ; visited  the  world 
of  spirits ; saw  the  rewards  and  punishments  there  experienced ; came  back  to 
life,  and  was  greatly  reformed  in  consequence,  177-188. 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION  TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFFSPRING. 

By  R.  Brown,  M.L. 

The  Grecians,  from  distrust  of  Grecian  justice,  appealed  to  foreign  judicatures,  189. 
In  a similar  manner,  philosophers,  instead  of  appeals  to  human  nature,  have 
appealed  to  brute  affection,  189.  Absurdity  of  such  an  appeal,  189.  Brutes, 
having  no  reason,  follow  blindly  and  implicitly  the  guidance  of  Nature,  190.  All 
brutes  love  their  offspring,  toiling  and  suffering  for  their  good,  190, 191.  Let  them 
herein  be  our  examples,  192.  Some  pretend  that  among  human  beings  disin- 
terested affection  does  not  exist,  192.  This  assertion  is  not  true,  193.  Nature 
has  so  ordered  the  circumstances  in  which  man  comes  into  being,  as  to  necessitate 
the  existence  of  a strong  and  tender  love  on  the  part  of  the  mother,  193,  194. 
Parents  d©  not  love  their  children  in  the  hope  of  benefit  to  be  derived  from  them, 
195.  Nor  from  the  desire  of  having  heirs  to  their  estates,  196.  A rich  man 
without  heirs  has  many  friends ; and  children,  when  born  to  him,  do  not  augment 
his  power,  196.  Natural  affection  may  be  obscured  and  hindered  by  vice;  but 
this  disproves  not  its  existence,  197. 


Ylll 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE  OF  THE  ROMANS. 

By  John  Oswald. 

Is  the  grandeur  and  power  of  the  Roman  Empire  due  to  Virtue,  or  to  Fortune?  198. 
Virtue  and  Fortune,  though  different  in  nature,  conspire  to  produce  the  same 
results,  198.  Both  united  in  rearing  that  stupendous  structure,  the  Roman  Em- 
pire, 199.  The  world  was  full  of  change,  confusion,  and  disorder,  till  the  power 
of  Rome  extended  over  the  nations,  200.  Virtue  and  Fortune  now  come  forward 
in  this  discussion  to  maintain  their  respective  claims  as  architects  and  supporters 
of  the  Roman  greatness,  200.  In  the  train  of  Virtue  are  Fabricius,  Camillus, 
Cincinnatus,  Mareellus,  Scipio,  and  others,  201.  Fortune,  having  deserted  the 
Persians,  Greeks  and  Carthaginians,  comes  forward  leading  Numa,  Aemilius 
Paulus,  Metellus,  Sylla,  as  her  favored  sons,  201-203.  The  Romans  themselves 
attributed  their  greatness  to  Fortune,  and  built  many  temples  to  it,  203,  211. 
Caesar  relied  much  on  Fortune,  and  was  greatly  assisted  by  it,  204,  205.  Aug- 
ustus was  the  favored  child  of  Fortune,  205.  Fortune  was  manifest  in  all  the 
affairs  of  Rome  from  the  beginning,  as  in  the  birth  and  education  of  Romulus, 
206-208.  In  the  long,  wise,  and  peaceful  reign  of  Numa,  208-210.  In  the  birth, 
elevation,  and  prosperity  of  Servius  Tullius,  212,  213.  In  the  triumphs  of  the 
Romans  over  Philip,  Antioehus,  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  especially  the  expe- 
ditions of  Pompey,  214.  The  favor  of  Fortune  was  constant,  from  age  to  age : it 
attended  the  Romans  in  all  their  enterprises,  215.  The  great  overthrow  at  the 
river  Allia  was  not  fatal  to  Rome,  216-218.  The  cackling  of  the  sacred  geese,  a 
piece  of  good  fortune,  saved  Rome,  217.  Alexander  of  Macedon  was  intending 
war  against  the  Romans,  but  Fortune  ordered  his  death  just  at  the  right  time  for 
them,  219.  [The  remainder  of  this  treatise,  containing  the  arguments  in  behalf 
of  Virtue,  is  lost.] 

OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 

By  John  Philips,  Gent. 

Talkativeness  an  inveterate  disease,  220.  Talkative  people  are  very  troublesome, 
221.  They  are  avoided  and  are  not  heard,  222.  They  never  gain  belief,  223. 
Talkativeness  often  results  from  drunkenness,  224.  Silence  is  often  a great  virtue  ; 
anecdote  of  Zeno  at  a feast,  225.  Loquacity  shows  great  want  of  good  breeding, 

227.  It  exposes  to  great  danger,  228.  It  gave  Athens  into  the  power  of  Sylla, 

228.  It  prolonged  the  tyranny  of  Nero,  228,  229.  The  noble  taciturnity  of 
Leaena,  229,  230.  Secrets  are  not  to  be  revealed,  even  to  our  most  intimate 
friends,  232,  233.  Anecdote  of  a Roman  senator  and  his  wife,  233,  234.  Mis- 
chiefs of  a vain  curiosity,  236.  Loquacious  men  destroy  themselves,  238.  Anec- 
dote of  Dionysius  and  a barber,  238.  Of  an  Athenian  barber,  238,  239.  Of  one 
who  robbed  the  temple  of  Minerva,  239.  Of  the  murderers  of  Ibycus,  240.  Great 
peril  of  an  unbridled  tongue,  240.  A’  tell-tale  is  often  a traitor,  241.  To  cure 
ourselves  of  so  vile  a habit,  consider  the  mischiefs  which  arise  from  it,  242.  Study 
conciseness  of  speech  : imitate  the  Spartan  brevity,  243.  When  in  company 
questions  are  asked,  keep  silence  till  all  the  rest  have  refused  to  answer,  245,  246. 
Be  not  hasty  to  answer  questions  that  are  intended  to  ensnare  you,  247.  When 
the  questioner  really  desires  information,  let  there  be  a pause  between  the  ques- 
tion and  the  answer,  247.  Three  sorts  of  answers  to  questions,  — the  necessary, 


CONTENTS  OF  YOL.  IV. 


IX 


the  polite,  the  superfluous,  248.  Beware  of  the  third  sort,  249.  Beware  of  talk- 
ing on  favorite  subjects,  and  of  matters  relating  to  your  profession,  250,  251.  Be- 
fore you  speak,  consider  what  advantage  may  arise  from  speaking,  and  what 
mischief  from  holding  your  peace,  253. 


OF  LOVE. 

By  the  Same  Hand. 

The  scene  of  this  discussion  is  laid  near  Thespiae,  on  the  slope  of  Mount  Helicon ; 
the  interlocutors  are  Plutarch  and  several  of  his  friends,  254,  255.  The  occasion 
is  a match  projected  between  Ismenodora,  a chaste,  noble,  and  rich  widow,  and 
Baccho,  a beautiful  young  man,  botli  of  Thespiae,  256.  There  are  different 
opinions  concerning  the  propriety  of  the  connection,  chiefly  on  account  of  the 
disparity  of  age  and  outward  condition,  256.  A discussion  arises  as  to  the  true 
nature  and  foundation  of  love,  as  it  actually  exists  in  the  world,  258.  Does  it 
spring  from  the  desire  of  carnal  gratification  merely,  or  from  some  higher  im- 
pulse 1 258,  259.  One  speaker  pretends  that  genuine  love  is  that  for  beautiful 
boys,  Traidepaana,  and  condemns  the  love  of  women,  259.  Another  condemns 
male  converse  as  contrary  to  nature,  260.  It  is  of  recent  origin,  nourished  by 
the  scenes  of  the  palaestra,  261,  262.  As  Venus  is  not  present  in  such  scenes, 
there  is  no  real  love,  262.  The  connection  of  Baccho  with  Ismenodora  is  object- 
ed to  by  some  of  the  speakers,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  make  him  dependent 
on  her,  264,  265.  Plutarch  advocates  the  connection,  266.  Men  have  sometimes 
married  wives  who  held  them  in  subjection,  but  came  to  this  result  by  their  own 
weakness,  266,  267.  There  may  be  a positive  advantage  in  having  a wife  older 
than  one’s  self,  arising  from  her  superior  wisdom,  268.  At  this  point,  the  com- 
pany receive  information  that  Ismenodora,  with  some  friends,  had  got  Baccho 
into  her  house,  and  was  holding  him  there,  269.  A lady  warmly  in  love,  270. 
Is  Love  a Deity,  or  only  a strong  human  passion  1 272.  Why  should  we  call  in 
question  the  deity  of  Cupid  more  than  that  of  Jupiter  or  Minerva  t 273,  274. 
Why  admit  the  deity  of  Mars,  the  god  of  war  and  slaughter,  and  even  of  the 
nymphs  and  dryads,  and  refuse  to  believe  that  a god  presides  over  the  tenderest 
human  affections  ? 275-280.  The  god  of  love  is  not  inferior  either  in  power,  or 
in  the  benefits  he  confers,  to  any  other  deity,  281.  Mere  venereal  delight  may 
be  purchased  for  a drachm  ; it  is  soon  over,  281,  282.  Love,  as  an  affection,  has 
a controlling  power ; examples,  283-287.  Its  power  over  the  ancient  heroes,  286. 
Love  makes  cowards  brave,  and  covetous  men  liberal,  288.  There  are  different 
opinions  about  the  gods,  but  all  confess  the  power  of  the  god  of  love,  291. 
Opinions  of  the  Egyptians  concerning  the  god  of  love,  292.  Resemblance  be- 
tween the  sun  and  the  god  of  love,  and  differences,  293,  294.  True  love  has  for 
its  main  and  ultimate  object  the  qualities  of  the  mind  and  heart,  295,  296.  True 
beauty  is  that  of  the  soul,  297.  Love  is  the  scourge  of  proud,  ill-natured  people, 
298.  The  causes  of  love  are  common  to  both  sexes,  299.  Love  is  a noble  and 
generous  affection,  300.  In  wedlock,  founded  on  true  love,  there  will  be  no 
“mine”  and  “thine,”  301.  There  will  be  mutual  respect  and  confidence,  301. 
All  other  love  will  be  excluded,  302.  Illustrated  by  the  story  of  Camma,  a Gal- 
atian lady,  302,  303.  A raging  passion  for  beautiful  persons,  either  male  or 
female,  is  not  true  love,  305.  Yet  personal  charms  in  a modest  woman  will  fix 
the  affection  of  a husband,  305.  No  earthly  joy  is  so  great  and  so  lasting  as  that 
arising  from  the  conjugal  union,  307.  The  love  of  virtuous  women  does  not 


X 


CONTENTS  OE  VOL.  IY. 


cease  with  their  youth  and  beauty,  308.  Conjugal  fidelity  exemplified  in  the  case 
of  Sabinus  of  Galatia  and  his  wife,  308-310.  The  discussion  ends  with  the  mar- 
riage of  Ismenodora  and  Baccho,  311. 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 

By  Sir  A.  I. 

1.  Aristoclia,  of  Haliartus  in  Boeotia,  is  sought  in  marriage  by  two  young  men; 
on  her  wedding-day  she  is  slain,  312,  313.  2.  Arehias  of  Corinth,  enamoured 
of  a young  man  named  Actaeon,  endeavors  b}r  force  to  obtain  possession  of  his 
person ; resistance  being  made,  Actaeon  is  slain,  313-315.  3.  Two  virgins  of 
Leuctra  in  Boeotia  having  been  ravished  and  murdered  by  two  young  Spartans, 
their  father  goes  to  Lacedaemon  to  obtain  redress ; failing  in  the  attempt,  he 
invokes  the  vengeance  of  the  Furies  upon  that  city,  and  slays  himself;  not  long 
after,  the  Lacedaemonians  receive  a signal  defeat  at  Leuctra,  315-319.  4.  Pho- 

cus,  the  father  of  a beautiful  virgin,  refusing  to  give  her  in  marriage,  is  mur- 
dered ; the  murderers  escape,  but  are  at  length  taken,  and  put  to  death, 
319,  320.  5.  Alcippus  of  Lacedaemon,  a virtuous  citizen,  being  unjustly  ban- 
ished, his  wife  and  daughters  are  not  permitted  to  follow  him ; his  wife  slays 
herself  and  daughters,  and  a terrible  earthquake  follows,  320-322. 


A DISCOURSE  TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 

By  Mr.  J.  Kersey. 

Difficulty  of  giving  advice  to  princes,  323.  A prince  in  the  first  place,  should  learn 
to  govern  himself,  324.  He  should  feel  that  he  is  God’s  minister  for  good  to  his 
subjects,  325.  He  should  not  affect  the  power  or  the  absolute  sovereignty  of 
God,  326.  He  should  be  more  afraid  of  doing  than  of  suffering  ill,  327.  He 
should  vigilantly  guard  the  welfare  of  his  subjects,  327.  His  wisdom  and  justice 
should  reflect  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  God,  328.  His  power  should  be  re- 
strained by  sound  reason,  329. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 

By  A.  G.,  Gent. 

Plutarch  feels  under  obligation  to  defend  his  countrymen  and  others  from  the  un- 
generous representations  of  Herodotus,  331.  Some  signs  of  a malicious  narrative, 
332.  To  put  the  worst  construction  on  actions  ; to  relate  fixults  having  no  con- 
nection with  the  story  ; to  omit  the  relation  of  laudable  actions ; when  the  same 
action  has  been  related  in  two  different  ways,  to  prefer  the  more  uniuvorable ; to 
assign  had  motives  for  an  action  of  which  the  true  motive  is  unknown : these 
things  are  signs  of  malice,  332-334.  Many  misrepresentations  occur  in  Herod- 
otus : as  in  the  story  of  Io ; the  cause  of  the  Trojan  war ; and  that  the  Greeks 
derived  their  religious  worship  from  the  Egyptians,  335,  336.  Also  that  the  Per- 
sians learned  the  castration  of  hoys  from  the  Greeks,  336.  That  Hercules  came 
from  Egypt,  and  Thales  from  Phoenicia,  337.  That  the  Alcmaeonidae  were 
guilty  of  treason,  338.  That  Othrvadas  was  not  truly  a hero,  338.  He  is  incon- 
sistent in  his  account  of  Croesus,  339.  He  misrepresents  the  Athenians  in  the 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


XI 


affair  of  the  Milesians,  339.  And  the  Lacedaemonians  in  their  expedition  against 
Polycrates  of  Samos,  340.  And  the  Corinthians  in  the  affair  of  the  300  boys 
from  Corcyra,  341.  He  calumniates  Clisthenes,  the  deliverer  of  Athens,  Aris- 
togiton,  and  the  Lacedaemonians,  for  their  share  in  the  expulsion  of  Hippias,  343. 
He  gives  an  incorrect  and  defective  account  of  the  burning  of  Sardis  by  the 
Athenians  and  Eretrians,  344.  He  falsifies  the  history  of  the  Persian  invasion 
of  Greece,  345,  et  seq.  He  defames  the  Alcmaeonidae  and  the  Argives,  for  their 
conduct  in  that  affair,  347-349.  lie  indulges  a malignant  spite  against  the  The- 
bans, 351-356.  He  does  injustice  to  Leonidas,  354.  He  misrepresents  the  re- 
tirement of  the  Greek  fleet  after  the  battle  of  Artemisium,  356-358.  He  is  unfair 
towards  those  of  the  Greeks  who  were  compelled  to  submit  to  the  overwhelming 
power  of  the  Persians,  351,  352,  360.  He  misrepresents  the  Naxians,  360,  361. 
He  is  unjust  to  Themistocles,  and  to  Adimantus,  the  Corinthian  admiral,  in  re- 
spect to  their  conduct  at  Salamis,  361-364.  He  unfairly  represents  the  battle  of 
Plataea,  and  the  part  taken  in  it  by  several  of  the  confederate  States,  366-369. 
The  summing  up  of  the  case,  370. 

OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS,  AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 

Bt  S.  White,  M.D. 

The  views  of  Chrysippus,  the  Stoic,  opposed,  372,  et  seq.  He  and  the  Stoics  in  gen- 
eral pervert  the  common  conceptions,  373,  374.  Do  they  agree  with  Nature  who 
make  all  natural  things  indifferent  t 375.  Natural  things,  — health,  vigor,  comfort, 
&c.,  — are  necessary,  if  we  would  live  according  to  Nature  ; but  the  Stoics  deny 
this,  375.  An  intelligent  and  wise  man  will  estimate  every  thing  at  its  true 
value,  376.  When  deprived  of  good  things,  a wise  man  feels  the  loss,  377.  It  is 
a common  experience  that  a man  has  joy  in  exchanging  a state  of  great  evil  for  a 
state  of  great  good ; but  the  Stoics  do  not  admit  this,  377.  The  Stoics  do  not 
admit  that  the  continuance  of  a good  thing  increases  its  value,  contrary  to  the 
common  apprehension  and  belief,  378.  They  maintain  that  virtue  and  happiness, 
when  present,  may  not  be  perceived  by  him  who  enjoys  them  ; which  is  a great 
absurdity,  378,  379.  Is  the  difference  then  so  small  between  health  and  sickness, 
wisdom  and  folly  ? 379.  It  is  repugnant  to  the  common  conception,  that  all  men 
who  are  not  wise  are  equally  foolish,  wicked,  and  unjust;  and  yet  the  Stoics 
assert  this,  380.  They  say  that  a man  possessing  all  good  things  may  find  it 
convenient  to  commit  suicide ; and  that  a man  destitute  of  all  good  may  find  it 
fitting  to  live,  381,  382.  Chrysippus  inconsistent  with  himself,  383.  He  main- 
tains that  vice  is  not  wholly  useless  ; that  it  is  indispensable  to  the  existence  of 
virtue,  384.  Must  we  then  pray  that  wickedness  may  always  continue  1 385. 
God  has  no  need  of  thieves,  murderers,  and  other  evil-doers,  nor  is  wickedness 
pleasing  to  him,  386.  The  Stoics  say  that  prudence  could  not  exist  in  the  utter 
absence  of  evil,  387.  But  good  and  evil  do  not  exist  that  there  may  be  place  and 
opportunity  for  prudence,  388.  Suppose  evil  to  cease  to  exist : would  any  harm 
arise  from  the  lack  of  prudence?  388.  Our  taste  would  not  be  lost,  if  all  bitter  things 
were  wanting,  389.  If  good  only  existed,  might  there  not  be  an  apprehension  of 
evil  ? 389.  If  vice  were  absolutely  necessary,  might  not  a few  examples  suffice  ? 
389.  The  Stoics  say  that  no  vicious  man  receives  benefit  from  any  source  ; has 
no  benefactors,  and  does  not  slight  benefactors  : of  course,  then,  he  is  never  un- 
grateful, 391.  What  is  utilty  1 392.  According  to  the  Stoics,  it  is  a gathering 
and  keeping  of  useless  and  indifferent  things,  393.  To  live  virtuously  and 


XU 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


according  to  nature  is  the  true  happiness,  394.  The  Stoics,  in  practice,  sanction 
this  idea  ; but  their  philosophy  rejects  it,  394.  The  end  is  more  important  and 
valuable  than  the  means,  though  both  may  be  good ; but  the  Stoics  allow  no 
good  or  evil  thing  to  be  greater  or  less  than  another  good  or  evil  thing,  395.  It  is 
against  common  sense  to  say,  with  Chrysippus,  that,  there  may  be  two  ends  or 
scopes  proposed  of  life,  and  that  all  we  do  is  not  to  be  referred  to  one,  396.  That 
which  is  first  by  nature  is  to  be  first  chosen,  396.  The  Stoics  say  that  the  obtain- 
ing of  natural  things  is  not  the  end  of  aiming  after  them,  397.  Chrysippus  says 
a man  may  be  indifferent  to  good  and  evil  before  he  understands  the  nature  of 
good  or  evil : which  is  utterly  impossible,  398.  The  Stoics  reason  in  a circle, 
399,  400.  Absurdities  of  their  philosophy,  402.  It  is  self-contradictory,  403. 
According  to  them  the  universe  is  nothing  and  nowhere,  404.  Their  conceptions 
of  God  are  confused  and  erroneous,  404.  They  believe  none  of  the  gods  to  be 
immortal,  but  Jupiter  alone,  405.  They  admit  the  providence  of  God,  but  do 
not  allow  that  he  bestows  good  things,  406.  They  make  God  the  author  of  evil, 
408.  They  hold  a final  conflagration,  and  an  absorption  of  all  things  into  God, 
405,  409.  They  say  there  is  but  one  quality  in  two  substances,  410.  They  think 
that  one  body  may  mix  with  another  through  its  whole  extent,  so  that  a drop  of 
wine  may  extend  through  the  whole  Atlantic  Ocean,  411,  412.  Their  philosophy 
concerning  the  equality  and  inequality  of  bodies  leads  to  absurdity,  412-416; 
and  so  when  they  say  that  nothing  touches  another,  416,  417.  They  also  ab- 
surdly say  that  time  may  be  past  or  future,  but  not  present,  418-420.  They  say 
that  nothing  can  overtake  another : a swift  horse  cannot  overtake  a slow  tortoise, 
because  the  interval  between  can  be  divided  into  infinite  spaces,  420.  They  say 
that  every  man  has  two  bodies  precisely  alike,  one  being  substance,  the  other 
quality,  421,  422.  They  make  the  virtues  and  vices,  the  fancies,  impulses,  and 
operations  of  the  mind  to  be  distinct  bodies  and  animals,  423.  They  make  God 
himself  to  be  an  intellectual  body,  not  incorporeal,  425.  They  make  qualities  to 
be  bodies,  and  yet  say  that  matter  is  void  of  quality,  426. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 

Br  E.  Smith,  M.A. 

The  life  of  every  man,  especially  of  every  philosopher,  should  agree  with  what  he 
believes  and  teaches,  428.  The  lives  of  Chrysippus,  Zeno,  and  other  Stoic  phi- 
losophers, did  not  agree  with  their  doctrines,  429,  et  seq.  It  has  been  so  when  any 
of  them  have  managed  state  affairs,  429.  And  in  regard  to  the  worship  of  the 
gods,  430.  They  represent  virtue  as  one  indivisible  quality  of  the  mind,  and  yet 
admit  several  virtues,  431.  They  say  that  students  should  first  learn  logic,  sec- 
ondly ethics,  then  physics,  and  then  say  that  natural  science  should  come  first, 
432,  433.  Chrysippus  has  written  on  both  sides  of  the  same  question  ; he  has 
opposed  his  own  doctrines,  434-436.  They  say  that  the  law  commands  good  ac- 
tions and  forbids  evil  actions  ; and  yet  wicked  men  cannot  do  good,  437.  Chry- 
sippus says  that  nothing  properly  belongs  to  a bad  man,  or  is  profitable  to  him  ; 
that  no  one  vice  or  sin  is  greater  than  another,  nor  any  good  deed  better  than 
another;  and  then  contradicts  himself,  438-441.  He  disparages  the  fear  of  divine 
wrath  as  a motive  to  virtue,  and  yet  commends  it,  442.  In  one  place  he  allows 
pleasure  to  be  a good  ; in  another  place  he  denies  that  it  is  so,  443.  In  one  place 
he  asserts  that  he  who  injures  another  injures  also  himself,  and  in  another  place 
says  this  is  absurd,  444.  He  often  asserts  that  vice  is  the  essence  of  unhappiness  ; 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


XIII 


but  elsewhere  says  that  it  is  profitable  for  a bad  man  to  live  rather  than  to  die, 
although  he  never  become  good,  446.  He  says  it  is  sometimes  meet  for  the  hap- 
py to  make  away  with  themselves,  and  for  the  unhappy  to  continue  to  live,  447. 
He  says  that  good  things  are  totally  and  necessarily  different  from  bad;  and  yet 
that  a man  may  change,  from  one  to  the  other  without  perceiving  it,  447.  He 
maintains  that  a prudent  man  meddles  not  with  public  affairs ; and  also  says  that 
a wise  man  willingly  takes  upon  him  a kingdom,  448.  He  makes  a wise  man  in- 
different to  wealth,  and  yet  eager  to  receive  pay,  449.  In  one  place  he  justifies 
unclean  practices  from  the  example  of  brute  animals,  and  in  another  place  con- 
demns them,  452.  When  two  things  are  exactly  alike,  and  there  is  a necessity 
to  choose  between  them,  the  mind  chooses  : which  Chrysippus  in  one  place  calls 
an  effect  without  a cause,  but  in  another  place  thinks  there  may  be  a hidden 
cause,  452,  453.  He  highly  commends  Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle,  for  what 
they  delivered  on  dialectics,  and  yet  opposes  .their  views,  454.  He  says  that  to 
have  been  happy  a long  time  is  to  be  no  more  happy  than  to  be  happy  only  for  a 
moment ; and  yet  that  momentary  happiness  is  worth  nothing,  455.  He  allows 
ornament  to  be  desirable  in  a discourse,  and  yet  says  that  blemishes  and  solecisms 
in  speaking  are  not  to  be  regarded,  456.  He  applies  to  the  gods  terms  of  high 
praise,  but  makes  them  the  authors  of  slaughter  and  carnage,  460.  If  the  gods 
are  the  authors  of  war  they  are  also  the  authors  of  vice  and  wickedness,  contrary 
to  what  Chrysippus  says,  461.  He  says  nothing  can  be  contrary  to  Nature,  and 
even  vicious  practices  are  according  to  Nature  and  the  laws  established  by  the 
Deity : yet  he  says  God,  and  man  too,  punishes  vice,  462-464.  He  says  all  the 
gods  are  nourished  except  Jupiter  and  the  World  ; he  also  says  the  World  is 
nourished,  466,  467.  He  contradicts  himself  in  regard  to  the  generation  of  the 
soul;  the  nature  and  qualities  of  the  air  ; a vacuum,  &c.,  468-473.  His  doctrine 
of  things  possible  is  contrary  to  his  doctrine  of  Fate,  473.  Fate  lie.  declares  to  be 
an  invincible,  absolute  cause ; yet  admits  that  there  are  obstacles  and  hindrances 
to  particular  motions  and  actions,  474-477. 

OF  THE  WORD  El  ENGRAVEN  OVER  THE  GATE  OF  APOLLO’S 

TEMPLE  AT  DELPHI. 

By  R.  Kippax,  M.A. 

It  is  not  probable  that  this  word  was  placed  there  by  chance,  479.  It  is  doubtless  an 
enigma,  like  many  other  things  in  the  temple  of  Apollo,  480.  What  then  is  the 
meaning!  480.  Does  it  point  to  the  number  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece,  of 
whom  Thales  was  one  1 480.  Has  it  an  astronomical  meaning  referring  to  the 
sun,  the  second  of  the  planets,  as  e is  the  second  of  the  vowels  1 481.  Does  it 
denote  a form  of  prayer  to  the  god,  el  standing  for  a wish  1 482.  As  Apollo  is 
skilled  in  logic,  does  el  refer  to  that  science,  denoting  the  dependence  of  con- 
sequent or  antecedent,  or  the  connection  of  one  thing  with  another  1 482-484. 
Has  it  a relation  to  mathematics,  e being  the  fifth  letter  of  the  alphabet,  five 
being  the  sum  of  two  and  three,  the  even  and  odd  numbers,  and  five  or  its  double 
being  that  number  by  which  we  reckon  ? 484-486.  Or  does  it  point  to  music  and 
its  five  symphonies,  or  the  five  positions  of  the  tetrachords  ? 488.  Or  may  we 
suppose  it  refers  to  five  worlds,  or  to  five  elements  of  matter,  or  to  the  five  geo- 
metrical solids  ? 489.  Or  to  the  five  portions  of  the  world,  or  to  the  five  species 
of  animated  beings  1 490.  Or  to  the  five  principal  beginnings  ? 491.  The  true 
answor  is,  — By  the  word  el,  we  are  to  understand  the  verb  d,  Thou  art,  as  an 


XIV 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  IV. 


address  to  Apollo ; signifying  thereby  the  actual  and  permanent  existence  of  God, 
in  contrast  with  our  fleeting,  transitory  existence,  493-495.  God  is  : he  exists, 
not  in  time  but  in  eternity,  an  eternal,  changeless  now,  495.  God  is  One, 
and  not  many,  though  there  are  many  manifestations  of  him,  495,  496.  The 
word  el,  Thou  art,  then,  testifies  of  this  one  God,  as  eternal  and  unchangeable, 
and  challenges  for  Him  our  worship,  497,  498. 

WHETHER  VICE  IS  SUFFICIENT  TO  RENDER  A MAN  UNHAPPY. 

By  S.  White,  M.D. 

Men  cannot  enjoy  wealth  by  reason  of  trouble ; yet  men  earnestly  seek  it,  499. 
Vice  is  sufficient  of  itself  to  produce  misery ; it  needs  no  aid  from  instruments, 
500.  Poverty,  slavery,  war,  external  calamity  of  every  sort,  even  death  in  cruel 
forms,  may  be  borne  by  a heroic  spirit,  501.  In  India,  widows  burn  with  joy  on 
the  funeral  pile  of  their  husbands,  502.  All  the  ills  of  Fortune  cannot  produce 
misery,  without  Vice ; but  Vice  ruins  and  destroys,  503. 


WHETHER  THE  PASSIONS  OF  THE  SOUL  OR  DISEASES  OF 

THE  BODY  ARE  WORSE. 

By  the  Same  Hand. 

Man  is  the  most  unhappy  of  all  creatures,  504.  The  body  has  many  diseases,  and 
they  are  readily  perceived,  505.  But  the  soul  does  not  readily  perceive  its  own 
maladies  ; it  even  mistakes  them  for  indications  of  soundness,  506.  The  man 
diseased  in  body  willingly  yields  to  the  care  of  the  physician,  506.  The  unruly 
passions  of  the  soul  resist  a cure,  and  are  therefore  more  fatal,  507,  508. 


PLUTARCH’S  MORALS. 


PLUTARCH’S  MORALS. 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE  TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 

LAMPRIAS,  CLEOMBROTUS,  DIDYMUS,  PHILIPPUS,  DEMETRIUS, 
AMMONIUS,  HERACLEON. 

1.  There  is  an  old  story,  friend  Terentius  Priscus,  that 
heretofore  eagles  or  swans,  flying  from  the  opposite  bounds 
of  the  earth,  met  together  where  now  stands  the  temple  of 
Apollo  Pythius,  in  the  place  now  called  the  Navel ; and 
that  some  while  after,  Epimenides  the  Phaestian,  willing  to 
satisfy  his  curiosity,  enquired  of  the  oracle  of  Apollo  with 
regard  to  this  story,  but  received  such  an  answer  as  made 
him  never  a jot  the  wiser ; upon  which  he  said : 

No  navel  is  there  of  the  earth  or  sea : 

’Tis  known  to  Gods  alone,  if  one  there  he. 

Thus  fitly  did  the  God  chastise  this  bold  enquirer  into  an- 
cient traditions. 

2.  But  in  our  time,  not  long  before  the  celebration  of 
the  Pythian  games  during  the  magistracy  of  Callistratus, 
there  were  two  holy  men  who,  coming  as  it  were  from 
the  two  opposite  ends  of  the  world,  met  together  at  the 
city  of  Delphi.  The  one  was  Demetrius  the  grammarian, 
who  came  from  England  to  return  to  Tarsus  in  Cilicia, 
where  he  was  born ; the  other,  Cleombrotus  the  Lacedae- 
monian, who  had  been  long  conversant  in  Egypt  and  the 
Troglodytic  country,  and  had  made  several  voyages,  as  well 
on  the  Red  Sea  as  other  parts,  — not  as  a merchant,  to  get 


4 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


money,  but  to  improve  his  knowledge  and  enrich  his  mind  ; 
for  he  had  enough  to  live  upon,  and  cared  for  no  more. 
And  he  was  collecting  history,  as  the  material  for  philoso- 
phy, the  end  whereof  (as  he  called  it)  is  theology.  He, 
having  been  lately  at  the  temple  and  oracle  of  Jupiter  Am- 
mon, seemed  not  much  to  marvel  at  any  thing  he  there  saw  ; 
yet  he  mentioned  to  us  one  particular  (which  he  said  was 
told  him  by  the  priest  of  the  temple)  touching  the  lamp 
that  is  never  extinguished  and  spendeth  less  every  year 
than  the  former.  Whence  they  conjectured  an  inequality 
of  years,  whereby  each  year  was  shorter  than  the  preced- 
ing. 

3.  This  discourse  was  much  wondered  at  by  the  com- 
pany, and  Demetrius  amongst  the  rest  affirmed  it  unrea- 
sonable to  ground  the  knowledge  of  such  great  matters  on 
such  slight  and  trivial  conjectures  ; for  this  was  not  (as 
Alcaeus  said)  to  paint  the  lion  from  the  measure  of  his 
claw,#  but  to  change  and  disorder  the  motions  of  celestial 
bodies  for  the  sake  of  a lamp  or  the  snuff  of  a candle,  and 
to  overthrow  at  one  stroke  all  the  mathematical  sciences. 
These  men,  replied  Cleombrotus,  will  not  be  moved  by 
what  you  say ; for  first,  they  will  not  yield  to  mathemati- 
cians in  point  of  certainty,  seeing  they  may  be  more  easily 
mistaken  in  their  comprehension  of  time,  it  being  so 
slippery  in  its  motions  and  with  such  distant  periods,  than 
these  men  in  the  measures  of  their  oil,  about  which  they 
are  so  exact  and  careful  because  of  the  strangeness  of  the 
thing.  Moreover,  Demetrius,  by  denying  that  small  things 
are  oft  the  signs  and  indications  of  great,  must  prejudice 
several  arts  and  sciences,  and  deprive  them  of  the  proofs 
of  several  conclusions  and  predictions.  And  yet  you 
grammarians  will  needs  vouch  that  the  Demi-gods  and 
princes  at  the  Trojan  war  shaved  with  razors,  because  you 
find  in  Ilomer  the  mention  of  such  an  instrument ; that 


* ’Ef  owxog  rdv  Xeovra,  ex  ungue  leonem. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


5 


also  usury  was  then  in  fashion,  because  he  says  in  one 
place, 

A debt  is  due  me  neither  new  nor  small,* 

where  you  interpret  ocp&lercu  to  mean  increases.  And 
again,  when  he  calls  the  night  quick  and  sharp,  you  will 
needs  have  him  to  mean  by  this  word,  that  the  shadow  of 
the  earth  being  round  groweth  sharp  at  the  end  like  the 
body  of  a cone.  Again,  who  is  he  that,  denying  small 
things  to  be  the  signs  and  proofs  of  great,  will  allow  what 
physicians  tell  us,  namely,  that  we  may  prognosticate  a 
pestilent  summer  when  great  numbers  of  spiders  are  seen, 
and  also  when  the  fig  leaves  in  the  spring  resemble  crows’ 
feetl  And  who  will  permit  us  to  measure  the  greatness 
of  the  sun’s  body  by  a pint  or  gallon  of  water,  or  will  grant 
that  a small  table  like  a tile,  making  a sharp  angle  lean- 
ing on  a plane  superficies,  can  ,sliow  the  just  measure  of 
the  elevation  of  the  pole  from  the  horizon  which  is  ever  to 
be  seen  in  our  hemisphere  1 And  this  is  what  the  priests 
may  allege  in  favor  of  what  they  affirm ; so  that  we  must 
offer  other  arguments  against  them,  if  we  will  maintain  the 
course  of  thq  sun  to  be  fixed  and  unchangeable,  as  we  here 
hold  it  to  be. 

4.  Not  only  of  the  sun,  cried  out  aloud  the  philosopher 
Ammonius,  who  was  there  present,  but  also  of  the  whole 
heaven ; for,  if  the  years  really  decrease,  the  passage  which 
the  sun  makes  from  one  tropic  to  another  must  of  necessity 
be  shortened,  so  that  it  shall  not  take  up  so  great  a part  of 
the  horizon  as  the  mathematicians  do  imagine,  but  become 
less  and  shorter  as  the  southern  part  approaches  the  north- 
ern. Whence  consequently  the  summer  will  fall  out  to  be 
shorter  and  the  temperature  of  the  air  colder,  by  reason  of 
the  sun’s  turning  more  inwardly,  and  describing  greater 
parallels  within  the  signs  of  the  tropics  than  it  now  does  in 

* ’E vQa  xptioc  fj.oi  btyeXherai,  ov  tl  veov  ye  ovd’  oX'cyov.  Od.  III.  367.  The  same 
interpretation  is  found  in  the  Scholia  on  the  Odyssey.  (G.) 


6 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


the  longest  day  in  summer  and  the  shortest  in  winter.  It 
would  moreover  also  follow,  that  the  pins  of  the  dials  in 
the  city  of  Syene  will  no  longer  appear  shadowless  at  the 
summer  solstice,  and  some  fixed  stars  will  run  under  the 
horizon,  and  others  against  one  another,  for  want  of  room. 
And  should  it  be  alleged  that  all  the  other  celestial  bodies 
keep  their  courses  and  ordinary  motions  without  any  change, 
they  will  never  be  able  to  cite  any  cause  which  shall  hasten 
his  motion  alone  above  all  the  rest ; but  they  will  be  forced 
to  confound  and  disorder  all  evident  appearances  which  do 
clearly  show  themselves  to  our  eyes,  and  especially  those 
of  the  moon.  So  that  there  will  be  no  need  of  observing 
these  measures  of  oil  to  know  the  difference  of  the  years ; 
because  the  eclipses  will  do  this,  if  there  be  any,  seeing 
the  sun  does  oft  meet  with  the  moon,  and  the  moon  as  oft 
falls  within  the  shadow  of  the  earth ; so  that  we  need  not 
any  longer  hold  arguing  on  this  matter. 

But,  says  Cleombrotus,  I myself  have  seen  the  measure 
of  the  oil,  for  they  have  shown  it  several  years ; but  that 
of  the  present  is  far  less  than  that  of  ancient  times.  Unto 
which  Ammonius  answered : How  comes  it  to  pass  then 
that  other  people  who  have  an  inextinguishable  fire  in 
veneration,  and  have  preserved  it  even  time  out  of  mind, 
could  never  remark  this'?  And  granting  what  you  say 
concerning  this  measure  of  oil,  is  it  not  better  to  attribute 
the  cause  of  this  to  some  coldness  or  dampness  of  air ; or, 
on  the  contrary,  to  some  heat  or  dryness,  by  which  the  fire 
in  the  lamp  being  weakened  needs  not  so  much  nourish- 
ment, and  could  not  consume  the  same  quantity  ? For  it 
is  well  known  that  fire  burns  better  in  winter  than  in  sum- 
mer, its  heat  being  drawn  in  and  enclosed  by  the  cold ; 
whereas  in  great  heats  and  dry  weather  it  is  weakened, 
lying  dead  and  languishing  without  any  strength  ; and  if  it 
be  kindled  in  the  sunshine,  its  efficacy  is  small,  for  it  hardly 
catches  hold  of  the  wood,  and  slowly  consumes  the  fuel. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


7 


But  we  may  with  greater  probability  attribute  the  circum- 
stance of  the  oil  to  the  oil  itself ; for  oil  formerly  was  of 
less  nutriment,  as  squeezed  out  of  olives  which  grew  upon 
young  trees ; but  being  since  better  ordered,  as  coming  of 
plants  more  fully  grown,  it  must  needs  be  more  effectual 
to  the  nourishing  and  keeping  of  the  fire.  And  this  is  the 
best  way  of  saving  the  credit  of  the  Ammonian  priests  in 
their  supposition,  which  will  not  endure  the  test  of  reason. 

5.  Ammonius  having  finished  his  discourse,  I pray,  said 
I,  Cleombrotus,  give  us  some  account  of  the  oracle  ; for 
it  ever  has  been  in  great  esteem  in  those  parts  till  these 
times,  wherein  its  divinity  and  reputation  seem  to  be  de- 
cayed. Unto  which  Cleombrotus  making  no  answer,  but 
looking  down  to  the  ground,  Demetrius  took  up  the  dis- 
course, saying  : You  need  not  busy  yourself  in  enquiries 
after  the  oracles  in  those  parts,  seeing  we  find  the  oracles 
in  these  parts  to  fail  or  (to  speak  better)  to  be  totally  si- 
lenced, except  two  or  three ; so  that  it  would  be  more  to 
the  purpose  to  search  into  the  cause  of  this  silence.  But 
we  are  more  concerned  in  Boeotia,  which,  although  for- 
merly famous  throughout  all  the  world  for  oracles,  is  now 
like  a fountain  dried  up,  so  that  at  present  we  find  them 
dumb.  For  at  this  day  there  is  no  place  in  all  Boeotia, 
unless  in  the  town  of  Lebadea,  where  one  can  draw  out 
any  divination,  all  other  parts  being  become  silent  and  for- 
saken. Yet  in  the  time  of  the  Avar  against  the  Persians, 
the  oracle  of  Apollo  Ptoiis  was  in  request,  as  also  that 
of  Amphiaraus  ; for  both  of  them  were  tried.  The  priest 
of  Apollo  Ptoiis,  Avho  Avas  always  Avont  to  return  the  ora- 
cle’s ansAvers  in  Aeolic  Greek,  spake  to  him  that  Avas 
sent  from  the  barbarians  in  their  oavii  barbarous  language, 
so  that  none  of  the  assistants  understood  a Avord ; AAdicre- 
by  they  Avere  given  to  understand,  that  it  Avas  not  laAvful 
for  the  barbarians  to  have  the  use  of  the  Greek  tongue  to 
serve  their  pleasure.  And  as  to  that  of  Amphiaraus.  the 


8 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


person  that  was  sent  thither,  having  fallen  asleep  in  the 
sanctuary,  dreamed  that  he  heard  the  minister  of  that  God 
bidding  him  be  gone  out  of  the  temple  and  saying  that 
the  God  forbade  him  to  remain,  and  that  he  presently 
shoved  him  out  thence  with  both  his  hands  ; and  seeing  he 
still  stopped  by  the  way,  he  took  up  a great  stone  and 
struck  him  with  it  on  the  head.  And  what  was  this  but  a 
prediction  and  denunciation  of  what  was  to  come  to  pass  ? 
For  Mardonius  was  not  long  after  defeated  by  Pausanias, 
who  was  no  king,  but  only  the  king  of  Lacedaemonia’s 
guardian  and  minister,  and  the  then  lieutenant  of  the 
Grecians’  army,  and  was  with  a stone  flung  out  of  a sling 
felled  to  the  ground,  just  as  the  Lydian  servant  thought  he 
was  struck  in  his  dream.  In  the  same  manner  also  flour- 
ished the  oracle  near  Tegyra,  where  it  is  said  Apollo  him- 
self was  born  ; and  in  effect,  there  are  two  sreams  that 
glide  near  the  place,  one  of  which  is  still  called  the  Palm- 
tree,  and  the  other  the  Olive-tree.  And  at  this  oracle,  in 
the  time  of  the  Medes’  war,  Echecrates  being  then  the 
prophet,  the  God  Apollo  answered  by  his  mouth,  that  the 
honor  and  profit  of  this  war  would  fall  to  the  Greeks’ 
share.  And  during  the  Peloponnesian  war,  the  Delians 
having  been  driven  out  of  their  island,  they  had  word 
brought  them  from  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  that  they  should 
search  for  the  place  where  Apollo  was  born,  and  there 
make  some  certain  sacrifice.  At  which  they  marvelling, 
and  demanding  whether  Apollo  was  born  elsewhere  than 
in  their  parts,  the  prophetess  Pythia  moreover  told  them 
that  a crow  would  show  them  the  place.  These  deputies 
from  the  Delians,  in  their  return  home,  passed  by  chance 
through  the  city  of  Chaeronea,  where  they  heard  their 
hostess  at  the  inn  talking  to  some  travellers  about  the  ora- 
cle of  Tegyra,  to  which  they  were  going,  and  at  then-  parting 
they  heard  them  say  to  her  Adieu,  Dame  Corone.*  By 


* Kopuvji,  that  is,  Crow. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


9 


this  they  comprehended  the  meaning  of  Pythia’s  answer ; 
and  having  offered  their  sacrifices  at  Tegyra,  they  were 
soon  after  restored  and  established  in  their  own  country. 
Yet  there  have  been  given  later  answers  from  these  oracles 
than  those  you  have  mentioned ; but  now  they  have  wholly 
ceased,  so  that  it  will  not  be  besides  the  matter,  seeing  we 
are  near  by  Apollo  Pythius,  to  enquire  after  the  cause  of 
this  change. 

6.  Thus  discoursing  together,  we  left  the  temple,  and 
were  come  as  far  as  the  Cnidian  Hall,  where  entering  in, 
we  fiound  our  friends  which  we  looked  for,  being  set  down 
in  expectation  of  our  coming.  All  the  rest  were  at  leis- 
ure, by  reason  of  the  time  of  the  day,  and  did  nothing 
but  anoint  their  bodies,  or  gaze  on  the  wrestlers  who 
were  exercising  themselves.  Whereupon  Demetrius 
laughing  said  to  them  : It  seems  to  me  that  you  are  not 
discoursing  of  any  matter  of  great  consequence,  for  I see 
you  labor  not  under  deep  thoughts.  It  is  true,  replied 
Heracleon  the  Megarean,  we  are  not  a disputing,  whether 
the  verb  Bulla  in  his  future  tense  loses  one  of  his  ll,  nor 
from  what  positive  or  primitive  are  formed  or  derived  these 
two  comparatives,  /siqov  and  folziov,  and  these  two  super- 
latives, ’//ini6T°v  and  fitlxiaxov ; for  such  questions  as  these 
make  people  knit  their  brows.  A man  may  discourse  of 
all  other  matters,  especially  of  philosophy,  without  these 
frowning  angry  looks  that  put  the  by-standers  into  a fright. 
Receive  us  then,  said  Demetrius,  into  your  company,  and, 
if  you  please,  the  question  too  which  has  been  now  agi- 
tated amongst  us,  which  does  well  agree  with  the  place 
where  we  are,  and,  relating  to  the  God  Apollo,  concerns 
therefore  all  that  are  here ; but,  however,  let  us  have  no 
knitting  of  the  brows  or  frowning  looks. 

7.  Being  then  all  set  down  close  together,  and  Deme- 
trius having  proposed  the  question  we  were  upon,  Didymus 
the  Cynic  philosopher,  surnamed  Planetiades,  getting  upon 


10 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


his  feet  and  striking  the  ground  two  or  three  times  with 
his  stick,  cried  out  : O Jupiter ! what  a hard  question  do 
you  offer!  What  a difficult  matter  do  you  propose  ! For 
is  it  any  wonder,  the  whole  world  wallowing  in  wicked- 
ness, and  Shame  and  Retributive  Justice  having  departed 
from  men  (as  Hesiod  long  ago  predicted),  that-  the  Gods 
should  no  longer  suffer  their  oracles  to  be  among  them, 
as  heretofore  ] For  my  part,  I wonder  there  is  so  much 
as  one  left,  and  that  Hercules  or  some  other  of  the  Gods 
has  not  long  since  plucked  up  and  carried  away  the 
tripod  whereon  are  offered  such  base  and  villainous  ques- 
tions to  Apollo  ; some  coming  to  him  as  a mere  paltry 
astrologer,  to  try  his  skill  and  impose  on  him  by  subtle 
questions,  others  asking  him  about  treasures  buried  under 
ground,  others  about  incestuous  marriages.  So  that  Pythag- 
oras is  here  soon  convinced  of  his  mistake,  when  he  af- 
firmed that  the  time  when  men  are  honestest  is  when  they 
present  themselves  before  the  Gods  ; for  those  filthy  pas- 
sions, which  they  dare  not  discover  before  a grave  mortal 
man,  they  scruple  not  to  utter  to  Apollo.  He  had  gone 
further,  if  Heracleon  had  not  pulled  him  by  the  sleeve  ; 
and  myself,  who  was  better  acquainted  than  any  in  the 
company  besides,  thus  spake  to  him  : Cease,  friend  Plane- 
tiades,  from  angering  Apollo  against  thee,  seeing  he  is 
sharp  and  choleric  and  not  easily  reconciled ; although, 
as  Pindar  says, 

Mortals  to  favor,  Heaven  has  him  enjoined. 

And  whether  he  be  the  sun,  or  the  master  of  the  sun  and 
father  of  it,  being  above  all  visible  natures,  it  is  not  to  be 
supposed  he  disdains  to  hold  any  further  intercourse  with 
men  at  this  time,  seeing  he  gives  them  their  birth,  nour- 
ishment, subsistence,  and  reason.  Neither  is  it  credible 
that  the  Divine  Providence  (who,  like  a kind  and  indulgent 
mother,  produces  and  conserves  all  things  for  our  use) 
should  show  herself  malevolent  only  in  the  matter  of  divi- 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


11 


nation,  or  deprive  us  of  it  having  once  given  it  us  ; as  if, 
when  there  were  more  oracles  than  there  are  now  in  the 
world,  men  were  not  then  as  wicked.  But  let  us  make  a 
Pythian  truce  (as  they  say)  with  vice,  which  you  are  al- 
ways sharply  reprehending,  and  sit  down  here  together  to 
try  whether  we  can  find  out  any  other  cause  of  the  ceasing 
of  oracles  ; and  let  me  only  advise  you,  by  the  way,  to  re- 
member that  you  keep  this  God  propitious  and  move  him 
not  to  wrath.  Planetiades  was  so  moved  with  these 
speeches,  that  he  went  away  immediately,  without  speak- 
ing a word. 

8.  The  company  remaining  a while  in  silence,  Ammo- 
nius,  addressing  himself  to  me,  said  : Prithee,  Lamprias, 
let  us  take  care  of  wrhat  we  say,  and  not  be  rash  in  our 
assertions ; for  we  do  not  well  when  we  make  the  God  to 
be  little  or  no  cause  of  these  oracles  ceasing  ; for  he  that 
attributes  the  failing  of  them  to  any  other  cause  than  the 
will  and  decree  of  the  God  gives  occasion  to  suspect  him 
of  believing  that  they  never  were  nor  are  now  by  his  dispo- 
sition, but  by  some  other  means.  For  there  is  no  other 
more  excellent  and  noble  cause  and  power  which  can  de- 
stroy and  abolish  divination,  if  it  be  the  work  of  a God. 
And  as  for  Plantiades’s  discourse,  it  does  not  at  all  please 
me,  as  well  for  the  inequality  and  inconstancy  which  he  at- 
tributes to  the  God,  as  for  other  reasons.  For  he  makes 
him  sometimes  rejecting  and  detesting  vice,  and  sometimes 
admitting  and  receiving  it,  just  as  a king,  or  rather  a ty- 
rant, who  drives  wicked  people  out  of  one  gate,  and  re- 
ceives them  through  another,  and  negotiates  with  them. 
But  the  greatest  and  most  perfect  work,  that  will  admit  of 
no  additions,  is  that  which  agrees  best  with  the  dignity  of 
the  Gods.  By  supposing  this,  we  may  in  my  judgment 
affirm  that  in  this  common  scarcity  of  men,  occasioned  by 
the  former  wars  and  seditions  over  all  the  world,  Greece 
has  most  suffered ; so  that  she  can  with  much  difficulty 


12 


WHV  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


raise  three  thousand  men,  which  number  the  single  city  of 
Megara  sent  heretofore  to  Plataea.  Wherefore  if  the 
God  now  forsakes  several  oracles  which  anciently  were 
frequented,  what  is  this  but  a sign  that  Greece  is  at  this 
time  very  much  dispeopled,  in  comparison  of  what  it  was 
heretofore  ; and  he  that  will  affirm  this  shall  not  want  for 
arguments.  For  of  what  use  would  the  oracle  be  now, 
which  was  heretofore  at  Tegyra  or  atPtoum  \ For  scarce- 
ly shall  you  meet,  in  a whole  day’s  time,  with  so  much  as 
a herdsman  or  shepherd  in  those  parts.  We  find  also  in 
writing,  that  this  place  of  divination  where  we  now  are, 
and  which  is  as  ancient  as  any,  and  as  famous  and  renowned 
as  any  in  all  Greece,  was  for  a considerable  time  deserted 
and  inaccessible,  by  means  of  a dangerous  creature  that 
resorted  hither,  namely  a dragon.  Yet  those  that  have 
written  this  did  not  well  comprehend  the  occasion  of  the 
oracle’s  ceasing ; for  the  dragon  did  not  make  the  place 
solitary,  but  rather  the  solitude  of  the  place  occasioned 
the  dragon  to  repair  hither.  Since  that  time,  when  Greece 
became  populous  and  full  of  towns,  they  had  two  women 
prophetesses,  who  went  down  one  after  another  into  the 
cave.  Moreover,  there  was  a third  chosen,  if  need  were  ; 
whereas  now  there  is  but  one,  and  yet  we  do  not  complain 
of  it,  because  she  is  sufficient.  And  therefore  we  do  not 
well  to  repine  at  Providence,  seeing  there  is  no  want 
of  divinations,  where  all  that  come  are  satisfied  in  what- 
ever they  desire  to  know.  Homer  tells  us,  Agamem- 
non had  nine  heralds,  and  yet  with  these  could  he 
hardly  keep  in  order  the  Greeks,  they  being  so  many  in 
number ; but  you  will  find  here  that  the  voice  of  one  man 
is  sufficient  to  be  heard  all  over  the  theatre.  The  oracles 
then  spake  by  more  organs  or  voices,  because  there  were 
then  a greater  number  of  men.  So  that  we  should  think 
it  strange,  if  the  God  should  suffer  the  prophetical  divina- 
tion to  be  spilt  and  run  to  waste  like  water,  or  everywhere 


.TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


13 


to  resound,  as  in  solitary  fields  we  hear  the  rocks  echoing 
the  voices  of  shepherds  and  bleating  cattle. 

9.  Ammonias  having  said  these  words,  and  I returning 
no  answer,  Cleombrotus  took  up  the  discourse,  and  ad- 
dressed himself  to  me.  Hast  thou  then,  said  he,  confessed 
that  it  is  the  God  who  makes  and  unmakes  oracles  1 Not 
I,  said  I ; for  I maintain  that  God  was  never  the  cause  of 
taking  away  or  abolishing  any  oracle  or  divination ; but, 
on  the  contrary,  whereas  he  produces  and  prepares  several 
things  for  our  use,  so  Nature  leads  them  into  corruption, 
and  not  seldom  into  a privation  of  their  whole  being.  Or, 
to  speak  better,  matter,  which  is  itself  privation  or  nega- 
tion, often  flies  away,  and  dissolves  what  a more  excellent 
being  than  herself  had  wrought.  So  that  I am  of  opinion, 
there  are  other  causes  which  obscure  and  extinguish  these 
prophetic  spirits.  For  though  God  does  give  to  men  sev- 
eral good  and  excellent  things,  yet  he  gives  to  none  of 
them  the  power  to  exist  eternally ; for,  though  the  Gods 
never  die,  yet  their  gifts  do,  as  Sophocles  speaks.  It  were 
then  well  becoming  philosophers  who  exercise  themselves 
in  the  study  of  Nature  and  the  first  matter,  to  enquire  into 
the  existence,  property,  and  tendency  of  those  things,  but 
to  leave  the  origin  and  first  cause  to  God,  as  is  most  rea- 
sonable. For  it  is  a very  childish  and  silly  thing,  to  sup- 
pose that  the  God  himself  does,  like  the  spirits  speaking 
in  the  bowels  of  ventriloquists  (which  were  anciently 
called  Euryclees,  and  now  Pythons),  enter  into  the  bodies 
of  the  prophets,  and  speak  by  their  mouths  and  voices,  as 
fit  instruments  for  that  purpose.  For  he  that  thus  mixes 
God  in  human  affairs  has  not  that  respect  and  reverence 
wrhich  is  due  to  so  great  a majesty,  as  being  ignorant  of 
his  power  and  virtue. 

10.  Cleombrotus  then  answered : You  say  very  well ; 
but  it  is  a hard  matter  to  comprehend  and  define  how  far 
this  providence  does  extend  itself.  They  seem  both  alike 


14 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


faulty  to  me,  who  Avill  have  him  simply  the  cause  of  noth- 
ing at  all  in  the  world,  and  who  will  have  him  to  be 
concerned  in  all  things ; for  both  of  these  are  run  into  ex- 
tremes. But  as  those  say  well  who  hold  that  Plato,  having 
invented  the  element  on  which  spring  up  the  qualities,  — 
which  we  sometimes  call  the  first  matter,  and  sometimes 
Nature,  — has  thereby  delivered  the  philosophers  from 
several  great  difficulties  ; so  it  seems  to  me,  that  those  who 
have  ranked  the  genus  of  Daemons  between  that  of  Gods 
and  men  have  solved  greater  doubts  and  difficulties,  as 
having  found  the  knot  which  does,  as  it  were,  join  and 
hold  together  our  society  and  communication  with  them. 
It  is  uncertain  whence  this  opinion  arose,  whether  from  the 
ancient  Magi  by  Zoroaster,  or  from  Thrace  by  Orpheus,  or 
from  Egypt,  or  Phrygia;  as  may  be  conjectured  from  the 
sight  of  the  sacrifices  which  are  made  in  both  countries, 
where  amongst  their  holy  and  divine  ceremonies  there  is 
seen  a mixture  of  mortality  and  mourning.  And  as  to  the 
Greeks,  Homer  has  indifferently  used  these  two  names, 
terming  sometimes  the  Gods  Daemons,  and  other  whiles 
Daemons  Gods.  But  Hesiod  was  the  first  that  did  best 
and  most  distinctly  lay  down  four  reasonable  natures,  the 
Gods,  the  Daemons  (being  many  in  number,  and  good  in 
their  kind),  heroes,  and  men ; for  the  Demi-gods  are  reckoned 
amongst  heroes.  Others  say,  there  is  a transmutation  of 
bodies  as  well  as  of  souls  ; and  that,  just  as  we  see  of  the 
earth  is  engendered  water,  of  the  water  the  air,  and  of  the 
air  fire,  the  nature  of  the  substance  still  ascending  higher, 
so  good  spirits  always  change  for  the  best,  being  trans- 
formed from  men  into  heroes,  and  from  heroes  into 
Daemons ; and  from  Daemons,  by  degrees  and  in  a long 
space  of  time,  a few  souls  being  refined  and  purified  come 
to  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  Divinity.  But  there  are 
some  that  cannot  contain  themselves,  but  rove  about  till 
they  be  entangled  into  mortal  bodies,  where  they  live 
meanly  and  obscurely,  like  smoke. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


15 


11.  And  moreover,  Hesiod  imagines  that  the  Daemons 
themselves,  after  certain  revolutions  of  time,  do  at  length 
die.  For,  introducing  a Nymph  speaking,  he  marks  the 
time  wherein  they  expire : 

Nine  ages  of  men  in  their  flower  doth  live 
The  railing  crow  ; four  times  the  stags  surmount 
The  life  of  crows  ; to  ravens  doth  Nature  give 
A threefold  age  of  stags,  by  true  account; 

One  phoenix  lives  as  long  as  ravens  nine. 

But  you,  fair  Nymphs,  as  the  daughters  verily 
Of  mighty  Jove  and  of  Nature  divine, 

The  phoenix’s  years  tenfold  do  multiply. 

Now  those  which  do  not  well  understand  what  the  poet 
means  by  this  word  yevia  (age)  do  cause  this  computation 
of  time  to  amount  to  a great  number  of  years.  For  the 
word  means  a year;  so  that  the  total  sum  makes  but  9720 
years,  which  is  the  space  of  the  age  of  Daemons.  And 
there  are  several  mathematicians  who  make  it  shorter  than 
this.  Pindar  himself  does  not  make  it  longer  when  he 
says,  Destiny  has  given  Nymphs  an  equal  life  with  trees ; 
and  therefore  they  are  called  Hamadryades,  because  they 
spring  up  and  die  with  oaks.  He  was  going  on,  when 
Demetrius  interrupting  him  thus  said : How  is  it  possible, 
Cleombrotus,  that  you  should  maintain  that  a year  was 
called  by  this  poet  the  age  of  a man,  seeing  it  is  not  the 
space  of  his  flower  and  youth,  nor  of  his  old  age?  For  there 
are  divers  readings  of  this  place,  some  reading  rfiwvrcov,  others 
ytjomvrcov,  — one  signifying  flourishing , the  other  aged.  Now 
those  that  understand  hereby  “ flourishing  ” reckon  thirty 
years  for  the  age  of  man’s  life,  according  to  the  opinion  of 
Heraclitus ; this  being  the  space  of  time  in  which  a father 
has  begotten  a son  who  then  is  apt  and  able  to  beget 
another.  And  those  that  read  “ aged”  allow  to  the  age  of 
man  a hundred  and  eight  years,  saying  that  fifty-four  years 
are  just  the  half  part  of  a man’s  life,  which  number  consists 
of  unity,  the  first  two  plane  numbers,  two  squares,  and  two 
cubes  (i.  e.  l -f-  2 -f-  3 + 4 -f-  9 + 8 -j-  27) ; which  numbers  Plato 


16 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


himself  has  appropriated  to  the  procreation  of  the  soul. 
And  it  seems  also  that  Hesiod  by  these  words  intimated  the 
consummation  of  the  world  by  fire ; at  which  time  it  is  likely 
the  Nymphs,  with  the  rivers,  marshes,  and  woods  where 
they  inhabit,  shall  be  consumed, 

Such  as  in  woods,  or  grotto’s  shady  cell, 

Near  sacred  springs  and  verdant  meadows  dwell.  * 

12.  I have  heard,  says  Cleombrotus,  this  alleged  by 
several,  and  find  that  the  Stoical  conflagration  hath  intruded 
itself  not  only  upon  the  works  of  Heraclitus  and  Orpheus, 
but  also  upon  Hesiod’s,  imposing  such  meanings  on  their 
words  as  they  never  thought  of.  But  I cannot  approve  of 
the  consummation  of  the  world  which  thev  maintain,  nor 
of  the  other  impossible  matters ; and  especially  what  they 
say  about  the  crow  and  the  stag  would  force  us  to  believe  in 
the  most  excessive  numbers.  Moreover,  the  year,  containing 
in  itself  the  beginning  and  end  of  all  things  which  the 
seasons  bring  and  the  earth  produces,  may,  in  my  opinion, 
be  not  impertinently  called  the  age  ^f  man.  For  you 
yourselves  confess  that  Hesiod  does  somewhere  call  the  life 
of  man  yevea  (age).  What  say  you,  does  he  not?  Which 
Demetrius  confessing,  he  proceeded  in  this  manner : It  is 
also  certain  that  we  call  the  vessels  whereby  we  measure 
things  by  the  names  of  the  things  measured  in  them ; as  a 
pint,  a quart,  or  a bushel.  As  we  then  call  a unit  a number, 
though  it  be  but  the  least  part  and  measure  and  the  begin- 
ning of  a number  ; so  has  he  called  a year  the  age  of  man, 
because  it  is  the  measure  Avherewith  it  is  measured.  As 
for  those  numbers  which  those  others  describe,  they  be  not 
of  such  singularity  and  importance.  But  the  sum  of  9920 
is  thus  composed.  The  four  numbers  arising  in  order 
from  one,  being  added  together  and  multiplied  by  four, 
amount  to  forty  ; this  forty  being  tripled  five  times  makes  up 
the  total  of  the  forecited  number.  But  as  to  that  it  is 


* II.  XX.  8. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


IT 


not  necessary  to  enter  into  a debate  with  Demetrius  ; for 
whether  it  be  a short  or  a long  time,  certain  or  uncertain, 
wherewith  Hesiod  limits  the  soul  of  a Daemon  and  the  life 
of  a Demi- god,  either  of  those  will  prove,  by  ancient  and 
evident  testimonies,  that  there  are  natures  neuter  and 
mean,  and  as  it  were  in  the  confines  of  the  Gods  and  men, 
subject  to  mortal  passions  and  necessary  changes ; which 
natures,  according  to  the  tradition  and  example  of  our 
predecessors,  it  is  fitting  we  should  call  Daemons,  giving 
them  all  due  honor. 

13.  To  which  purpose  Xenocrates,  one  of  the  familiar 
friends  of  Plato,  was  wont  to  allege  the  example  of 
triangles,  which  agree  very  well  with  the  subject ; for  that 
triangle  which  has  equal  sides  and  equal  angles  he  com- 
pared unto  the  divine  and  immortal  nature ; and  that 
which  has  all  three  unequal,  to  the  human  and  mortal 
nature  ; and  that  which  has  two  equal  and  one  unequal, 
to  the  nature  of  Daemons,  which  is  endued  with  the  pas- 
sions and  perturbations  of  the  mortal  nature,  and  the  force 
and  power  of  the  divine.  Even  Nature  has  set  before  us 
sensible  figures  and  resemblance  of  this ; of  the  Gods,  the 
sun  and  the  stars ; of  mortal  men,  the  comets,  flashings  in 
the  night,  and  shooting-stars.  And  this  similitude  is  taken 
up  by  Euripides,  when  he  saith : 

He  that  but  now  was  fleshy,  plump,  and  gay, 

As  a fall’ll  star  his  glories  melt  away  ; 

Like  that  extinguished  on  the  ground  he  lies, 

Breathing  his  soul  into  the  ambient  skies. 

And  for  a mixed  body  representing  the  nature  of  Daemons, 
we  have  the  moon ; which  some,  observing  it  to  be  subject 
to  increase  and  decrease  and  wholly  to  disappear,  have 
thought  very  agreeable  to  the  mutable  condition  of  Dae- 
mons ; and  for  this  reason  they  have  termed  her  a terrestrial 
star,  others  Olympic  earth,  and  others  the  inheritance  and 
possession  of  Hecate,  both  heavenly  and  earthly.  As  one 


VOL.  IV. 


2 


18 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


then  that  should  take  from  the  world  the  air,  and  remove 
it  from  between  the  moon  and  the  earth,  would  dissolve  the 
continuation  and  composition  of  the  universe,  by  leaving 
an  empty  place  in  the  midst,  without  any  contexture  to 
hold  the  two  parts  together ; so  those  that  do  not  allow 
Daemons  oppose  all  communication  and  conference  of  the 
Gods  with  men,  seeing  they  destroy  that  nature  (as  Plato 
says)  which  serves  as  an  interpreter  and  messenger  between 
them  both ; or  else  they  constrain  us  to  perplex  and  con- 
found all  things  together,  by  mixing  the  divine  nature  with 
human  passions,  and  plucking  it  down  from  heaven,  as  the 
women  of  Thessaly  are  said  to  do  the  moon.  Even  this 
tiction  has  met  with  belief  in  some  women,  because  Ag- 
laonice,  the  daughter  of  Hegetor,  being  skilful  in  astrology, 
made  the  vulgar  believe,  whenever  the  moon  was  eclipsed, 
that  by  means  of  some  charms  and  enchantments  she 
brought  it  down  from  heaven.  But  as  to  us,  let  us  not 
think  there  are  any  oracles  or  divinations  without  some 
divinity,  or  that  the  Gods  are  not  pleased  with  sacrifices, 
and  our  services,  and  other  ceremonies.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  let  us  not  think  that  God  is  present  in  them,  or  em- 
ploys himself  personally  about  them ; but  rather  believe 
that  he  does  commit  them  to  his  officers,  the  Daemons,  who 
are  the  spies  and  scouts  of  the  Gods,  wandering  and 
circuiting  about  at  their  commands,  — some  beholding  and 
ordering  the  sacred  ceremonies  and  oblations  offered  to  the 
Gods,  others  being  employed  to  revenge  and  punish  the 
high  misdemeanors  and  enormous  injustices  of  men.  There 
are,  moreover,  others,  to  whom  Hesiod  gives  a very  vener- 
able name,  calling  them  the  distributers  of  riches  and 
donors  of  largesses  among  mortals ; for  the  Gods  have 
allowed  them  the  privilege,  and  granted  them  a royal  com- 
mission to  see  them  duly  distributed.  lie  informs  us  here, 
by  the  way,  that  to  he  beneficent  and  liberal  of  favors  is 
the  proper  office  of  a king.  For  there  is  a difference  of 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


19 


virtue  between  these  Daemons,  as  much  as  between  men. 
For  there  are  some  of  them  in  whom  still  there  are  some 
small  remains  (though  weak  and  scarcely  discernible)  of  the 
sensitive  and  irrational  soul,  which,  like  a small  quantity 
of  excrements  and  superfluities,  stay  still  behind.  Others 
there  are,  in  whom  there  abideth  a greater  measure  of 
these  gross  humors,  the  marks  and  traces  of  which  are  to 
be  seen  in  many  places,  in  the  odd  and  singular  ceremonies 
and  sacrifices  and  the  strange  fables  which  prevail. 

14.  As  to  the  mysteries  and  secret  ceremonies,  by  which 
wTe  may  more  clearly  than  by  any  other  means  understand 
the  nature  of  Daemons,  let  me  keep  a religious  silence,  as 
Herodotus  says.  But  as  to  the  certain  feasts  and  direful 
sacrifices  which  are  held  as  unfortunate  and  mournful 
days,  and  are  celebrated  by  eating  raw  flesh  and  tearing 
the  skin  with  the  nails,  or  days  wherein  they  fast  and  smite 
their  breasts,  and  in  several  places  utter  filthy  and  dishonest 
words  during  the  sacrifices, 

Wagging  their  heads  in  frantic  wise. 

With  strange  alarms  and  hideous  cries,  — 


I will  never  think  these  done  on  any  of  the  Gods’  account, 
but  rather  to  avert,  mollify,  and  appease  the  wrath  and 
fury  of  some  bad  Daemons.  For  it  is  not  likely  there  ever 
was  a God  that  expected  or  required  men  to  be  sacrificed 
to  him,  as  has  been  anciently  done,  or  who  received  such 
kind  of  sacrifices  with  approbation.  Neither  must  we 
imagine  it  was  for  nothing,  that  kings  and  great  men  have 
delivered  their  own  children  to  be  sacrificed,  or  that  they 
sacrificed  them  themselves  with  their  own  hands  ; but 
they  intended  hereby  to  avert  and  appease  the  malice 
and  rancor  of  some  evil  spirits,  or  to  satisfy  the  violent 
and  raging  lusts  of  some,  who  either  could  not  or  would 
not  enjoy  them  with  their  bodies  or  by  their  bodies.  Even 
as  Hercules  besieged  the  city  of  Oechalia  for  a wench  that 


20 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


was  therein,  so  these  powerful  and  tyrannical  Daemons, 
requiring  some  human  soul  which  is  still  compassed  with 
a body,  and  yet  not  being  able  to  satisfy  their  lust  by  the 
body,  do  therefore  bring  the  plague  and  famine  into  towns, 
raise  wars  and  seditions,  till  such  time  as  they  obtain  and 
enjoy  that  which  they  love.  Others,  on  the  contrary  (as  I 
remember  I observed  in  Crete,  for  I was  some  considerable 
time  there)  celebrate  a feast  in  which  they  show  the 
figure  of  a man  without  a head,  calling  it  Molus,  the  father 
of  Meriones,  who,  having  violently  laid  hands  on  the 
Nymph,  was  afterwards  found  without  a head. 

15.  The  rapes  committed  on  boys  or  girls,  the  long 
voyages,  flights,  banishments,  and  voluntary  services  of  the 
Gods,  which  are  sung  by  the  poets,  are  passions  fitting  to 
be  attributed  not  to  Gods,  but  to  Daemons,  whose  fortunes 
were  recorded  in  memorial  of  their  virtue  and  power. 
Neither  is  Aeschylus  in  the  right,  when  he  says, 

Divine  Apollo  banished  from  the  sky ; 

nor  Admetus  in  Sophocles,  saying  of  a God, 

My  cock  by  crowing  led  him  to  the  mill. 

The  divines  of  Delphi  were  far  from  the  truth  when  they 
asserted  that  there  was  a combat  between  Apollo  and  a 
Dragon  about  the  possession  of  this  oracle.  No  less  are 
they  to  blame  who  suffer  the  poets  or  orators  in  the  open 
theatres  to  act  or  speak  of  such  matters ; whereby  they 
seem  to  condemn  those  things  which  themselves  perform 
in  their  sacred  solemnities.  Philippus  (for  this  man  was 
an  historian,  and  then  present  in  the  company),  wondering 
at  what  was  last  said,  enquired  what  divine  solemnities 
they  contradicted  and  condemned  who  contended  one 
against  another  in  the  theatres.  Even  those,  quoth  Cle- 
ombrotus,  which  concern  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  by  which 
this  city  has  lately  admitted  into  these  ceremonies  and  sac- 
rifices all  the  Greeks  without  Thermopylae,  including  those 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


21 


that  dwell  as  far  as  the  vale  of  Tempe.  For  the  taberna- 
cle or  hut,  which  is  set  up  every  ninth  year  within  the 
court-yard  of  this  temple,  is  not  a representation  of  the 
Dragon’s  den,  hut  of  some  king  or  tyrant ; as  likewise 
the  assaulting  of  it  in  great  silence,  by  the  way  termed 
Dolonia,  in  which  they  lead  hither  a youth  whose  father 
and  mother  are  still  living,  with  torches  burning  ; and 
having  set  this  tabernacle  on  fire  and  overthrown  the 
table,  they  run  away  as  fast  as  they  are  able  through  the 
doors  of  the  temple,  never  looking  behind  them.  In  fine, 
this  boy’s  wanderings,  together  with  his  servile  offices,  and 
all  the  expiatory  sacrifices  about  Tempe,  seem  to  declare 
the  commission  of  some  horrid  crime  in  this  place.  For 
it  looks  silly  to  affirm  that  Apollo,  for  having  killed  the 
Dragon,  was  forced  to  flv  to  the  farthest  parts  of  Greece 
to  be  cleansed  and  purified ; and  that  he  there  made  cer- 
tain offerings  and  libations,  as  men  do  when  they  design 
the  appeasing  those  vindictive  spirits  whom  we  call  Alas- 
tores  and  Palamnaei,  which  is  to  say,  the  revengers  of 
such  crimes  as  cannot  be  forgotten  but  must  have  punish- 
ment. It  is  true,  indeed,  that  the  relation  which  I have 
heard  touching  this  flight  is  very  strange  and  wonderful ; 
but  if  there  be  any  truth  in  it,  we  must  not  suppose  it 
was  an  ordinary  and  common  matter  which  happened 
then  about  this  oracle.  Yet  lest  I should  be  thought,  as 
Empedocles  says, 

Starting  new  heads,  to  wander  from  the  text, 

And  make  the  theme  we  have  in  hand  perplext, 

I entreat  you  to  let  me  put  a fit  conclusion  to  my  discourse 
(for  now  the  time  requires  it),  and  to  say  what  several  have 
said  before  me,  that  when  the  Daemons  who  are  appointed 
for  the  government  and  superintendency  of  oracles  do  fail, 
the  oracles  must  of  necessity  fail  too ; and  when  they  de- 
part elsewhere,  the  divining  powers  must  likewise  cease  in 
those  places  ; but  when  they  return  again,  after  a long 


22 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


time,  the  places  will  begin  again  to  speak,  like  musical  in- 
struments handled  by  those  that  know  how  to  use  them. 

16.  Cleombrotus  having  said  thus  much,  Heracleon  took 
up  the  discourse,  saying : We  have  never  an  infidel  among 
us,  but  are  all  agreed  in  our  opinions  touching  the  Gods  ; 
yet  let  us  have  a care,  Philippus,  lest  in  the  heat  and 
multiplicity  of  our  words  we  unawares  broach  some 
false  doctrine  that  may  tend  to  impiety.  Well!  but,  saith 
Philippus,  I hope  Cleombrotus  has  not  said  any  thing 
which  may  occasion  this  caution.  His  asserting  (says 
Heracleon)  that  they  be  not  the  Gods  who  preside  over 
the  oracles  (because  we  are  to  suppose  them  free  from  all 
worldly  care),  but  Daemons,  or  the  Gods’  officers  or 
messengers,  does  not  scandalize  me ; but  to  attribute  to 
these  Daemons  all  the  calamities,  vexations,  and  plagues 
which  happen  to  mortal  men,  — snatching  these  violently 
(we  may  almost  say)  from  the  verses  of  Empedocles,  — 
and  in  the  end  to  make  them  to  die  like  them,  this,  in  my 
mind,  savors  of  bold  presumption.  Cleombrotus,  having 
asked  Philippus  who  this  young  man  was,  and  being  in- 
formed of  his  name  and  country,  proceeded  in  this  man- 
ner : I know  very  well,  Heracleon,  that  the  discourse  I 
used  may  bear  an  absurd  construction  ; but  there  is  no 
speaking  of  great  matters  without  laying  first  great  foun- 
dations for  the  proof  of  one’s  opinion.  But,  as  for  your 
part,  you  are  not  sensible  how  you  contradict  even  that 
which  you  allow ; for  granting,  as  you  do,  that  there  be 
Daemons,  but  not  allowing  them  to  be  vicious  and  mortal, 
you  cannot  prove  there  are  any  at  all.  For  wherein  do 
they  differ  from  Gods,  supposing  they  be  incorruptible  and 
impassible  and  not  liable  to  error  ] 

17.  Whilst  Heracleon  was  musing,  and  studying  how  to 
answer  this,  Cleombrotus  went  on,  saying  : It  is  not  only 
Empedocles  who  affirms  there  are  bad  Daemons,  but  even 
Plato,  Xenocrates,  and  Chrysippus ; yea,  and  Democritus, 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


23 


when  he  prayed  he  might  meet  with  good  spirits,  which 
shows  that  he  thought  there  were  bad  as  well  as  good 
Daemons.  And  as  to  their  mortality,  I have  heard  it  re- 
ported from  a person  that  was  neither  fool  nor  knave, 
being  Epitherses,  the  father  of  Aemilianus  the  orator, 
whom  some  of  you  have  heard  declaim.  This  Epitherses 
was  my  townsman  and  a school-master,  who  told  me  that, 
designing  a voyage  to  Italy,  he  embarked  himself  on  a 
vessel  well  laden  both  with  goods  and  passengers.  About 
the  evening  the  vessel  was  becalmed  about  the  Isles  Echin- 
ades,  whereupon  their  ship  drove  with  the  tide  till  it  was 
carried  near  the  Isles  of  Paxi ; when  immediately  a voice 
was  heard  by  most  of  the  passengers  (who  were  then 
awake,  and  taking  a cup  after  supper)  calling  unto  one 
Thamus,  and  that  with  so  loud  a voice  as  made  all  the 
company  amazed  ; which  Thamus  was  a mariner  of  Egypt, 
whose  name  was  scarcely  known  in  the  ship.  He  returned 
no  answer  to  the  first  calls ; but  at  the  third  he  replied, 
Here  ! here  ! I am  the  man.  Then  the  voice  said  aloud  to 
him,  When  you  are  arrived  at  Palodes,  take  care  to  make 
it  known  that  the  great  God  Pan  is  dead.  Epitherses  told 
us,  this  voice  did  much  astonish  all  that  heard  it,  and 
caused  much  arguing  whether  this  voice  was  to  be  obeyed 
or  slighted.  Thamus,  for  his  part,  was  resolved,  if  the 
wind  permitted,  to  sail  by  the  place  without  saying  a word; 
but  if  the  wind  ceased  and  there  ensued  a calm,  to  speak 
and  cry  out  as  loud  as  he  was  able  what  he  was  enjoined. 
Being  come  to  Palodes,  there  was^  no  wind  stirring,  and  the 
sea  was  as  smooth  as  glass.  Whereupon  Thamus  standing 
on  the  deck,  with  his  face  towards  the  land,  uttered  with  a 
loud  voice  his  message,  saying,  The  great  Pan  is  dead.  He 
had  no  sooner  said  this,  but  they  heard  a dreadful  noise, 
not  only  of  one,  but  of  several,  who,  to  their  thinking, 
groaned  and  lamented  with  a kind  of  astonishment.  And 
there  being  many  persons  in  the  ship,  an  account  of  this 


24 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


was  soon  spread  over  Rome,  which  made  Tiberius  the  Em- 
peror send  for  Thamus ; and  he  seemed  to  give  such  heed 
to  what  he  told  him,  that  he  earnestly  enquired  who  this 
Pan  was ; and  the  learned  men  about  him  gave  in  their 
judgments,  that  it  was  the  son  of  Mercury  by  Penelope. 
There  were  some  then  in  the  company  who  declared  they 
had  heard  old  Aemilianus  say  as  much. 

18.  Demetrius  then  related,  that  about  Britain  there 
were  many  small  and  desolate  islands,  some  of  which  were 
called  the  Isles  of  Daemons  and  Demi-gods ; and  that  he 
himself,  at  the  command  of  the  Emperor,  sailed  to  the 
nearest  of  those  places  for  curiosity’s  sake,  where  he  found 
few, inhabitants ; but  that  they  were  all  esteemed  by  the 
Britains  as  sacred  and  divine.  Not  long  after  he  was 
arrived  there,  he  said,  the  air  and  the  weather  were  very 
foul  and  tempestuous,  and  there  followed  a terrible  storm 
. of  wind  and  thunder ; which  at  length  ceasing,  he  says, 
the  inhabitants  told  him  that  one  of  the  Daemons  or  Demi- 
gods was  deceased.  For  as  a lamp,  said  he,  while  it  is 
lighted,  offends  nobody  with  its  scent,  but  when  it  is  ex- 
tinguished, it  sends  out  such  a scent  as  is  nauseous  to  every- 
body ; so  these  great  souls,  whilst  they  shine,  are  mild  and 
gracious,  without  being  troublesome  to  anybody ; but 
when  they  draw  to  an  end,  they  cause  great  storms  and 
tempests,  and  not  seldom  infect  the  air  with  contagious 
distempers.  They  say  farther,  that  Saturn  is  detained 
prisoner  in  one  of  those  islands,  and  guarded  by  Briareus, 
being  in  a sound  sleep  (for  that  is  the  device  to  hold  him 
captive),  and  that  he  has  several  of  those  Daemons  for  his 
valets  and  attendants. 

19.  Thus  then  spake  Cleombrotus : I could,  says  he, 
relate  several  such  stories  as  these  ; but  it  is  sufficient  that 
what  has  been  said  as  yet  does  not  contradict  the  opinion 
of  any  one  here.  And  we  all  know,  the  Stoics  believe  the 
same  as  we  do  concerning  the  Daemons,  and  that  amongst 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


25 


tlie  great  company  of  Gods  which  are  commonly  believed, 
there  is  but  one  who  is  eternal  and  immortal ; all  the  rest, 
having  been  born  in  time,  shall  end  by  death.  As  to  the 
flouts  and  scofling  of  the  Epicureans,  they  are  not  to  be 
regarded,  seeing  they  have  the  boldness  to  treat  divine 
providence  with  as  little  reverence,  calling  it  by  no  better 
a name  than  a mere  whimsy  and  old  wives’  fable. 
Whereas  we,  on  the  contrary,  assert  that  their  Infinity 
is  fabulous  and  ridiculous,  seeing  among  such  endless  num- 
bers of  worlds  there  is  not  one  governed  by  reason  or  divine 
providence,  they  having  been  all  made  and  upheld  by 
chance.  If  we  cannot  forbear  drolling  even  in  matters  of 
philosophy,  they  are  most  to  be  ridiculed  Avho  bring  into 
their  disputes  of  natural  questions  certain  blind,  dumb,  and 
lifeless  images,  which  appear  they  know  not  where  nor 
when,  which,  they  say,  proceed  from  bodies,  some  of  which 
are  still  living,  and  others  long  since  dead  and  rotten. 
Now,  such  people’s  opinions  as  these  must  needs  be  ex- 
ploded and  derided  by  all  rational  men ; yet  these  very 
people  shall  be  offended  and  angry  at  a man’s  saying  there 
be  Daemons,  and  that  they  subsist  both  by  reason  and  by 
Nature,  and  continue  a long  time. 

20.  Here  Ammonius  began  to  speak,  saying : In  my 
opinion,  Theophrastus  was  in  the  right,  and  spoke  like  a 
philosopher  and  a divine  ; for  whoever  shall  deny  what  he 
alleges  must  also  reject  many  things  which  may  happen, 
though  we  understand  not  the  reasons  why  they  do  so. 
And  granting  what  he  offers  to  be  true,  it  carries  with  it 
many  things  called  impossible  and  unreal.  But  as  to  what  I 
have  heard  the  Epicureans  allege  against  the  Daemons  which 
Empedocles  brings  in,  — as,  that  it  is  impossible  they  can 
be  happy  and  long-lived  if  they  be  bad  and  viciously 
affected,  because  vice  in  its  own  nature  is  blind  and  natu- 
rally precipitates  itself  into  such  mischiefs  as  destroy  life, 
— that,  I must  tell  you,  is  vain  and  idle.  For  if  this 


26 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


reasoning  be  good,  it  will  then  follow  that  Epicurus  was  a 
worse  man  than  Gorgias  the  sophister,  and  Metrodorus 
than  Alexis  the  comic  actor ; for  Alexis  lived  twice  as  long 
as  Metrodorus,  and  Gorgias  a third  longer  than  Epicurus. 
For  it  is  in  another  regard  we  say  virtue  is  strong  and  vice 
weak,  not  in  reference  to  the  continuance  or  dissolution  of 
the  body ; for  we  know  there  are  many  animals  which  are 
dull,  slow,  and  heavy,  and  many  disorderly  and  lustful, 
which  live  longer  than  those  that  are  more  sagacious  and 
quicker  of  sense.  And  therefore  they  are  much  in  the 
wrong  in  saying  the  divine  nature  is  immortal  because  it 
avoideth  the  things  which  are  ill  and  mischievous  ; for  they 
should  have  supposed  the  divine  nature  free  from  all  pos- 
sibility of  falling  into  corruption  and  alteration.  But  per- 
haps it  will  be  thought  not  fair  to  dispute  against  those 
that  are  absent ; I would  have  therefore  Cleombrotus  to 
resume  his  discourse  touching  the  vanishing  and  transmi- 
gration of  Daemons  from  one  place  to  another. 

21.  With  all  my  heart,  answered  Cleombrotus  ; but  1 
shall  now  say  something  which  will  seem  more  absurd  than 
any  thing  I have  heretofore  offered,  although  it  seems  to 
be  grounded  on  natural  reason ; and  Plato  himself  has 
touched  upon  it,  not  positively  affirming  it,  but  offering  it 
as  a probable  opinion,  although  among  other  philosophers 
it  has  been  much  cried  out  against.  And  seeing  that  we 
are  fallen  into  a free  discourse,  and  that  a man  cannot  light 
into  better  company  and  a more  favorable  auditory  to  test 
the  story,  as  if  it  were  foreign  coin,  I shall  therefore  tell 
you  a story  which  I heard  from  a stranger,  whose  acquaint- 
ance has  cost  me  no  small  sum  of  money  in  searching  after 
him  in  divers  countries,  whom  at  length,  after  much  travel, 
-I  found  near  the  Red  Sea.  He  would  converse  with  men 
but  once  a year,  all  the  rest  of  his  time  (as  he  told  me)  he 
spent  among  the  Nymphs,  Nomades,  and  Daemons.  He 
was  very  free  with  me,  and  extremely  obliging.  I never 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


27 


saw  a more  graceful  person  in  all  my  life ; and  that  which 
was  very  strange  in  him  was,  that  he  was  never  subject  to 
any  disease ; once  every  month  he  ate  the  hitter  fruit  of  a 
certain  medicinal  herb.  He  spake  several  languages  per- 
fectly well ; his  discourse  to  me  was  in  the  Doric  dialect ; 
his  speech  was  as  charming  as  the  sweetest  music,  and  as 
soon  as  ever  he  opened  his  mouth  to  speak,  there  issued 
out  of  it  so  sweet  and  fragrant  a breath,  that  all  the  place 
was  filled  with  it.  Now,  as  to  human  learning,  such  as 
history,  he  retained  the  knowledge  thereof  all  the  year ; 
but  as  to  the  gift  of  divination,  he  was  inspired  therewith 
only  one  day  in  the  year,  in  which  he  went  down  to  the 
sea-side,  and  there  foretold  things  to  come.  And  thither 
resorted  to  him  the  princes  and  great  men  of  all  the 
country,  or  else  their  secretaries,  who  there  attended  his 
coming  at  a prefixed  day,  and  then  returned.  This  person 
attributed  divination  to  the  Daemons,  and  was  well  pleased 
to  hear  what  we  related  concerning  Delphi.  Whatsoever 
we  told  concerning  Bacchus  and  the  sacrifices  which  are 
offered  to  him,  he  knew  it  all,  saying  that,  as  these  were 
great  accidents  which  happened  to  Daemons,  so  also  was 
that  which  was  related  of  the  serpent  Python.  And  he 
affirmed,  that  he  who  slew  him  was  not  banished  for  nine 
years,  neither  did  he  fly  into  the  Valley  of  Tempe,  but 
was  driven  out  of  this  world  into  another,  from  whence, 
after  nine  revolutions  of  the  great  years,  being  returned, 
cleansed,  and  purified,  and  become  a true  Phoebus,  — that 
is  to  say,  clear  and  bright,  — he  had  at  length  recovered 
the'  superintendence  of  the  Delphic  oracle,  which  in  the 
mean  time  had  been  committed  to  the  charge  of  Themis. 
He  said  as  much  concerning  what  is  related  of  Typhon 
and  the  Titans.  For  he  affirmed,  they  were  the  battles  of 
Daemons  against  Daemons,  and  the  flights  and  banishments 
of  those  that  had  been  vanquished,  or  the  punishments 
inflicted  by  the  Gods  on  those  who  had  committed  such 


28 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


acts  as  Typhon  is  said  to  have  done  against  Osiris,  and 
Saturn  against  Uranus,  whose  honors  are  much  obscured, 
or  wholly  lost,  by  being  translated  into  another  world. 
For  I know  that  the  Solymeans,  who  are  borderers  to  the 
Lycians,  did  greatly  honor  Saturn ; but  since  he  killed 
their  princes,  Arsalus,  Dryus,  and  Trosobius,  he  fled  into 
some  other  country,  they  knew  not  where,  and  he  now  is 
in  a manner  forgotten.  But  they  called  these  three  — 
Arsalus,  Dryus,  and  Trosobius  — the  severe  Gods,  and  the 
Lycians  do  at  this  day  curse  people  in  their  names,  as  well 
in  private  as  in  public.  Several  other  such  like  examples 
may  a man  find  in  the  records  of  the  Gods.  And  if  we 
call  any  of  the  Daemons  by  the  usual  and  common  names 
of  the  Gods,  on  whom  they  do  depend,  it  is  no  marvel  at 
all,  said  the  stranger ; for  they  like  to  be  called  by  the 
Gods  on  Avhom  they  do  depend,  and  from  whom  they  have 
received  their  honor  and  power ; even  as  amongst  us  men 
one  is  named  Diius,  another  Athenae,  another  Apollonius, 
another  Dionysius,  and  still  another  Hermaeus.  And 
there  are  some  who  have  names  imposed  on  them,  as 
it  were,  by  chance,  which  yet  do  well  agree  with  their 
tempers ; whereas  some  carry  the  names  of  the  Gods 
which  do  not  at  all  suit  with  their  weaknesses. 

22.  Here  Cleombrotus  having  paused,  his  discourse 
seemed  strange  to  all  the  company,  and  Heracleon  de- 
manded of  him,  how  all  this  concerned  Plato,  and  how  he 
had  siven  occasion  to  this  discourse.  Unto  which  Cleom- 

O 

brotus  answered:  You  do  well  to  put  me  in  mind  of  it; 
for  first,  Plato  ever  rejected  the  infinity  of  worlds,  yet 
would  determine  nothing  positively  touching  the  precise 
number  of  them.  And  granting  the  probability  of  their 
opinion  who  affirmed  there  were  five,  one  for  each  element, 
as  to  his  own  part,  he  kept  to  one,  which  seems  to  be  his 
genuine  opinion  ; whereas  all  other  philosophers  have  been 
afraid  to  receive  and  'admit  the  multitude  of  worlds,  as  if 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


29 


those  who  did  not  limit  matter  to  one  must  needs  fall 
into  troublesome  and  boundless  infinity.  But  was  this 
stranger,  said  I,  of  the  same  opinion  with  Plato,  touching 
the  number  of  the  worlds  1 Or  did  you  not  all  the  while 
ask  his  opinion  in  that  matter”?  I was  far  from  failing 
herein,  says  Cleombrotus,  seeing  I found  him  so  communi- 
cative and  affable  to  me.  He  told  me,  that  neither  was 
the  number  of  the  worlds  infinite,  neither  was  there  but 
only  one,  nor  five ; but  a hundred  and  eighty-three,  which 
were  ranged  in  a triangular  form,  every  side  containing 
sixty  worlds ; and  of  the  three  remaining,  every  corner 
had  one.  That  they  were  so  ordered,  that  one  always 
touched  another  in  a circle,  like  those  who  dance  in  a 
ring.  That  the  plain  within  the  triangle  is,  as  it  were,  the 
foundation  and  common  altar  to  all  those  worlds,  which  is 
called  the  Plain  of  Truth,  in  which  lie  the  designs,  moulds, 
ideas,  and  invariable  examples  of  all  things  which  were, 
or  ever  shall  be  ; and  about  these  is  Eternity,  whence 
flowed  Time,  as  from  a river,  into  these  worlds.  More- 
over, that  the  souls  of  men,  if  they  have  lived  well  in  this 
world,  do  see  these  ideas  once  in  ten  thousand  years  ; and 
that  the  most  holy  mystical  ceremonies  which  are  per- 
formed here  are  no  more  than  a dream  of  this  sacred 
vision.  And  further,  that  all  the  pains  which  are  taken 
in  the  study  of  philosophy  are  to  attain  to  a sight  of  those 
beauties ; otherwise  they  were  all  lost  labors.  I heard 
him,  said  he,  relate  all  these  things  as  perfectly,  as  if  they 
had  been  some  religious  rites  wherein  he  would  have 
instructed  me ; for  he  brought  me  no  proof  or  demonstra- 
tion to  confirm  what  he  said. 

23.  Here,  turning  myself  to  Demetrius,  I asked  him 
what  were  the  words  which  the  wooers  of  Penelope  spake 
in  Homer,  when  they  saw  Ulysses  handling  his  bow.  And 
Demetrius  having  put  me  in  mind  of  them,  I said : It 
came  into  my  thoughts  to  say  as  much  of  this  wonderful 


30 


WHY  TIIE  ORACLES  CEASE 


man.  He  was  indeed  “ an  observer  and  a cunning  tliief  ” 
of  opinions  and  discourses,  and  a person  conversant  in  all 
sorts  of  learning,  being  a Greek  born,  and  perfectly  well 
skilled  in  the  studies  of  his  country.  For  this  number  of 
worlds  shows  us  that  he  was  neither  an  Indian  nor  an 
Egyptian ; but  his  father  was  a Dorian  Greek  of  the  coun- 
try of  Sicily,  named  Petron,  born  in  the  city  of  Himera, 
who  wrote  a little  book  on  this  subject,  which  I indeed 
never  saw,  nor  can  tell  whether  it  be  extant.  But  Hippys, 
a native  of  Rhegium,  mentioned  by  Phanias  the  Eresian, 
tells  us,  it  was  the  doctrine  of  Petron  that  there  were  a 
hundred  and  eighty-three  worlds,  tacked  to  one  another  in 
their  first  principle ; but  he  does  not  explain  to  us  what 
this  phrase  means,  nor  does  he  offer  any  reason  to  prove 
this.  It  is  certain,  says  Demetrius,  that  Plato  himself, 
bringing  no  argument  to  evince  this  point,  does  hereby 
overthrow  this  opinion.  Yet,  says  Heracleon,  we  have 
heard  you  grammarians  say  that  Homer  was  the  first 
author  of  this  opinion,  as  having  divided  the  universe 
into  five  worlds,  heaven,  water,  air,  earth,  and  that  which 
he  calls  Olympus ; of  which  he  leaveth  two  to  be  com- 
mon,— the  earth  to  all  beneath,  and  Olympus  to  all  above, 
— but  the  three  in  the  midst  between  them  he  attributes 
unto  three  several  Gods.  In  the  like  manner  Plato,  as- 
signing unto  the  principal  parts  of  the  universe  the  first 
forms  and  most  excellent  figures  of  the  bodies,  calls  them 
five  Avorlds,  — those  of  the  earth,  water,  air,  and  fire,  and 
finally,  of  that  which  comprehended  all  the  others,  which 
he  calls  Dodecaedron  (which  is  to  say,  with  twelve  bases), 
which,  amply  extending,  is  of  easy  motion  and  capacity, 
its  form  and  figure  being  very  fit  and  proper  for  the  revolu- 
tions and  motions  of  the  souls.  What  need  is  there  then, 
cried  Demetrius,  of  bringing  in  good  old  Homer  1 For 
we  have  had  fables  enough  already.  But  Plato  is  far  from 
calling  the  different  elements  five  worlds ; for  even  where 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


31 


lie  disputes  against  those  who  assert  an  infinite  number  of 
worlds,  he  affirms,  there  is  only  one  created  of  God  and 
satisfying  him,  consisting  of  the  entire  corporeal  Nature, 
perfect,  endued  with  self-sufficiency,  and  wanting  noth- 
ing ; and  therefore  we  may  well  think  it  strange  that  the 
truth  which  he  spake  should  occasion  the  extravagancy  of 
others.  For  had  he  not  maintained  the  world’s  unity,  he 
would  in  some  sort  have  given  a foundation  to  those  who 
affirm  an  infinite  number  of  worlds ; but  that  he  asserted 
precisely  five,  this  is  marvellously  strange  and  far  from  all 
probability,  unless  you  can  (says  he,  turning  himself  to 
me)  clear  this  point.  How ! (said  I)  are  you  then  resolved 
to  drop  here  your  first  dispute  about  oracles,  and  to  take 
up  another  of  no  less  difficulty  ? Not  so,  replied  Deme- 
trius ; yet  we  must  take  cognizance  of  this,  which  does,  as 
it  were,  hold  out  its  hand  to  us,  though  we  shall  not  re- 
main long  upon  it,  but  treat  of  it  by  the  way,  and  soon 
return  to  our  first  discourse. 

24.  First  of  all  then,  I say,  the  reasons  which  hinder  us 
from  asserting  an  infinite  number  of  worlds  do  not  hinder 
us  from  affirming  that  there  are  more  than  one  ; for  as 
well  in  many  worlds  as  in  one  there  may  be  Providence 
and  Divination,  while  Fortune  intervenes  only  in  the  small- 
est things ; but  most  part  of  the  grand  and  principal  things 
have  and  take  their  beginnings  and  changes  by  order, 
which  could  not  be  in  an  infinite  number  of  worlds.  And 
it  is  more  conformable  to  reason  to  say  that  God  made 
more  than  one  world ; for,  being  perfectly  good,  he  wants 
no  virtue,  and  least  of  all  justice  and  friendship,  for  they 
do  chiefly  become  the  nature  of  the  Gods.  Now  God 
hath  nothing  that  is  superfluous  and  useless  ; and  there- 
fore there  must  be  other  inferior  Gods  proceeding  from 
him,  and  other  worlds  made  by  him,  towards  whom  he 
must  use  these  social  virtues  ; for  he  cannot  exercise  those 
virtues  of  justice  and  benignity  on  himself  or  any  part  of 


» 


32 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


himself,  but  on  others.  So  that  it  is  not  likely  this  world 
should  float  and  wander  about,  without  either  friend, 
neighbor,  or  any  sort  of  communication,  in  an  infinite 
vacuum.  For  we  see  Nature  includes  all  single  things  in 
genera  and  species,  like  as  in  vessels  or  in  husks  of  seeds ; 
for  there  is  nothing  to  be  found  in  Nature  — and  nothing 
can  have  a common  notion  or  appellation  — which  is  not 
qualified  both  in  common  and  in  particular.  Now  the 
world  is  not  said  to  be  such  in  common,  but  in  particular, 
for  its  quality  is  derived  from  its  being  an  harmonious 
whole  made  up  of  different  parts.  But  yet,  there  being 
no  such  thing  in  Nature  as  one  man  alone,  one  horse, 
one  star,  one  God,  one  Daemon,  why  may  we  not  be- 
lieve that  there  is  not  in  Nature  one  only  world  and  no 
more,  but  several  ? And  if  any  one  shall  object  against 
me  that  this  world  hath  likewise  but  one  earth  and  one 
sea,  I can  answer  him,  he  is  much  deceived  by  not  under- 
standing the  evidence  afforded  by  like  parts.  For  we 
divide  the  earth  into  similar  parts  of  the  same  denomina- 
tion ; for  all  the  parts  of  the  earth  are  earth,  and  so  of 
the  sea ; but  no  part  of  the  world  is  still  the  world,  it 
being  composed  of  divers  and  different  natures. 

25.  For  as  to  the  inconvenience  which  some  do  seem 
to  fear,  and  in  respect  of  which  they  confine  all  the  matter 
within  one  world,  lest,  there  remaining  any  thing  without, 
it  should  disturb  the  composition  of  this,  by  the  resistances 
and  jars  which  it  would  make  against  it,  — they  have  no 
need  to  dread  this.  For,  there  being  many  worlds,  and 
each  of  them  in  particular  having  one  definite  and  deter- 
minate measure  and  limit  of  its  substance  and  matter,  no 
part  thereof  will  be  without  order  and  good  disposition, 
nothing  will  remain  superfluous  or  be  cast  out  as  an  excre- 
ment. For  the  reason  which  belongeth  to  each  world, 
being  able  to  rule  and  govern  the  matter  that  is  allotted 
thereto,  will  not  suffer  that  any  thing  shall  run  out  of 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


33 


course  and  order,  and  rencounter  and  jumble  another 
world,  nor  likewise  that  any  thing  from  another  shall 
justle  or  disturb  it,  there  being  nothing  in  Nature  infinite 
and  inordinate  in  quantity,  nor  in  motion  without  reason 
and  order.  And  if  perhaps  there  be  any  influence  that 
passes  from  the  one  to  the  other,  this  is  a fraternal  com- 
munication, whereby  they  mix  themselves  together,  like 
the  light  of  the  stars  and  the  influence  of  their  tempera- 
tures, and  whereby  they  themselves  do  rejoice  in  behold- 
ing one  another  with  a benign  aspect,  and  give  to  the  Gods 
(who  are  good  and  many  in  number  in  every  world)  an 
opportunity  of  knowing  and  caressing  one  another.  For 
there  is  nothing  in  all  this  that  is  impossible,  or  fabulous, 
or  contrary  to  reason ; though  some  may  think  so  because 
of  the  opinion  of  Aristotle,  who  saith  that  all  bodies  have 
their  proper  and  natural  places,  by  which  means  the  earth 
must  on  all  sides  tend  to  the  midst,  and  the  water  must 
rest  upon  it,  serving  by  its  weight  for  a foundation  to  the 
other  lighter  elements.  Were  there  then  many  worlds,  the 
earth  would  be  often  found  above  the  airy  and  fiery  regions, 
and  as  often  under  them ; while  air  and  water  would  be 
sometimes  in  their  natural  places,  and  sometimes  in  others 
which  are  their  unnatural ; which  things  being  impossible, 
as  he  thinks,  it  follows  then,  there  are  neither  two  nor 
more  worlds,  but  one  only,  which  is  this  here,  consisting 
of  all  kinds  of  elements,  disposed  according  to  Nature, 
agreeably  to  the  diversity  of  bodies. 

26.  But  in  all  this  there  is  more  probability  than  truth. 
For  consider,  friend  Demetrius;  when  he  saith  that  some 
bodies  tend  towards  the  midst,  which  is  to  say,  downwards, 
the  others  from  the  midst,  that  is,  upward,  and  a third 
sort  move  round  about  the  midst,  what  does  he  mean  by  the 
midst  ? This  cannot  be  understood  in  respect  of  a vacuum, 
there  being  no  such  thing  in  Nature,  as  he  says  himself ; 
and,  moreover,  those  that  do  allow  it  say  that  it  can  have 

3 


VOL.  IV. 


34 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


no  middle,  no  more  than  beginning  and  end  ; for  begin- 
ning and  end  are  extremities,  but  that  which  is  infinite, 
everybody  knows,  is  without  an  end.  But  supposing  we 
should  be  necessitated  to  admit  a middle  in  a vacuum,  it  is 
impossible  to  comprehend  and  imagine  the  difference  in 
the  motions  of  bodies  towards  it,  because  there  is  neither 
in  this  vacuum  any  power  attractive  of  the  body,  nor  in 
the  bodies  any  inclination  or  affection  to  tend  on  all  sides 
to  this  middle.  And  it  is  no  less  difficult  to  imagine  that 
bodies  can  move  of  themselves  towards  an  incorporeal 
place,  or  receive  any  motion  from  it.  This  middle  then 
must  be  understood  not  locally,  but  corporeally.  For  this 
world  being  a mass  and  union  consisting  of  different  bod- 
ies joined  together,  this  diversity  of  them  must  beget  differ- 
ent motions  from  one  another ; which  appears  in  that  each 
of  these  bodies  changing  its  substance  does  at  the  same 
time  change  its  place.  For  subtilization  and  rarefaction 
dissipate  the  matter  which  springeth  from  the  midst  and 
ariseth  upwards ; whereas,  on  the  contrary,  condensation 
and  constipation  depress  and  drive  it  down  towards  the 
middle. 

27.  On  these  points  it  is  not  necessary  to  discourse  any 
longer  in  this  place.  For  whatever  cause  a man  supposes 
shall  produce  such  passions  and  changes,  that  very  cause 
will  contain  each  of  these  worlds  in  itself ; because  each 
of  them  has  its  sea  and  land,  each  its  proper  middle,  and 
each  its  passions  and  change  of  bodies,  and  the  nature 
and  power  which  contain  and  preserve  each  in  its  place 
and  being.  For  that  which  is  without,  whether  it  be 
nothing  at  all  or  an  infinite  vacuum,  cannot  allow  any  mid- 
dle, as  we  have  already  said.  But  there  being  several 
worlds,  each  has  its  proper  middle  apart ; so  that  in  each 
of  them  there  will  be  motions  proper  to  bodies,  some  tend- 
ing down  to  the  midst,  others  mounting  aloft  from  the 
midst,  others  moving  round  about  it,  according  as  they 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


35 


themselves  do  distinguish  motions.  And  he  who  asserts 
there  are  many  middles,  and  that  heavy  bodies  from  all 
sides  do  tend  unto  one  alone,  is  like  to  him  who  shall  af- 
firm that  the  blood  of  several  men  runs  from  all  parts 
into  one  vein,  or  that  all  then’  brains  should  be  contained 
within  one  and  the  same  membrane ; supposing  it  absurd, 
that  all  natural  bodies  which  are  solid  should  not  be  in  one 
place,  and  the  rare  in  another.  He  that  thus  thinketh  is 
certainly  a mean  philosopher  ; and  no  better  is  he  who 
will  not  allow  the  whole  to  have  all  parts  in  their  order, 
rank,  and  natural  situation.  What  could  be  more  foolish, 
than  for  a man  to  call  that  a world  which  had  a moon 
within  it  so  situated,  as  if  a man  should  have  his  brains 
in  his  heels,  and  his  heart  in  his  forehead  ? Whereas  there 
is  no  absurdity  or  inconveniency,  if,  in  supposing  several 
distinct  worlds  separated  from  one  another,  a man  should 
distinguish  and  separate  their  parts.  For  in  each  of  them 
the  earth,  sea,  and  sky  will  be  placed  and  situated  in  their 
proper  places,  and  each  of  these  worlds  may  have  its  su- 
perior, inferior,  circular,  and  middle  part,  not  in  respect 
of  another  world,  nor  in  reference  to  what  is  without,  but 
to  what  is  within  itself. 

28.  And  as  to  the  argument  which  some  do  draw  from 
a stone  supposed  to  be  placed  without  the  world,  it 
neither  proves  rest  nor  motion ; for  how  could  it  remain 
suspended,  seeing  it  is  by  nature  heavy,  or  move  towards 
the  midst  of  the  world,  as  other  ponderous  bodies,  seeing 
it  is  neither  part  of  it  nor  like  it?  And  as  to  that  earth 
which  is  fixed  and  environed  by  another  world,  we  must 
not  wonder,  considering  its  weightiness,  if  it  does  not  drop 
down,  seeing  it  is  upheld  by  a certain  natural  force  per- 
taining to  it.  For  if  we  shall  take  high  and  low  not  with- 
in the  world  but  without,  we  shall  find  ourselves  involved 
in  the  same  difficulties  as  Epicurus  was  when  he  made  his 
little  indivisible  atoms  to  move  and  tend  to  those  places 


36 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


which  are  under  foot,  as  if  the  vacuum  had  feet,  or  its  in- 
finite space  would  permit  one  to  talk  of  high  or  low.  In- 
deed, a man  would  marvel  what  should  cause  Chrysippus 
to  say,  that  the  world  was  placed  and  situated  directly  in 
the  midst,  and  that  the  matter  thereof,  from  all  eternity 
having  possessed  itself  of  the  midst,  yet  is  so  compacted 
together  that  it  remains  for  ever.  For  he  writes  this  in 
his  Fourth  Book  of  Possible  Things,  vainly  imagining 
there  is  a middle  in  that  vast  emptiness,  and  still  more  ab- 
surdly attributing  unto  that  middle,  which  is  not,  the  cause 
of  the  world’s  stability  and  continuance ; he  having  often 
said  in  other  writings  of  his  that  the  substance  is  upheld 
and  governed,  partly  by  the  motions  tending  to  the  midst 
of  it,  and  partly  by  others  parting  from  the  midst  of  it. 

29.  As  to  the  other  oppositions  which  the  Stoics  make, 
who  should  fear  them  ? As  when  they  demand,  how  it  is 
possible  to  maintain  a fatal  destiny  and  a divine  provi- 
dence, and  how  it  can  be  otherwise  but  that  we  must  ad- 
mit of  several  Jupiters,  when  we  assert  the  plurality  of 
worlds.  Now  if  there  be  an  inconveniency  in  admitting 
many  Jupiters,  their  opinions  will  appear  far  more  absurd  ; 
for  they  imagine  there  are  suns,  and  moons,  Apollos,  Di- 
anas, and  Neptunes  innumerable,  in  innumerable  changes 
and  revolutions  of  worlds.  But  where  is  the  necessity 
which  lies  upon  us  to  grant  that  there  must  be  many  Jupi- 
ters if  there  be  many  worlds,  seeing  that  each  of  them  may 
be  subject  to  a sovereign  governor  of  the  whole,  a God 
endued  with  a suitable  mind  and  ability,  like  to  him  whom 
we  name  the  Lord  and  Father  of  all  things  ? Or  what 
shall  hinder  us  from  asserting  that  the  several  worlds  must 
be  subject  to  the  providence  and  destiny  of  Jupiter,  and 
that  he  has  an  eye  to  all  things,  directing  all,  and  admin- 
istering to  them  the  principles,  seeds,  and  causes  of  all 
things  which  are  made  1 For,  while  we  often  see  here  a 
body  composed  of  several  other  distinct  bodies, — for  ex- 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


37 


ample,  the  assembly  of  a town,  an  army,  or  a chorus, — 
in  each  of  which  bodies  there  is  life,  prudence,  and  un- 
derstanding ; so  it  cannot  be  impossible  that,  in  the  whole 
universe,  ten  or  fifty  or  a hundred  worlds  which  may  be  in 
it  should  all  use  the  same  reason,  and  all  correspond  with 
the  same  principle.  For  this  order  and  disposition  is  very 
suitable  to  the  Gods  ; for  we  must  not  make  them  kings 
of  a swarm  of  bees  who  never  stir  out  of  their  hives,  or 
keep  them  fast  imprisoned  in  matter,  like  those  who  affirm 
the  Gods  to  be  certain  dispositions  of  the  air,  and  powers 
of  waters  and  fire,  infused  and  mixed  within,  which  arise 
and  spring  up  together  with  the  world,  and  in  time  are  to 
be  burnt  and  end  with  it,  — not  affording  them  the  liberty  of 
coachmen  and  pilots,  but  nailing  them  down  to  their  bases 
like  statues  and  images.  For  they  enclose  the  Gods  with- 
in matter,  and  that  in  so  strict  a manner  as  makes  them 
liable  to  all  the  changes,  alterations,  and  decays  of  it. 

30.  It  is  certainly  more  agreeable  to  the  nature  of  the 
Gods  to  say  that  they  are  wholly  at  liberty,  like  Castor  and 
Pollux,  ready  to  succor  such  as  are  overtaken  by  bad 
weather  at  sea  ; for  when  they  appear,  the  winds  cease  and 
the  waves  are  calmed.  Not  that  they  navigate  and  are 
partakers  of  the  same  peril ; but  they  only  appear  in  the 
sky,  and  the  danger  is  over.  Thus  do  the  Gods  visit  each 
world,  and  rule  and  provide  for  all  things  in  them.  Jupi- 
ter in  Homer  cast  not  his  eyes  far  from  the  city  of  Troy 
into  Thrace,  and  to  the  nomad  Scythians  along  the  river 
Ister ; but  the  true  Jupiter  has  several  seemly  and  agree- 
able passages  for  his  majesty  from  one  world  into  another, 
not  looking  into  the  infinite  vacuum  without,  nor  regarding 
himself  and  nothing  else,  as  some  have  imagined,  but 
weighing  the  deeds  of  Gods  and  men,  and  the  motions  and 
revolutions  of  the  stars.  For  the  Divinity  does  not  hate 
variety  and  changes,  but  takes  great  pleasure  in  them,  as 
one  may  conjecture  by  the  circuits,  conversions,  and  muta- 


38 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


tions  observable  in  the  heavens.  And  therefore  I conclude 
that  the  infinite  number  of  worlds  is  a chimera,  which  has 
not  the  least  probability  of  truth,  and  which  cannot  by  any 
means  admit  of  any  God,  but  must  be  wholly  guided  by 
chance  and  fortune.  Whereas  the  government  and  provi- 
dence of  a certain  definite  number  of  worlds  has  nothing  in 
it  that  seems  more  laborious  and  unworthy  than  that  which 
is  employed  in  the  direction  of  one  alone,  which  is  trans- 
formed, renewed,  and  reformed  an  infinite  number  of 
times. 

31.  Having  said  this,  I paused.  And  Philippus  imme- 
diately cried  out : Whether  this  be  certain  or  not,  I will 
not  be  too  positive  ; but  if  we  carry  God  beyond  one  world, 
it  would  more  gratify  me  to  know  why  we  should  make 
him  the  Creator  only  of  five  worlds  and  no  more,  and  what 
proportion  this  number  bears  to  that  of  the  worlds,  than  to 
know  why  the  word  E I was  inscribed  upon  this  temple. 
For  this  is  neither  a triangular,  a quadrate,  a perfect,  nor 
a cubic  °number,  neither  does  it  yield  any  elegancy  to  such 
as  are  delighted  in  this  kind  of  sciences.  As  to  what  con- 
cerns the  argument  drawn  from  the  number  of  elements, 
which  Plato  seems  to  have  touched  upon,  it  is  obscure  and 
improbable,  and  will  not  afford  this  consequence,  — that, 
as  there  are  formed  from  matter  five  sorts  of  regular  bodies, 
which  have  equal  angles  and  equal  sides,  and  are  environed 
with  equal  superficies,  so  there  were  from  the  beginning 
five  worlds,  made  and  formed  of  these  five  bodies. 

32.  Yet  Theodoras  the  Solian,  said  I,  when  he  reads 
Plato’s  mathematics  to  his  scholars,  both  keeps  to  the  text 
and  clearly  expounds  it,  when  he  saitli,  the  pyramid,  oc- 
tahedron, dodecahedron,  icosahedron  (which  Plato  lays 
down  as  the  first  bodies)  are  all  beautiful  both  in  their 
proportions  and  equalities  ; Nature  cannot  contrive  and 
make  better  than  these,  nor  perhaps  so  good.  Yet  they 
have  not  all  the  same  constitution  and  origin  ; for  the  least 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


39 


and  slightest  of  the  five  is  the  pyramid  ; the  greatest,  which 
has  most  parts,  is  the  dodecahedron  ; and  of  the  other 
two,  the  icosahedron  is  greater  than  the  octahedron  by 
more  than  twofold,  if  you  compare  their  number  of  trian- 
gles. And  therefore  it  is  impossible  they  should  be  all 
made  at  once,  of  one  and  the  same  matter ; for  the  small- 
est and  most  subtile  have  been  certainly  more  pliable  to  the 
hand  of  the  workman  who  moved  and  fashioned  the  mat- 
ter, and  consequently  were  sooner  made  and  shaped,  than 
those  which  have  stronger  parts  and  a greater  mass  of 
bodies,  and  whose  composition  was  more  laborious  and 
difficult,  like  the  dodecahedron.  ’Whence  it  follows  that 
the  pyramid  was  the  first  body,  and  not  one  of  the  others, 
which  were  by  nature  last  produced.  Now  the  way  also 
to  avoid  this  absurdity  is  to  separate  and  divide  matter  into 
five  worlds  ; here  the  pyramid  (for  she  is  the  first  and  most 
simple),  there  the  octahedron,  and  there  the  icosahedron ; 
and  out  of  that  which  exists  first  in  every  one  of  these  the 
rest  draw  their  original  by  the  concretion  of  parts,  by  which 
every  thing  is  changed  into  every  thing,  as  Plato  himself 
shows  us  by  examples  throughout.  But  it  will  suffice  us 
briefly  to  learn  thus  much.  Air  is  engendered  by  the  ex- 
tinction of  fire,  and  the  same  being  subtilized  and  rarefied 
produceth  fire.  Now  by  the  seeds  of  these  two  we  may 
find  out  the  passions  and  transmutations  of  all,  The  semi- 
nary or  beginning  of  fire  is  the  pyramid,  consisting  of 
twenty-four  first  triangles  ; and  the  octahedron  is  the  semi- 
nary of  the  air,  consisting  of  forty-eight  triangles  of  the 
same  kind.  So  that  the  one  element  of  air  stands  upon 
two  of  fire,  joined  together  and  condensed.  And  again, 
one  body  or  element  of  air  is  divided  into  two  of  fire,  which 
again,  becoming  thick  and  hard,  is  changed  into  water;  so 
that,  throughout,  that  which  comes  first  into  light  gives 
easily  birth  unto  the  rest  by  transmutation.  And  so  it 
comes  to  pass,  that  there  is  not  merely  one  first  principle 


40 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


of  all  things  ; but  one  thing  is  so  mixed  with  the  origin 
of  another,  in  the  several  changes  and  alterations  of  nature 
by  motion,  that  the  same  name  and  denomination  belong 
equally  to  all. 

33.  But  here  Ammonius  interrupted  him,  and  said: 
Notwithstanding  that  those  things  are  so  peremptorily  and 
so  pompously  asserted  by  Theodoras,  yet  I shall  wonder  if 
he  be  not  forced  to  make  use  of  such  suppositions  as  are 
destructive  of  themselves  and  one  of  another.  For  he  will 
have  it,  that  the  five  worlds  he  speaks  of  were  not  com- 
posed all  at  one  time,  but  that  that  which  was  subtilest,  and 
which  gave  least  trouble  in  the  making,  came  out  first  into 
being.  And  as  if  it  were  a consequent,  and  not  a repug- 
nant thing,  he  supposes  that  the  matter  does  not  always 
drive  out  into  existence  that  which  is  most  subtile  and  sim- 
ple, but  that  sometimes  the  thickest,  grossest,  and  heaviest 
parts  do  anticipate  the  more  subtile  in  generation.  But 
besides  this,  supposing  that  there  be  five  primitive  bodies 
or  elements,  and  consequently  that  there  be  as  many  worlds, 
there  are  but  four  of  those  orders  which  he  discourses  ra- 
tionally concerning.  For  as  to  the  cube,  he  takes  it  away 
and  removes  it,  as  it  were  in  a game  of  counters  ; for  it  is 
naturally  unfit  either  to  turn  into  any  thing  besides  itself, 
or  to  yield  that  any  of  those  other  bodies  be  converted  into 
it,  inasmuch  as  the  triangles  of  which  they  consist  be  not 
of  the  same  sort.  For  all  the  rest  consist  in  common  of 
demi-triangles  (or  halves  of  equilateral  triangles) ; but  the 
proper  subject  of  which  the  cube  is  particularly  composed 
is  the  right  isosceles  triangle,  which  admits  no  inclina- 
tion to  a demi-triangle,  nor  can  possibly  be  united  and 
incorporated  with  it.  If  there  be  then  five  bodies,  and  con- 
sequently five  worlds,  and  in  each  of  these  worlds  the 
principle  of  generation  be  that  body  which  is  first  produced, 
it  must  happen  that,  where  the  cube  is  the  first  in  genera- 
tion, none  of  the  rest  can  possibly  he  produced,  it  being 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


41 


contrary  to  its  nature  to  change  into  any  of  them.  Not  to 
insist  here,  that  Theodoras  and  those  of  his  mind  make 
the  element  or  principle  of  which  the  dodecahedron  is 
composed  to  be  different  from  the  rest,  it  not  being  that 
triangle  which  is  termed  scalene,  with  three  unequal  sides, 
out  of  which  the  pyramid,  octahedron,  and  icosahedron, 
according  to  Plato,  are  produced ; so  that  (said  Ammonius 
laughing)  you  must  solve  these  objections,  or  offer  some- 
thing new  concerning  the  matter  in  debate.* 

34.  And  I answered  him,  that,  for  my  part,  I knew  not 
at  present  how  to  say  any  thing  which  carried  more  prob- 
ability. But  perhaps  (said  I)  it  is  better  for  a man  to  give 
an  account  of  his  own  opinion  than  of  another’s.  There- 
fore I say  that,  there  being  supposed  from  the  beginning 
of  things  two  several  natures  contrary  to  each  other,  — 
the  one  sensible,  mutable,  subject  to  generation,  corruption, 
and  change  every  way,  the  other  spiritual  and  intelligible, 
and  abiding  always  in  the  same  state,  — it  would  be  very 
strange,  my  friends,  to  say  that  the  spiritual  nature  admit- 
teth  of  division  and  hath  diversity  and  difference  in  it,  and 
to  be  angry  if  a man  will  not  allow  the  passible  and  cor- 
poreal nature  to  be  wholly  united  in  itself,  without  dividing 
it  into  many  parts.  For  it  is  most  suitable  to  the  perma- 
nent and  divine  natures  to  be  tied  and  linked  to  each  other, 
and  to  avoid,  as  much  as  is  possible,  all  division  and  separa- 
tion ; and  yet,  amongst  incorporeal  natures  the  power  of 
diversity  works  greater  differences  in  regard  to  essential 
forms  and  reason,  than  those  of  distance  of  place  in  the 
corporeal  world.  And  therefore  Plato,  refuting  those  who 
hold  this  proposition,  that  all  is  one,  asserts  these  five 
grounds  and  principles  of  all,  — entity,  identity,  diversity, 
motion,  and  rest ; which  five  immaterial  principles  being 
admitted,  it  is  no  marvel  if  Nature  have  made  every  one  of 

* See  Plato’s  discussion  of  triangles  and  the  regular  solids,  Timaeus,  pp.  53  C- 
56  C,  with  the  commentaries.  See  also  Grote’s  Plato,  Vol.  III.  p.  269.  (G.) 


42 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


these  to  be  an  imitation,  though  not  exact,  yet  as  perfect 
and  agreeable  as  could  be  drawn,  of  a correspondent  prin- 
ciple in  the  corporeal  mystery,  partaking,  as  much  as  can 
be,  of  its  power  and  virtue.  For  it  is  very  plain  that  the 
cube  is  most  proper  and  agreeable  to  repose  and  rest,  by 
reason  of  the  stability  and  firmness  of  those  plain  surfaces 
of  which  it  consists.  And  as  to  the  pyramid,  everybody 
soon  sees  and  acknowledges  the  nature  of  fire  in  it,  by  the 
slenderness  of  its  decreasing  sides,  and  the  sharpness  of  its 
angles ; and  the  nature  of  the  dodecahedron,  apt  to  com- 
prehend all  the  other  figures,  may  seem  more  properly  to 
be  the  corporeal  image  of  Ens,  or  Being  in  the  general, 
indifferent  to  this  or  that  particular  form  or  shape.  And 
of  the  other  two  which  remain,  the  icosahedron  resembleth 
the  principle  of  diversity,  and  the  octahedron  principally 
partakes  of  the  identical  nature.  And  thus  from  one  of 
these  the  air  is  produced,  which  partakes  of  and  borders 
upon  every  substance,  under  one  and  the  same  outward 
form  and  appearance  ; and  the  other  has  afforded  us  the 
element  of  water,  which  by  mixture  may  put  on  the  great- 
est diversity  of  qualities.  Therefore  if  Nature  requires  a 
certain  uniformity  and  harmony  in  all  things,  it  must  be 
then  that  there  are  neither  more  nor  fewer  worlds  in  the 
corporeal  nature  than  there  are  patterns  or  samples  in 
the  incorporeal,  to  the  end  that  each  pattern  or  sample  in 
the  invisible  nature  may  have  its  own  primary  position  and 
power,  answering  to  a secondary  or  derivative  in  the  differ- 
ent constitution  or  composition  of  bodies. 

35.  And  this  may  serve  for  an  answer  to  those  that  won- 
der at  our  dividing  Nature,  subject  to  generation  and  alter- 
ation, into  so  many  kinds.  But  I entreat  you  all  further, 
attentively  to  consider  with  yourselves  that,  of  the  two  first 
and  supreme  principles  of  all  things,  — that  is  to  say,  the 
unity,  and  the  indefinite  binary  or  duality,  — this  latter, 
being  the  element  and  chief  origin  of  all  deformity  and  dis- 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


43 


s 

order,  is  termed  infinity,  and  on  the  contrary,  the  nature  of 
unity,  determining  and  limiting  the  void  infinity,  which  has 
no  proportion  nor  termination,  reduces  it  into  form,  and 
renders  it  in  some  manner  capable  of  receiving  a denomi- 
nation which  belongs  only  to  sensible  and  particular  things. 
Now  these  two  general  principles  appear  first  in  number ; 
for  the  multitude  is  indeed  no  number,  unless  a certain 
form  of  the  matter  resulting  out  of  indeterminate  infinity 
is  cut  off,  and  bounded  within  respective  limits,  either 
shorter  or  longer.  For  then  each  multitude  is  made  num- 
ber, when  once  it  is  determined  and  limited  by  unity ; 
whereas,  if  we  take  away  unity,  then  the  indeterminate 
duality  brings  all  into  confusion,  and  renders  it  without 
harmony,  without  number  or  measure.  Now,  the  form  not 
being  the  destruction  of  matter,  but  rather  the  order  and 
the  beauty  of  it,  both  these  principles  therefore  must  be 
within  number,  from  whence  ariseth  the  chief  disparity  and 
greatest  difference.  For  the  infinite  and  indeterminate 
principle  is  the  cause  of  the  even  number ; and  the  other 
better  principle,  which  is  the  unity,  is  the  father  (as  it 
were)  of  the  odd  number.  So  that  the  first  even  number 
is  two,  and  the  first  odd  number  is  three ; of  which  is  com- 
posed five  by  conjunction,  which  is  by  its  composition  com- 
mon to  both,  but  of  power  or  nature  not  even  but  odd. 
For,  since  sensible  and  corporeal  nature  is  divided  into  sever- 
al parts,  on  account  of  its  inborn  necessity  of  diversity,  it 
was  necessary  that  the  number  of  these  parts  should  not 
be  either  the  first  even  number,  nor  yet  the  first  uneven  or 
odd,  but  a third,  consisting  of  both  ; to  the  end  that  it 
might  be  procreated  out  of  both  principles,  viz.  of  that 
which  causeth  the  even  number,  and  of  that  which  pro- 
duceth  the  odd  ; for  the  one  cannot  be  parted  from  the 
other,  inasmuch  as  both  have  the  nature,  power,  and  force 
of  a principle.  These  two  principles  being  then  joined 
together,  the  better  one  being  mightier  prevails  over  the  in- 


44 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


determinate  infinity  or  duality,  which  divideth  the  corppreal 
nature  ; and  thus  the  matter  being  divided,  the  unity  inter- 
posing itself  between  has  hindered  the  universe  from  being 
divided  and  parted  into  two  equal  portions.  But  there  has 
been  a multitude  of  worlds  caused  by  the  diversity  and  dis- 
agreement of  the  infinite  Nature  ; but  this  multitude  was 
brought  into  an  odd  number  by  the  virtue  and  power  of 
identity,  or  the  finite  principle ; and  it  was  therefore  odd, 
because  the  better  principle  would  not  suffer  Nature  to 
stretch  itself  further  than  was  fitting.  For  if  there  had 
been  nothing  but  pure  and  simple  unity,  the  matter  would 
have  known  no  separation ; but  being  mixed  with  the 
dividing  nature  of  duality,  it  has  by  this  means  suffered 
separation  and  division ; yet  it  has  stopped  here,  by  the 
odd  numbers  being  the  superior  and  master  to  the  even. 

36.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  ancients  were  used  to 
express  numbering  or  reckoning  by  nsimdaaa&ui,  to  count  by 
fives.  And  I am  of  opinion  that  that  word  nana,  all , is 
derived  from  iti We,  which  is  to  say  five , five  being  com- 
pounded of  the  first  numbers.  For  all  the  other  numbers 
being  afterwards  multiplied  by  others,  they  produce  num- 
bers different  from  themselves ; whereas  five,  being  multi- 
plied by  an  even  number,  produceth  a perfect  ten,  and 
multiplied  by  an  odd  number,  representeth  itself  again  ; 
not  to  insist  that  it  is  composed  of  the  two  first  tetragons 
or  quadrate  numbers  (unity  and  four),  and  that,  being  the 
first  number  whose  square  is  equivalent  to  the  two  squares 
before  it,  it  composeth  the  fairest  of  right  angled  triangles, 
and  is  the  first  number  which  containeth  the  sesquilateral 
proportion.  Perhaps  all  these  reasons  are  not  very  perti- 
nent to  the  discourse  of  the  present  dispute,  it  being  better 
to  allege  that  in  this  number  there  is  a natural  virtue  of 
dividing,  and  that  nature  divideth  many  things  by  this 
number.  For  in  ourselves  she  has  placed  five  senses,  and 
five  parts  of  the  soul,  the  vital,  the  sensitive,  the  concubis- 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


45 


cible,  the  irascible,  and  the  rational ; and  as  many  fingers 
on  each  hand  ; and  the  most  fruitful  seed  disperseth  itself 
but  into  five,  for  we  read  nowhere  of  a woman  that 
brought  forth  more  than  five  at  a birth.  And  the  Egyptians 
also  tell  us  that  the  Goddess  Rhea  was  delivered  of  five 
Gods,  giving  us  to  understand  in  covert  terms  that  of  the 
same  matter  were  procreated  five  worlds.  And  in  the 
universe,  the  earth  is  divided  into  five  zones,  the  heaven 
into  five  circles,  — two  arctics,  two  tropics,  and  one  equi- 
noctial in  the  midst.  There  are  five  revolutions  of  planets 
or  wandering  stars,  inasmuch  as  the  Sun,  Venus,  and 
Mercury  make  but  one  and  the  same  revolution.  And  the 
construction  of  the  world  consists  of  an  harmonical  measure ; 
even  as  our  musical  chords  consist  of  the  posture  of  five 
tetrachords,  ranged  orderly  one  after  another,  that  is  to  say, 
those  called  vitazmv,  [isaoiv,  avvrjfA^evcov,  Sis^evy/ievoiv,  and  vneoflolui'av.* 
The  intervals  also  which  are  used  in  singing  are  five,  diesis, 
semitone,  tone,  the  tone  and  a half,  and  the  double  tone ; 
so  that  Nature  seems  to  delight  more  in  making  all  things 
according  to  the  number  five,  than  she  does  in  producing 
them  in  a spherical  form,  as  Aristotle  writeth. 

37.  But  it  will  perhaps  be  demanded,  why  Plato  refers 
the  number  of  worlds  to  the  five  regular  bodies  or  figures, 
saying  that  God  made  use  of  the  number  five  in  the  fabric 
of  the  world,  as  it  were  transcribing  and  copying  this  ; and 
then,  having  proposed  a doubt  and  question  of  the  number 
of  the  worlds,  whether  there  be  five,  or  one  only,  thereby 
clearly  shows  that  his  conjecture  is  grounded  on  this 
conceit  of  the  five  regular  bodies.  If  now  we  may  make 
a probable  conjecture  as  to  his  opinion,  we  may  believe 
that  of  necessity,  with  the  diversity  of  these  figures  and 
bodies,  there  must  presently  ensue  a difference  and  diver- 
sity of  motions ; as  he  himself  teacheth,  affirming  that 
whatever  is  subtilized  or  condensed  does,  at  the  same  time 

* See  note  prefixed  to  Plutarch’s  Treatise  on  Music.  (G.) 


46 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


with  its  alteration  of  substance,  alter  and  change  its  place. 
For  if  from  the  air  there  is  engendered  fire,  when  the 
octahedron  is  dissolved  and  vanished  into  pyramids,  or,  on 
the  contrary,  if  the  air  be  produced  from  the  fire  pressed 
and  squeezed  up  into  the  form  of  the  octahedron,  it  is  not 
possible  it  should  remain  there  where  it  was  before,  but  it 
flies  and  runs  to  another  place,  forcing  and  combating 
whatever  stands  in  the  way  to  oppose  it.  And  he  shows 
this  more  clearly  and  evidently  by  an  example  and  simili- 
tude of  fans,  and  such  like  things  as  drive  away  the  chaff 
from  the  corn;  for  thus  the  elements  driving  the  matter, 
and  being  driven  by  it,  do  always  bring  like  to  like,  some 
taking  up  this  place,  others  that,  before  the  world  was 
digested  as  now  it  is.  The  matter  then  being  in  that  con- 
dition in  which  it  is  likely  every  thing  is  where  God  is  not 
present,  the  five  first  qualities,  or  first  bodies,  having  each 
their  proper  and  peculiar  inclinations  and  motions,  went 
apart,  not  wholly  and  altogether,  nor  throughly  divided 
and  separated  one  from  another ; for  when  all  was  huddled 
in  confusion,  such  as  were  surmounted  went  continually 
against  their  nature  with  the  mightier.  And  therefore, 
some  going  on  one  side  and  others  going  on  the  other, 
hence  it  has  happened  that  there  have  been  as  many  por- 
tions and  distinctions  as  there  are  divers  kinds  of  first 
bodies  ; one  of  fire,  not  wholly  pure,  but  inclining  towards 
the  form  of  fire ; another  of  an  ethereal  nature,  yet  not 
wholly  so,  but  inclining  thereto ; another  of  earth,  not 
simple  and  mere  earth,  but  inclining  to  the  form  of  earth. 
But  especially  there  was  a communication  of  water  and  air  ; 
for  these,  as  we  have  already  mentioned,  went  their  ways, 
replenished  with  divers  other  kinds.  For  God  did,  not 
separate  and  distribute  the  matter,  but  having  found  it  thus 
carelessly  dissipated  in  itself,  and  each  part  being  carried 
away  in  such  great  disorder  and  confusion,  he  ranged  and 
ordered  it  into  symmetry  and  proportion;  and  setting 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


47 


reason  over  each  as  a guardian  and  governor,  he  made 
as  many  worlds  as  there  Avere  first  bodies.  However,  in 
respect  to  Ammonius,  let  these  Platonical  notions  pass  for 
what  they  are  worth.  For  my  part,  I will  never  be  over- 
zealous  in  this  precise  number  of  worlds ; but  this  I will 
say,  that  those  who  hold  there  are  more  than  one,  yet  not 
an  infinite  number,  have  as  good  grounds  as  others,  seeing 
the  matter  does  naturally  spread  itself  and  is  diffused  into 
many  parts,  — not  resting  in  one,  while  yet  it  is  contrary 
to  reason  that  it  should  be  infinitely  extended.  In  short, 
let  us  here  especially  be  mindful  of  the  wise  precepts  of 
the  Academy,  and  preserve  ourselves  upon  such  slippery 
ground  as  the  controversy  concerning  the  infinity  of 
worlds,  by  refusing  a too  confident  assent. 

38.  And  when  I had  finished  this  discourse,  Demetrius 
said : Lamprias  is  very  much  in  the  right ; for  the  Gods 
deceive  us  with  multiplicities,  not  of  shadows  and  impost- 
ures (as  Euripides*  expresseth  it),  but  even  of  realities  and 
substances  themselves,  when  we  presume  to  be  positive,  as 
if  we  understood  them  in  things  of  such  weight  and  mo- 
ment. But  we  must,  as  he  advises  us,  return  to  our  first 
question,  which  we  seem  to  have  forgotten.  For  what 
was  said  concerning  the  oracles  remaining  dumb  and  use- 
less when  the  Daemons  who  presided  over  them  were 
departed,  even  as  we  see  musical  instruments  yield  no  har- 
mony when  the  musician  does  not  handle  them,  — this,  I 
say,  brings  a greater  question  into  debate,  namely  touching 
the  cause  and  power  by  which  these  Daemons  use  to  make 
their  prophets  and  prophetesses  to  be  ravished  with  enthu- 
siasm and  filled  with  fantastical  imaginations.  For  to  say 
the  oracles  are  silent  as  being  forsaken  by  the  Daemons  is 
nothing,  unless  we  be  first  shown  how  (when  they  are 
present  and  govern  them)  they  set  them  at  work  and  make 
them  prophesy. 


* See  Euripides,  Frag.  925. 


48 


WHY  TIIE  ORACLES  CEASE 


Ammonius  then  taking  up  the  discourse,  Do  you  think, 
said  he,  that  the  Daemons  are  any  thing  else 

Than  wandering  spirits  clothed  in  finest  air,* 

as  Hesiod  says'?  For  as  to  my  part,  I think  the  same  dif- 
ference which  there  is  between  one  man  and  another, 
when  they  act  in  a tragedy  or  comedy,  is  also  to  be  found 
in  this  life  in  souls  that  are  clothed  with  bodies.  So  that 
there  is  nothing  in  this  which  is  strange  or  contrary  to 
reason,  if  souls  meeting  with  other  souls  do  imprint  on 
them  visions  and  apprehensions  of  future  things,  just  as 
we  show  several  things  already  done  and  come  to  pass,  and 
prognosticate  of  those  which  have  not  yet  happened, 
not  only  by  the  help  of  speech,  but  also  by  letters  and 
writings,  or  by  a bare  touch,  or  a single  look  ; — unless 
you,  Lamprias,  are  of  another  opinion.  For  we  heard  but 
very  lately,  that  you  discoursed  at  large  upon  this  subject 
with  the  strangers  that  came  to  Lebadea ; but  he  that 
gave  us  this  information  could  give  us  no  particular  account 
of  what  passed.  No  wonder,  replied  I,  for  several  avoca- 
tions and  businesses  intervening,  occasioned  by  the  oracle 
and  the  solemn  sacrifice  that  was  then  performing,  made 
our  discourse  very  broken  and  interrupted.  But  now,  says 
Ammonius,  you  have  auditors  at  leisure,  that  are  inquisi- 
tive and  desirous  of  instruction,  so  that  you  may  speak 
freely,  and  expect  all  the  candor  and  consideration  which 
you  can  desire.  1 

-39.  And  the  rest  of  the  company  making  the  like  ex- 
hortations, having  paused  a while,  I began  after  this  man- 
ner: It  so  happened,  Ammonius,  that  you  did,  without 
your  knowledge,  give  occasion  to  the  discourse  which  was 
then  held ; for  if  the  Daemons  be  souls  and  spirits  sepa- 
rated from  bodies  and  having  no  communication  with 
them,  as  you  affirm,  but  according  to  the  divine  poet 
Hesiod, 


* Hesiod,  Works  and  Days,  125. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


49 


Are  our  kind  guardians,  walking  here  their  rounds,* 

why  do  we  deprive  the  spirits  and  souls  which  are  in 
bodies  of  the  same  power  by  which  Daemons  may  foresee 
and  foretell  things  to  come'?  For  it  is  not  likely  souls  do 
acquire  any  property  and  power,  when  they  abandon  their 
bodies,  wherewith  they  were  not  endowed  before ; but 
rather,  we  should  think  that  they  had  always  the  same 
parts,  but  in  a worse  degree,  when  they  were  mixed  with 
bodies,  some  of  them  being  inapparent  and  hid,  and  others 
weak  and  obscure,  like  those  who  see  through  a thick  mist 
or  move  in  water,  heavily  and  uneasily  performing  their 
operations,  much  desiring  to  be  cured  and  so  to  recover 
what  is  their  own,  and  to  be  discharged  and  purified  of 
that  which  covers  them.  For  as  the  sun  does  not  then 
properly  become  bright  when  he  has  escaped  out  of  the 
cloud, — for  he  is  always  so,  though  to  our  eyes,  being 
clouded,  he  seems  obscure  and  dark,  — so  the  soul  acquires 
not  then  the  faculty  of  divining  when  gotten  clear  of  the 
body,  as  from  a cloud,  but  having  the  same  before,  is 
blinded  by  the  commixture  and  confusion  which  she  has 
with  the  mortal  body.  And  this  cannot  seem  strange  or 
incredible,  if  we  consider  nothing  else  in  the  soul  but  the 
faculty  of  remembrance,  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  reverse, 
of,  divination,  and  if  we  reflect  upon  the  miraculous  power 
it  hath  of  preserving  things  past,  or,  we  should  rather  say, 
things  present,  for  of  what  is  past  nothing  remains,  and 
all  things  do  come  into  being  and  perish  in  the  same  mo- 
ment, whether  they  be  actions,  or  words,  or  passions ; they 
all  pass  by  and  vanish  as  soon  as  they  appear ; for  time, 
like  the  course  of  a river,  passeth  on,  and  carries  every 
thing  along  with  it.  But  this  retentive  faculty  of  the  soul 
seizes  upon  these  in  some  mysterious  way,  and  gives  a 
form  and  a being  to  those  things  which  are  no  longer 

* Hesiod,  Works  and  Days,  123. 

4 


VOL.  IV. 


50 


WHY  TIIE  ORACLES  CEASE 


present.  For  the  oracle  which  was  given  to  those  of 
Thessaly,  touching  Arne,  enjoined  them  to  declare 

The  deaf  man’s  hearing,  and  the  blind  man’s  sight. 

But  memory  is  to  us  the  hearing  of  things  without  voice, 
and  the  sight  of  things  invisible  ; so  that,  as  I now  said, 
no  marvel,  if  retaining  the  things  which  are  no  longer  in 
being,  the  soul  anticipates  several  of  those  which  are  still 
to  come  ; for  these  do  more  concern  her,  and  she  does 
naturally  sympathize  with  them,  inclining  and  tending  to 
things  which  are  future  ; whereas,  as  to  those  which  are 
past  and  have  an  end,  she  leaves  them  behind  her,  only 
retaining  the  bare  remembrance  of  them. 

40.  Our  souls  then,  having  this  inbred  power,  — though 
weak,  obscure,  and  hardly  able  to  express  their  apprehen- 
sions,— yet  sometimes  spread  forth  and  recover  them- 
selves, either  in  dreams  or  in  the  time  of  sacrifice  or 
religious  worship,  when  the  body  is  well  purified  and  endued 
with  a certain  temperature  proper  to  this  effect,  or  when 
the  rational  and  speculative  part,  being  released  and  freed 
from  the  solicitude  after  present  things,  joineth  with  the 
irrational  and  imaginative  part  to  think  of  and  represent 
what  is  to  come.  For  it  is  not,  as  Euripides  saith,  that  he 
is  the  best  prophet  who  guesses  well ; but  he  is  the  wisest 
man,  not  whose  guess  succeeds  well  in  the  event,  but  who, 
whatever  the  event  be,  takes  reason  and  probability  for  his 
guide.  Now  the  faculty  of  divining,  like  blank  paper,  is 
void  of  any  reason  or  determination  of  itself,  but  is  sus- 
ceptible of  fantasies  and  presentiments ; and  without  any 
ratiocination  or  discourse  of  reason,  it  touches  on  that  which 
is  to  come,  when  it  has  withdrawn  itself  farthest  from  the 
present.  And  from  this  it  withdraws  by  means  of  a cer- 
tain disposition  of  body,  by  which  that  state  is  produced 
which  we  call  inspiration  or  •enthusiasm.  Now  the  body 
is  sometimes  endued  naturally  with  this  disposition;  but 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


51 


most  times  the  earth  casts  forth  to  men  the  sources  and 
causes  of  several  other  powers  and  faculties,  some  of  which 
carry  men  beside  themselves  into  ecstasy  and  phrensy,  and 
produce  maladies  and  mortalities;  others  again  are  good, 
gentle,  and  profitable,  as  appears  by  those  who  have  had 
the  experience  of  them.  But  this  spring,  or  wind,  or 
spirit  of  divination  is  most  holy  and  divine,  whether  it 
comes  by  itself  through  the  air,  or  through  the  water  of 
some  spring.  For,  being  infused  and  mixed  with  the  body, 
it  produceth  an  odd  temperature  and  strange  disposition  in 
the  soul,  which  a man  cannot  exactly  express,  though  he 
may  resemble  or  compare  it  to  several  things.  For  by 
heat  and  dilatation  it  seems  to  open  certain  pores  that 
make  a discovery  of  future  things  ; like  wine,  which,  caus- 
ing fumes  to  ascend  up  into  the  head,  puts  the  spirits  into 
many  unusual  motions,  and  reveals  things  that  were  laid 
up  in  secret.  For  drunkenness  and  phrensy,  if  we  will 
believe  Euripides,  have  a near  approach  to  the  nature  of 
divination,  when  the  soul,  being  hot  and  fiery,  banishes 
those  fears  to  which  prudence  and  sobriety  are  subject, 
and  which  extinguish  and  quench  the  spirit  of  divination. 

41.  Furthermore,  a man  may  say  that  dryness,  being 
mixed  with  heat,  attenuateth  and  subtilizeth  the  spirit,  and 
makes  it  pure  and  of  an  ethereal  nature  and  consistence  ; 
for  the  soul  itself,  according  to  Heraclitus,  is  of  a dry  con- 
stitution ; whereas  moisture  does  not  only  dim  the  sight 
and  dull  the  hearing,  but  when  mingled  with  the  air  and 
touching  the  superficies  of  mirrors,  dusketh  the  brightness 
of  the  one  and  takes  away  the  light  of  the  other.  Or  per- 
haps, on  the  contrary,  by  some  refrigeration  and  condensa- 
tion of  this  spirit,  like  the  tincture  and  hardening  of  iron, 
this  part  of  the  soul  which  does  prognosticate  may  become 
more  intense  and  get  a perfect  edge.  Just  as  tin  being 
melted  with  brass  (which  of  itself  is  rare  and  spongeous) 
does  drive  it  nearer  and  make  it  more  massy  and  solid,  and 


52 


WHY  THE  OIIACLES  CEASE 


withal  causeth  it  to  look  more  bright  and  resplendent ; so 
I cannot  see  any  reason,  why  this  prophetical  exhalation, 
having  some  congruence  and  affinity  with  souls,  may  not 
fill  up  that  which  is  lax  and  empty,  and  drive  it  more  close 
together.  For  there  are  many  things  which  have  a refer- 
ence and  congruity  one  with  another ; as  the  bean  is  use- 
ful in  dyeing  purple,  and  soda  in  dyeing  saffron,  if  they 
be  mixed  therewith ; and  as  Empedocles  says, 

Linen  is  dyed  with  the  bright  saffron’s  flower. 

And  we  have  learned  of  you,  Demetrius,  that  only  the 
river  Cydnus  cleaneth  the  knife  consecrated  to  Apollo,  in 
the  city  of  Tarsus  in  Cilicia,  and  that  there  is  no  other 
water  which  can  scour  and  cleanse  it.  So  in  the  town  of 
Olympia,  they  temper  ashes  with  the  water  of  the  river 
Alpheus,  with  which  they  make  a mortar  wherewith  they 
plaster  the  altar  there ; but  if  this  be  attempted  to  be  done 
by  the  water  of  any  other  river,  it  is  all  to  no  purpose. 

42.  It  is  no  wonder  then  if,  the  earth  sending  up  many 
exhalations,  only  those  of  this  sort  transport  the  sonl  with 
a divine  fury,  and  give  it  a faculty  of  foretelling  future 
things.  And,  without  a doubt,  what  is  related  touching 
the  oracle  of  this  place  does  herewith  agree ; for  it  is  here 
where  this  faculty  of  divining  first  showed  itself,  by  means 
of  a certain  shepherd,  who  chanced  to  fall  down  and  be- 
gan to  utter  enthusiastic  speeches  concerning  future  events ; 
of  which  at  first  the  neighbors  took  no  notice ; but  when 
they  saw  what  he  foretold  came  to  pass,  they  had  him  in 
admiration ; and  the  most  learned  among  the  Delphians, 
speaking  of  this  man,  are  used  to  call  him  by  the  name  of 
Coretas.  The  soul  seems  to  me  to  mix  and  join  itself  with 
this  prophetic  exhalation,  just  as  the  eye  is  affected  with 
the  light.  For  the  eye,  which  has  a natural  property  and 
faculty  of  seeing,  would  be  wholly  useless  without  the 
light ; so  the  soul,  having  this  faculty  and  property  of  fore- 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


53 


seeing  future  things,  as  an  eye,  has  need  of  a proper  ob- 
ject which  may  enlighten  and  sharpen  it.  And  therefore 
the  ancients  took  the  sun  and  Apollo  to  be  the  same  God ; 
and  those  who  understand  the  beauty  and  wisdom  of  anal- 
ogy or  proportion  do  tell  us,  that  as  the  body  is  to  the  soul, 
the  sight  to  the  mind,  and  light  to  truth,  so  is  the  sun  with 
reference  to  Apollo  ; affirming  the  sun  to  be  the  offspring 
proceeding  perpetually  from  Apollo,  who  is  eternal  and 
who  continually  bringeth  him  forth.  For  as  the  sun  en- 
lightens and  excites  the  visive  powers  of  the  senses,  so 
Apollo  does  excite  the  prophetic  virtue  in  the  soul. 

43.  Those  then  that  imagined  that  both  were  one  and  the 
same  God  have  with  good  reason  dedicated  and  consecrated 
this  oracle  to  Apollo  and  to  the  earth,  deeming  it  to  be  the 
sun  which  imprinted  this  temperature  and  disposition  on 
the  earth,  from  lvhence  arose  this  predictive  exhalation. 
For  as  Hesiod,  with  far  better  reason  than  other  philoso- 
phers, calls  the  earth 

The  well-fixed  seat  of  all  things  ; * 

so  do  we  esteem  it  eternal,  immortal,  and  incorruptible. 
But  as  to  the  virtues  and  faculties  which  are  in  it,  we  be- 
lieve that  some  fail  in  one  place,  and  spring  up  anew  in 
another.  It  seems  also  (for  so  some  experiments  incline 
us  to  conjecture)  that  these  transitions,  changes,  and  revo- 
lutions in  process  of  time  do  circulate  and  return  to  the 
same  place,  and  begin  again  where  they  left  off.  In  some 
countries  we  see  lakes  and  whole  rivers  and  not  a few 
fountains  and  springs  of  hot  waters  have  sometimes  failed 
and  been  entirely  lost,  and  at  others  have  fled  and  ab- 
sconded themselves,  being  hidden  and  concealed  under  the 
earth ; but  perhaps  some  years  after  do  appear  again  in  the 
same  place,  or  else  run  hard  by.  And  so  of  metal  mines, 
some  have  been  quite  exhausted,  as  the  silver  ones  about 


* Hesiod,  Theogony,  117. 


54 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


Attica ; and  tlie  same  lias  happened  to  the  veins  of  brass 
ore  in  Euboea,  of  which  the  best  blades  were  made  and 
hardened  in  cold  water,  as  the  poet  Aeschylus  tells  us, 

Taking  his  sword,  a right  Euboean  blade. 

It  is  not  long  since  the  quarry  of  Carystus  has  ceased  to 
yield  a certain  soft  stone,  which  was  wont  to  be  drawn  in- 
to a fine  thread ; for  I suppose  some  here  have  seen  towels, 
net-work,  and  coifs  woven  of  that  thread,  which  could 
not  be  burnt ; but  when  they  were  soiled  with  using,  peo- 
ple flung  them  into  the  fire,  and  took  them  thence  white 
and  clean,  the  fire  only  purifying  them.  But  all  this  is  van- 
ished ; and  there  is  nothing  but  some  few  fibres  or  hairy 
threads,  lying  up  and  down  scatteringly  in  the  grain  of  the 
stones,  to  be  seen  now  in  the  quarry. 

44.  Aristotle  and  his  followers  affirm  that  all  this  pro- 
ceeds from  an  exhalation  within  the  earth,  and  when  this 
fails  or  removes  to  another  place,  or  revives  and  recovers 
itself  again,  the  phenomena  proceeding  from  them  do  so 
too.  The  same  must  we  say  of  the  prophetical  exhalations 
which  spring  from  the  earth,  that  their  virtue  also  is  not 
immortal,  but  may  wax  old  and  decay ; for  it  is  not  un- 
likely that  great  floods  of  rain  and  showers  do  extinguish 
them,  and  that  the  claps  of  thunder  do  dissipate  them  ; or 
else  (which  I look  upon  to  be  the  principal  cause)  they 
are  sunk  lower  into  the  earth  or  utterly  destroyed  by  the 
shock  of  earthquakes  and  the  confusion  that  attends  them, 
as  here  in  this  place  there  still  remain  the  tragical  monu- 
ments of  that  great  earthquake  that  overthrew  the  city. 
And  in  the  town  of  Orchomenus,  they  say,  when  the  pes- 
tilence carried  away  such  multitudes  of  people,  the  oracle 
of  Tiresias  of  a sudden  ceased,  and  remains  mute  to  this 
day.  And  whether  the  like  has  not  happened  to  the  ora- 
cles in  Cilicia,  as  we  have  heard  it  hath,  no  man  can  better 
inform  us  than  you,  Demetrius. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


55 


45.  I cannot  tell,  says  Demetrius,  how  things  are  at 
present  in  those  parts,  for  you  all  know  I have  been  long 
absent  from  thence  ; but  when  I was  there,  both  that  of 
Mopsus  and  of  Amphilochus  flourished  and  were  in  great 
esteem.  And  as  to  the  oracle  of  Mopsus,  I can  from  my 
own  knowledge  tell  you  a strange  story  about  it.  The 
Governor  of  Cicilia  was  a man  inclining  to  scepticism 
about  the  Gods,  — through  the  infirmity  of  his  unbelief,  I 
think,  for  otherwise  he  was  an  oppressor  and  a worthless 
man,  — and  he  had  about  him  several  Epicureans,  who  are 
wont  to  mock  at  the  belief  of  such  things  as  seem  contra- 
ry to  reason,  as  they  themselves  say,  standing  much  upon 
their  goodly  natural  philosophy.  He  sent  a freed  servant 
of  his  to  the  oracle,  like  a spy  into  an  enemy’s  camp,  with 
a letter  sealed,  wherein  was  the  question  he  was  to  ask 
the  oracle,  nobody  knowing  the  contents  thereof.  This 
man  then,  as  the  custom  of  the  place  is,  remaining  all 
night  in  the  temple-porch  asleep,  related  the  next  morning 
the  dream  which  he  had ; for  he  thought  he  saw  a very 
handsome  man  stand  before  him,  who  said  only  this  word, 
Black,  to  him,  and  nothing  else,  for  he  vanished  away  im- 
mediately. This  seemed  to  us  very  impertinent,  though 
we  could  not  tell  what  to  make  of  it ; but  the  governor 
marvelled  at  it,  and  was  so  nettled  with  it,  that  he  had  the 
oracle  in  great  veneration  ever  since  ; for,  opening  the  let- 
ter, he  showed  this  question  which  was  therein : Shall  I 
sacrifice  to  thee  a white  bull  or  a black  \ Which  dashed 
his  Epicureans  quite  out  of  countenance,  and  he  offered 
the  sacrifice  required,  and  to  the  day  of  his  death  contin- 
ued a devout  admirer  of  Mopsus. 

46.  When  Demetrius  had  given  us  this  relation,  he  held 
his  peace.  And  I,  being  desirous  to  put  an  end  to  this 
conference,  cast  mine  eyes  on  Philippus  and  Ammonius, 
who  sat  together  ; and  they,  I thought,  looked  as  if  they 
had  something  to  say  to  me,  and  therefore  I kept  silent. 


56 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


With  that  Ammonius:  Philippus  hath  something  to  offer, 
Lamprias,  touching  what  hath  been  debated  ; for  he  thinks, 
as  well  as  other  folks,  that  Apollo  and  the  sun  are  the 
same  God.  But  the  question  which  I propose  is  of  great- 
er consequence  ; for  just  now  in  our  discourse  we  have 
taken  away  divination  from  the  Gods,  and  openly  attributed 
it  to  the  Daemons,  and  now  we  are  for  excluding  them 
also,  and  dispossessing  them  of  the  oracle  and  three-footed 
stool,  referring  the  cause,  or  rather  the  nature  and  essence, 
of  divination  to  exhalations,  winds,  and  vapors  ; for  these 
opinions  carry  us  still  farther  off  from  the  Gods,  introduc- 
ing such  a cause  of  this  event  as  Euripides  makes  Poly- 
phemus to  allege : 

The  earth  by  force,  whether  she  will  or  no 

Does  for  my  cattle  make  the  grass  to  grow.* 

Yet  he  says  that  he  sacrificed  his  herds,  not  to  the  Gods, 
but  to  himself  and  his  own  belly,  “ the  greatest  of  all 
Daemons  ; ” whereas  we  offer  them  sacrifices  and  prayers 
to  obtain  an  answer  from  their  oracles ; but  to  what  pur- 
pose, if  it  be  true  that  souls  are  naturally  endued  with  the 
faculty  of  prediction,  and  that  the  chief  cause  that  excites 
this  faculty  and  virtue  is  a certain  temperature  of  air  and 
winds?  And  what  signifies  then  the  sacred  institutions 
and  setting  apart  these  religious  prophetesses,  for  the  giv- 
ing of  answers  ? And  why  do  they  return  no  answer  at 
all,  unless  the  sacrifice  tremble  all  over,  even  from  the  very 
feet,  whilst  the  wine  is  poured  on  its  head?  For  it  is  not 
enough  to  wag  the  head,  as  other  beasts  do  which  are  ap- 
pointed for  sacrifices  ; but  this  quaking  and  shivering  must 
be  universal  throughout  all  parts  of  the  body,  and  that 
with  a trembling  noise;  for  if  this  be  not  done,  they  say 
that  the  oracle  will  give  no  answer,  neither  is  the  priestess 
even  introduced.  For  it  is  very  proper  and  suitable  for 
them  to  do  and  believe  thus  who  ascribe  the  impulses  of 

* Eurip.  Cyclops,  332. 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


57 


prophetical  inspiration  either  to  a God  or  a Daemon,  but  by 
no  means  for  those  that  are  of  your  opinion.  For  the  ex- 
halation which  springeth  but  of  the  ground,  whether  the 
beast  tremble  or  not,  xvill  always,  if  it  be  present,  cause  a 
ravishment  and  transport  of  spirit,  and  dispose  the  soul 
alike,  not  only  of  Pytliia,  but  of  any  one  else  that  first  com- 
eth  or  is  presented.  . And  it  must  needs  seem  absurd  to 
set  apart  one  certain  woman  for  the  delivery  of  these  ora- 
cles, and  to  oblige  her  to  virginity  and  chastity  all  her 
days,  when  the  thing  is  referred  to  such  a cause.  For  as 
to  that  Coretas,  whom  the  Delphians  will  needs  have  to  be 
the  first  that  happened  to  fall  upon  this  chink  or  crevice  of 
the  ground,  and  gave  the  first  proof  of  the  virtue  of  the 
place,  — he,  I say,  seems  to  me  not  at  all  to  differ  from 
other  herdsmen  or  shepherds,  supposing  what  is  reported 
of  him  to  be  true,  as  I believe  it  is  not.  And  truly,  when 
I call  to  mind  of  what  benefit  this  oracle  has  been  unto 
the  Greeks,  not  only  in  their  wars  and  building  of  cities, 
but  also  in  the  stresses  of  plague  and  famine,  methinks  it 
is  very  unfit  to  refer  its  invention  and  original  unto  mere 
chance,  rather  than  to  God  and  divine  providence.  But 
I would  willingly  have  you,  Lamprias,  says  he,  to  speak  on 
this  point,  and  I pray  you,  Philippus,  to  have  patience  a 
while.  With  all  my  heart,  replied  Philippus,  and  I dare 
undertake  the  same  for  all  the  company. 

47.  And,  as  to  my  part,  quoth  I,  O Philippus ! I am 
not  only  much  moved,  but  also  ashamed,  considering  my 
youth,  in  the  presence  of  so  many  wise  and  grave  person- 
ages, to  appear  as  if  I endeavored  by  sophistry  to  impose 
upon  them,  and  to  destroy  and  evacuate  what  sage  and 
holy  men  have  determined  concerning  the  divine  nature 
and  power.  But  though  I am  young,  yet  Plato  was  old 
and  wise  as  you  are,  and  he  shall  be  my  example  and  ad- 
vocate in  this  case.  He  reprehended  Anaxagoras  for  apply- 
ing himself  too  much  to  natural  causes,  always  following 


58 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


and  pursuing  the  necessary  and  material  cause  of  the  pas- 
sions and  affections  incident  to  bodies,  and  omitting  the 
final  and  efficient,  which  are  much  better  and  more  consid- 
erable principles  than  the  other.  But  Plato  either  first,  or 
most  of  all  the  philosophers,  hath  joined  both  of  these 
principles  together,  attributing  to  God  the  causality  of  all 
things  that  are  according  to  reason,  and  yet  not  depriving 
matter  of  a necessary  or  passive  concurrence  ; but  acknowl- 
edging that  the  adorning  and  disposing  of  all  this  sensible 
world  does  not  depend  on  one  single  and  simple  cause, 
but  took  its  being  from  the  conjunction  and  fellowship  of 
matter  with  reason.  This  may  be  illustrated  by  the  works 
of  art;  as,  for  example,  without  going  any  further,  the 
foot  of  the  famous  cup  which  is  amongst  the  treasure  of 
this  temple,  which  Herodotus  calls  a Hypocrateridion,  that 
has  for  the  material  causes  fire  and  iron,  and  pliableness 
by  means  of  fire,  and  the  tincture  in  water,  without  which 
such  a piece  of  work  could  not  be 'wrought.  But  the 
principal  cause,  and  that  which  is  most  properly  so  called, 
which  wrought  by  all  these,  was  art  and  reason.  And  we 
see  the  name  of  the  artist  set  on  all  such  pieces,  accord- 
ing to  that, 

’Twas  Thasian  Polygnotus,  Aglaophon’s  son. 

That  drew  this  draught  of  conquer’d  Ilium. 

But  yet,  without  colors  mixed  and  confounded  with  one 
another,  it  had  been  impossible  to  have  done  a piece  so 
pleasing  to  the  eye.  Should  one  come  then  and  enquire 
into  the  material  cause,  searching  into  and  discoursing 
concerning  the  alterations  and  mutations  which  the  ver- 
milion receives  mixed  with  ochre,  or  the  ceruse  with  black, 
would  he  thereby  lessen  the  credit  of  the  painter  Polygno- 
tus?  And  so  he  that  shall  discourse  how  iron  is  both 
hardened  and  mollified,  and  how,  being  softened  in  the 
fire,  it  becomes  obedient  to  them  who  by  beating  it  drive 
it  out  in  length  and  breadth ; and  afterwards,  being  plunged 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


59 


into  fresh  water,  by  the  coldness  of  it  becomes  hardened 
and  condensed  after  it  was  softened  and  rarefied  by  the 
fire,  and  acquires  a firmness  and  temper  which  Homer 
calls  the  strength  of  the  iron,  — does  he,  because  of  this, 
e’er  the  less  attribute  the  cause  of  the  work  to  the  work- 
man ? I do  not  think  he  does  ; for  those  who  examine  the 
virtues  and  properties  of  medicinal  drugs  do  not  thereby 
condemn  the  art  of  physic.  Just  as  when  Plato  says  that 
we  see  because  the  light  of  the  eye  is  mixed  with  the 
clearness  of  the  sun,  and  that  we  hear  by  the  percussion 
of  the  air,  yet  this  does  not  hinder  but  that  we  have  the 
faculty  of  seeing  and  hearing  from  Divine  Providence. 

48.  In  a word,  generation,  as  I have  said,  proceeding 
from  two  causes,  the  chiefest  and  most  ancient  poets  and 
divines  have  stuck  only  to  the  first  and  most  excellent  of 
these,  having  on  all  occasions  these  known  words  in  their 
mouths, 

Jove,  the  beginning,  middle,  source  of  all ; * 

but  as  to  the  necessary  and  natural  causes,  they  concern 
not  themselves  with  them.  Whereas  their  successors,  who 
were  for  that  reason  called  natural  philosophers,  took  a 
different  course ; for  they,  forsaking  this  admirable  and 
divine  principle,  ascribe  all  matter  and  the  passions  of  it 
to  the  motions,  mutations,  and  mixtures  of  its  parts.  So 
that  both  of  these  are  defective  in  their  methods,  because 
they  omit,  through  ignorance  or  design,  the  one  the  effi- 
cient, the  others  the  material  cause.  Whereas  he  that 
first  pointed  at  both  causes,  and  manifestly  joined  with  the 
reason,  which  freely  operateth  and  moveth,  the  matter, 
which  necessarily  is  obedient  and  passive,  does  defend  both 
himself  and  us  from  all  calumny  and  censure.  For  we  do 
not  deprive  divination  either  of  God  or  of  reason ; seeing 
we  allow  it  for  its  subject  the  soul  of  man,  and  for  its 
instrument  an  enthusiastic  exhalation.  For  first,  the  earth, 

* From  the  Orphic  Fragments,  VI.  10  (Hermann). 


60 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


out  of  which  exhalations  are  generated,  and  then  the  sun, 
which  in  and  upon  the  earth  works  all  the  infinite  possibil- 
ities of  mixture  and  alteration,  are,  in  the  divinity  of  our 
forefathers,  esteemed  Gods.  And  hereunto  if  we  add  the 
Daemons  as  superintendents  and  guardians  of  this  tem- 
perature, as  of  a harmony  and  consort,  who  in  due  time 
slacken  or  stretch  the  virtue  of  this  exhalation,  sometimes 
taking  from  it  the  too  great  activity  which  it  has  to  tor- 
ment the  soul  and  transport  it  beyond  itself,  and  mingling 
with  it  a virtue  of  moving,  without  causing  pain  to  those 
that  are  possessed  with  it ; in  all  this  it  seems  to  me  that 
we  do  nothing  that  can  look  strange  or  impossible  or  un- 
agreeable to  reason. 

49.  And  when  we  offer  victims  before  we  come  to  the 
oracle,  and  crown  them  with  garlands  of  flowers  and  pour 
wine  on  their  heads,  I see  we  do  not  any  thing  in  all  this 
that  is  absurd  or  repugnant  to  this  opinion  of  ours.  For 
the  priests,  who  offer  the  sacrifices,  and  pour  out  the  holy 
wine  thereon,  and  observe  their  motions  and  tremblings, 
do  this  for  no  other  reason  besides  that  of  learning  whether 
thev  can  receive  an  answer  from  the  oracle.  For  the  ani- 
mal  which  is  offered  to  the  Gods  must  be  pure,  entire,  and 
sound,  both  as  to  soul  and  body.  Now  it  is  not  very  hard 
to  discover  the  marks  of  the  body ; and  as  to  the  soul, 
they  make  an  experiment  of  it  in  setting  meal  before  the 
bulls  and  presenting  pease  to  the  boars  ; for  if  they  will 
not  taste  them,  it  is  a certain  sign  they  be  not  sound.  As 
to  goats,  cold  water  is  a trial  for  them ; for  if  the  beast 
does  not  seem  to  be  moved  and  affected  when  the  water  is 
poured  upon  her,  this  is  an  evident  sign  that  her  soul  is 
not  right  according  to  Nature.  And  supposing  it  should 
be  granted  that  it  is  a certain  and  unquestionable  sign  that 
God  will  give  an  answer  when  the  sacrifice  thus  drenched 
stirs,  and  that  when  it  is  otherwise  he  vouchsafes  none,  I 
do  not  see  herein  any  thing  that  disagrees  with  the  account 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


61 


of  oracles  which  I have  given.  For  every  natural  virtue 
produceth  the  effect  to  which  it  is  ordained  better  or  worse, 
according  as  its  season  is  more  or  less  proper  ; and  it  is 
likely  God  gives  us  signs  whereby  we  may  know  whether 
the  opportunity  be  gone  or  not. 

50.  As  for  my  part,  I believe  the  exhalation  itself  which 
comes  out  of  the  ground  is  not  always  of  the  same  kind, 
being  at  one  time  slack,  and  at  another  strong  and  vigor- 
ous ; and  the  truth  of  that  experiment  which  I use  to 
prove  it  is  attested  by  several  strangers,  and  by  all  those 
which  serve  in  the  temple.  For  the  room  where  those  do 
wait  who  come  for  answers  from  the  oracle  is  sometimes 
— though  not  often  and  at  certain  stated  times,  but  as  it 
were  by  chance  — filled  with  such  a fragrant  odor  and 
scent,  that  no  perfumes  in  the  world  can  exceed  it,  and 
this  arises,  as  it  were,  out  of  a spring,  from  the  sanctuary 
of  the  temple.  And  this  proceeds  very  likely  from  its 
heat  or  some  other  power  or  faculty  which  is  in  it  ; and  if 
peradventure  this  seems  to  any  body  an  unlikely  thing, 
such  a one  will,  however,  allow  that  the  prophetess  Pythia 
hath  that  part  of  the  soul  unto  which  this  wind  and  blast 
of  inspiration  approacheth  moved  by  variety  of  passions 
and  affections,  sometimes  after  one  sort  and  sometimes  an- 
other, and  that  she  is  not  always  in  the  same  mood  and 
temper,  like  a fixed  and  immutable  harmony  which  the 
least  alteration  or  change  of  such  and  such  proportions 
destroys.  For  there  are  several  vexations  and  passions, 
which  agitate  bodies  and  slide  into  the  soul,  that  she  per- 
ceives, but  more  that  she  does  not,  in  which  case  it  would 
be  better  that  she  should  tarry  away  and  not  present  her- 
self to  this  divine  inspiration,  as  not  being  clean  and  void 
of  perturbations,  like  an  instrument  of  music  exquisitely 
made,  but  at  present  in  disorder  and  out  of  tune.  For 
wine  does  not  at  all  times  alike  surprise  the  drunkard, 
neither  does  the  sound  of  the  flute  always  affect  in  the 


62 


WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE 


same  manner  him  who  dances  to  it.  For  the  same  persons 
are  sometimes  more  and  sometimes  less  transported  beyond 
themselves,  and  more  or  less  inebriated,  according  to  the 
present  disposition  of  their  bodies.  But  especially  the 
imaginative  part  of  the  soul  is  subject  to  change  and  sym- 
pathize together  with  the  body,  as  is  apparent  from  dreams  ; 
for  sometimes  we  are  mightily  troubled  with  many  and  con- 
fused visions  in  our  dreams,  and  at  other  times  there  is  a 
perfect  calm,  undisturbed  by  any  such  images  or  ideas. 
We  all  know  Cleon,  a native  of  Daulia,  who  used  to  say 
to  himself  that  in  the  many  years  in  which  he  hath  lived 
he  never  had  any  dream.  And  among  the  ancients,  the 
same  is  related  of  Thrasymedes  of  Heraea.  The  cause 
of  this  lies  in  the  complexion  and  constitution  of  bodies, 
as  is  seen  by  melancholy  people,  who  are  much  subject  to 
dreams  in  the  night,  and  their  dreams  sometimes  prove 
true.  Inasmuch  as  such  persons’  fancies  run  sometimes 
on  one  thing  and  at  other  times  on  another,  they  must 
thereby  of  necessity  now  and  then  light  right,  as  they  that 
shoot  often  must  hit  sometimes. 

51.  When  therefore  the  imaginative  part  of  the  soul 
and  the  prophetic  blast  or  exhalation  have  a sort  of  har- 
mony and  proportion  with  each  other,  so  as  the  one,  as  it 
were  in  the  nature  of  a medicament,  may  operate  upon  the 
other,  then  happens  that  enthusiasm  or  divine  fury  which 
• is  discernible  in  prophets  and  inspired  persons.  And,  on 
the  contrary,  when  the  proportion  is  lost,  there  can  be  no 
prophetical  inspiration,  or  only  such  as  is  as  good  as  none ; 
for  then  it  is  a forced  fury,  not  a natural  one,  but  violent 
and  turbulent,  such  as  we  have  seen  to  have  happened  in 
the  prophetess  Pythia  who  is  lately  deceased.  For  certain 
pilgrims  being  come  for  an  answer  from  the  oracle,  it  is 
said  the  sacrifice  endured  the  first  effusion  without  stirring 
or  moving  a jot,  which  made  the  priests,  out  of  an  excess 
of  zeal,  to  continue  to  pour  on  more,  till  the  beast  was 


TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 


63 


almost  drowned  with  cold  water  ; but  what  happened  here- 
upon to  the  prophetess  Pythia "?  She  went  down  into  the 
hole  against  her  will ; but  at  the  first  words  which  she  ut- 
tered, she  plainly  showed  by  the  hoarseness  of  her  voice 
that  she  was  not  able  to  bear  up  against  so  strong  an  inspira- 
tion (like  a ship  under  sail,  oppressed  with  too  much  wind), 
but  was  possessed  with  a dumb  and  evil  spirit.  Finally, 
being  horribly  disordered  and  running  with  dreadful 
screeches  towards  the  door  to  get  out,  she  threw  herself 
violently  on  the  ground,  so  that  not  only  the  pilgrims  fled 
for  fear,  but  also  the  high  priest  Nicander  and  the  other 
priests  and  religious  which  were  there  present;  who  en- 
tering within  a while  took  her  up,  being  out  of  her  senses ; 
and  indeed  she  lived  but  few  days  after.  For  these  reasons 
it  is  that  Pythia  is  obliged  to  keep  her  body  pure  and  clean 
from  the  company  of  men,  there  being  no  stranger  per- 
mitted to  converse  with  her.  And  before  she  goes  to  the 
oracle,  they  are  used  by  certain  marks  to  examine  whether 
she  be  fit  or  no,  believing  that  the  God  certainly  knows 
when  her  body  is  disposed  and  fit  to  receive,  without  en- 
dangering her  person,  this  enthusiastical  inspiration.  For 
the  force  and  virtue  of  this  exhalation  does  not  move 
all  sorts  of  persons,  nor  the  same  persons  in  like  manner, 
nor  as  much  at  one  time  as  at  another ; but  it  only  gives 
beginning,  and,  as  it  were,  kindles  those  spirits  which  are 
prepared  and  fitted  to  receive  its  influence.  Now  this 
exhalation  is  certainly  divine  and  celestial,  but  yet  not 
incorruptible  and  immortal,  nor  proof  against  the  eternity 
of  time,  which  subdues  all  things  below  the  moon,  as 
our  doctrine  teaches,  — and,  as  some  say,  all  things 
above  it,  which,  weary  and  in  despair  as  regards  eter- 
nity and  infinity,  are  apt  to  be  suddenly  renewed  and 
changed. 

52.  But  these  things,  said  I,  I must  advise  you  and 
myself  often  and  seriously  to  consider  of,  they  being  liable 


64  WHY  THE  ORACLES  CEASE  TO  GIVE  ANSWERS. 

to  many  disputes  and  objections,  which  our  leisure  will 
not  suffer  to  particularize  ; and  therefore  we  must  remit 
them,  together  with  the  questions  which  Philippus  pro- 
poses touching  Apollo  and  the  sun,  to  another  oppor- 
tunity. 


OP  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS,  OR  OP  THE  ANCIENT  RELIGION 
AND  PHILOSOPHY  OP  EGYPT. 


1.  It  becomes  wise  men,  dame  Clea,*  to  go  to  the  Gods 
for  all  the  good  things  they  would  enjoy.  Much  more 
ought  we,  when  we  would  aim  at  that  knowledge  of  them 
which  our  nature  can  arrive  at,  to  pray  that  they  them- 
selves would  bestow  it  upon  us  ; truth  being  the  greatest 
good  that  man  can  receive,  and  the  goodliest  blessing  that 
God  can  give.  Other  good  things  he  bestows  on  men  as 
they  want  them,  they  being  not  his  own  peculiars  nor  of 
any  use  to  himself.  For  the  blessedness  of  the  Deity  con- 
sists not  in  silver  and  gold,  nor  yet  his  power  in  lightnings 
and  thunders,  but  in  knowledge  and  wisdom.  And  it  was 
the  best  thing  Homer  ever  said  of  Gods,  when  he  pro- 
nounced thus : 

Both  of  one  line,  both  of  one  country  boast, 

But  royal  Jove’s  the  eldest  and  knows  most ; t 

where  he  declares  Jupiter’s  prerogative  in  wisdom  and 
science  to  be  the  more  honorable,  by  terming  it  the  elder. 
I,  for  my  own  part,  do  believe  that  the  felicity  of  eternal 
living  which  the  Gods  enjoy  lies  mainly  in  this,  that  nothing 
escapes  their  cognizance  that  passes  in  the  sphere  of  gen- 
eration, and  that,  should  we  set  aside  wisdom  and  the 
knowledge  of  true  beings,*  immortality  itself  would  not 
be  life,  but  merely  a long  time. 

* This  Clea  was  priestess  to  Isis  and  to  Apollo  Delphicus. 

t II.  XIII.  354. 

t That  is,  tu  uvra  in  the  Platonic  sense,  as  opposed  to  rd  yi.yvu/ieva.  (G.) 

VOL.  iv.  5 


66 


OP  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


2.  And  therefore  the  desire  of  truth,  especially  in  what 
relates  to  the  Gods,  is  a sort  of  grasping  after  divinity,  it 
using  learning  and  enquiry  for  a kind  of  resumption  of 
things  sacred,  a work  doubtless  of  more  religion  than  any 
ritual  purgation  or  charge  of  temples  whatever,  and  espe- 
cially most  acceptable  to  the  Goddess  you  serve,  since  she 
is  more  eminently  wise  and  speculative,  and  since  knowl- 
edge and  science  (as  her  very  name  * seems  to  import) 
appertain  more  peculiarly  to  her  than  any  other  thing. 
For  the  name  of  Isis  is  Greek,  and  so  is  that  of  her  ad- 
versary Typhon,  who,  being  puffed  up  f through  ignorance 
and  mistake,  pulls  in  pieces  and  destroys  that  holy  doc- 
trine, which  she  on  the  contrary  collects,  compiles,  and 
delivers  down  to  such  as  are  regularly  advanced  unto  the 
deified  state ; which,  by  constancy  of  sober  diet,  and  ab- 
staining from  sundry  meats  and  the  use  of  women,  both 
restrains  the  intemperate  and  voluptuous  part,  and  habit- 
uates them  to  austere  and  hard  services  in  the  temples,  the 
end  of  which  is  the  knowledge  of  the  original,  supreme, 
and  mental  being,  which  the  Goddess  would  have  them 
enquire  for,  as  near  to  herself  and  as  dwelling  with  her. 
Besides,  the  very  name  of  her  temple  most  apparently 
promises  the  knowledge  and  acquaintance  of  true  being 
(to  or),  for  they  call  it  Iseion  (" 'Iaeiov ),  as  who  should  say,  We 
shall  know  true  being,  if  with  reason  and  sanctimony  we 
approach  the  sacred  temples  of  this  Goddess. 

3.  Moreover,  many  have  reported  her  the  daughter  of 
Hermes,  and  many  of  Prometheus ; the  latter  of  which 
they  esteem  as  the  author  of  wit  and  forecast,  and  the 
former  of  letters  and  music.  For  the  same  reason  also 
they  Call  the  former  of  the  Muses  at  Hermopolis  at  the 
same  time  Isis  and  Justice,  Isis  being  (as  we  before  said) 

* Plutarch  derives  Isis,  in  the  usual  uncritical  way  of  ancient  etymology,  from 
the  Greek  root  la  — , found  in  lore  from  oida.  (G.) 

t That  is,  rmipw/ievof.  (G.) 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


67 


no  other  than  wisdom,  and  revealing  things  divine  to  such 
as  are  truly  and  justly  styled  the  sacred  bearers,  and  keep- 
ers of  the  sacred  robes  ; and  these  are  such  as  have  in 
their  minds,  as  in  an  ark,  the  sacred  doctrine  about  the 
Gods,  cleansed  from  superstitious  frights  and  vain  curios- 
ities, keeping  out  of  sight  all  dark  and  shady  colors,  and 
exposing  to  sight  the  light  and  gay  ones,  to  insinuate 
something  of  the  like  kind  in  our  persuasion  about  the 
Gods  as  we  have  represented  to  us  in  the  sacred  vestments. 
Wherefore,  in  that  the  priests  of  Isis  are  dressed  up  in 
these  when  they  are  dead,  it  is  a token  to  us  that  this  doc- 
trine goes  with  them  to  the  other  life,  and  that  nothing 
else  can  accompany  them  thither.  For  as  neither  the 
nourishing  of  beards  nor  the  wearing  of  mantles  can  ren- 
der men  philosophers,  so  neither  will  linen  garments  or 
shaved  heads  make  priests  to  Isis ; but  he  is  a true  priest 
of  Isis,  who,  after  he  hath  received  from  the  laws  the  rep- 
resentations and  actions  that  refer  to  the  Gods,  doth  next 
apply  his  reason  to  the  enquiry  and  speculation  of  the 
truth  contained  in  them. 

4.  For  the  greater  part  of  men  are  ignorant  even  of  this 
most  common  and  ordinary  thing,  for  what  reason  priests 
lay  aside  their  hair  and  go  in  linen  garments.  Some  are 
not  at  all  solicitous  to  be  informed  about  such  questions  ; 
and  others  say  their  veneration  for  sheep  is  the  cause  why 
they  abstain  from  their  wool  as  well  as  their  flesh,  and  that 
they  shave  their  heads  in  token  of  mourning,  and  that 
they  wear  linen  because  of  the  bloomy  color  which  the 
flax  sendeth  forth,  in  imitation  of  that  ethereal  clarity  that 
environs  the  world.  But  indeed  the  true  reason  of  them 
all  is  one  and  the  same.  For  it  is  not  lawful  (as  Plato 
saith)  for  a clean  thing  to  be  touched  by  an  unclean ; but 
now  no  superfluity  of  food  or  excrementitious  substance 
can  be  pure  or  clean ; but  wool,  down,  hair,  and  nails 
come  up  and  grow  from  superfluous  excrements.  It  would 


68 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


be  therefore  an  absurdity  for  them  to  lay  aside  their  own 
hair  in  purgations,  by  shaving  themselves  and  by  making 
their  bodies  all  over  smooth,  and  yet  in  the  mean  time  to 
wear  and  carry  about  them  the  hairs  of  brutes.  For  we 
ought  to  think  that  the  poet  Hesiod,  when  he  saith, 

Not  at  a feast  of  Gods  from  fire-branched  tree 

With  sharp-edged  steel  to  part  the  green  from  dry,* 

would  teach  us  to  keep  the  feast  when  we  are  already 
cleansed  from  such  things  as  these,  and  not  in  the  solemni- 
ties themselves  to  use  purgation  or  removal  of  excrementi- 
tious  superfluities.  But  now  flax  springs  up  from  an 
immortal  being,  the  earth,  and  bears  an  eatable  fruit,  and 
affords  a simple  and  cleanly  clothing,  not  burdensome  to 
him  that  is  covered  with  it,  and  convenient  for  every  season 
of  the  year,  and  which  besides  (as  they  tell  us)  is  the  least 
subject  to  engender  vermin  ; but  of  this  to  discourse  in 
this  place  would  not  be  pertinent. 

5.  But  now  the  priests  do  so  abhor  all  kinds  of  super- 
fluous excrements,  that  they  not  only  decline  most  sorts  of 
pulse,  and  of  flesh  that  of  sheep  and  swine,  which  pro- 
duce much  superfluity,  but  also  in  the  time  of  their  purga- 
tions they  exclude  salt  from  their  meals.  For  which,  as 
they  have  several  other  good  reasons,  so  more  especially 
this,  that  it  whets  the  appetite  and  renders  men  over-eager 
after  meat  and  drink.  For  that  the  reason  why  salt  is 
not  accounted  clean  should  be  (as  Aristagoras  tells  us)  be- 
cause that,  when  it  is  hardened  together,  many  little  animals 
are  catched  in  it  and  there  die,  is  fond  and  ridiculous. 
They  are  also  said  to  water  the  Apis  from  a well  of  his 
own,  and  to  restrain  him  altogether  from  the  river  Nile,  — 
not  because  they  hold  the  water  for  polluted  by  reason  of 
the  crocodile,  as  some  suppose,  for  there  is  nothing  in  the 
world  in  more  esteem  with  the  Egyptians  than  the  Nile, 

* Hes.  Works  and  Days,  740.  That  is,  Do  not  cut  your  nails  at  a banquet  of  the  Gods. 
The  briefer  precept  of  Pythagoras  was,  naou  dvoiav  uv  bwxfov.  (G.) 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


69 


but  because  the  water  of  the  Nile  heiug  drunk  is  observed 
to  be  very  feeding,  and  above  all  others  to  conduce  to  the 
increase  of  flesh.  But  they  would  not  have  the  Apis  nor 
themselves  neither  to  be  over  fat ; but  that  their  bodies 
should  sit  light  and  easy  about  their  souls,  and  not  press 
and  squeeze  them  down  by  a mortal  part  overpowering  and 
weighing  down  the  divine. 

6.  They  also  that  at  Heliopolis  ( Sun-town ) wait  upon 
the  sun  never  bring  wine  into  his  temple,  they  looking 
upon  it  as  a thing  indecent  and  unfitting  to  drink  by  day- 
light, while  their  lord  and  king  looks  on.  The  rest  of 
them  do  indeed  use  it,  but  very  sparingly.  They  have 
likewise  many  purgations,  wherein  they  prohibit  the  use 
of  wine,  in  which  they  study  philosophy,  and  pass  their 
time  in  learning  and  teaching  things  divine.  Moreover 
their  kings,  being  priests  also  themselves,  Avere  Avont  to 
drink  it  by  a certain  measure  prescribed  them  in  the  sacred 
hooks,  as  Hecataeus  informs  us.  And  they  began  first  to 
drink  it  in  the  reign  of  Psammetichus ; but  before  that 
time  they  Avere  not  used  to  drink  Avine  at  all,  no,  nor  to 
pour  it  forth  in  sacrifice  as  a thing  they  thought  any  Avay 
grateful  to  the  Gods,  hut  as  the  blood  of  those  Avho  in 
ancient  times  Avaged  Avar  against  the  Gods,  from  whom,  fall- 
ing down  from  heaven  and  mixing  Avith  the  earth,  they 
conceived  vines  to  have  first  sprung ; Avhich  is  the  reason 
(say  they)  that  drunkenness  renders  men  besides  them- 
selves and  mad  ; they  being,  as  it  were,  gorged  Avith  the 
blood  of  their  ancestors.  These  things  (as  Eudoxus  tells 
us  in  the  second  book  of  his  Travels)  are  thus  related  by 
the  priests. 

7.  As  to  sea-fish,  they  do  not  all  of  them  abstain  from 
all,  but  some  from  one  sort,  and  some  from  another.  As 
for  example,  the  Oxyrynchites  abstain  from  such  as  are 
catched  Avith  the  angle  and  hook ; for,  having  the  fish 
called  oxyrynchus  (the  pike)  in  great  veneration,  they  are 


70 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


afraid  lest  the  hook  should  chance  to  catch  hold  of  it 
and  by  that  means  become  polluted.  They  of  Syene  also 
abstain  from  the  phagrus  (or  sea-bream)  because  it  is 
observed  to  appear  with  the  approaching  overflow  of  the 
Nile,  and  to  present  itself  a voluntary  messenger  of  the 
joyful  news  of  its  increase.  But  the  priests  abstain  from 
all  in  general.  But  on  the  ninth  day  of  the  first  month, 
when  every  other  Egyptian  eats  a fried  fish  before  the 
outer  door  of  his  house,  the  priests  do  not  eat  any  fish, 
but  only  burn  them  before  their  doors.  For  which  they 
have  two  reasons  ; the  one  whereof,  being  sacred  and  very 
curious,  I shall  resume  by  and  by  (it  agreeing  with  the 
pious  reasonings  we  shall  make  upon  Osiris  and  Typhon); 
the  other  is  a very  manifest  and  obvious  one,  which,  by 
declaring  fish  to  be  not  a necessary  but  a superfluous 
and  curious  sort  of  food,  greatly  confirms  Homer,  who 
never  makes  either  the  dainty  Phaeacians  or  the  Ithacans 
(though  both  islanders)  to  make  use  of  fish ; no,  nor  the 
companions  of  Ulysses  either  in  so  long  a voyage  at  sea, 
until  they  came  to  the  last  extremity  of  want.  In  short, 
they  reckon  the  sea  itself  to  be  made  of  fire  and  to  lie  out 
of  Nature’s  confines,  and  not  to  be  a part  of  the  world  or 
an  element,  but  a preternatural,  corrupt,  and  morbid  ex- 
crement. 

8.  For  nothing  hath  been  ranked  amon"  their  sacred 
and  religious  rites  that  savored  of  folly,  romance,  or  su- 
perstition, as  some  do  suppose ; but  some  of  them  were 
such  as  contained  some  signification  of  morality  and  utility, 
and  others  such  as  were  not  without  a fineness  either  in 
history  or  natural  philosophy.  As,  for  instance,  in  what 
refers  to  the  onions ; for  that  Dictys,  the  foster-father  of 
Isis,  as  he  was  reaching  at  a handful  of  onions,  fell  into 
the  river  and  was  there  drowned,  is  extremely  improbable. 
But  the  true  reason  why  the  priests  abhor,  detest,  and 
avoid  the  onion  is  because  it  is  the  only  plant  whose  na- 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


71 


ture  it  is  to  grow  and  spread  forth  in  the  wane  of  the 
moon.  Besides,  it  is  no  proper  food,  either  for  such  as 
would  practise  abstinence  and  use  purgations,  or  for  such 
as  would  observe  the  festivals ; for  the  former,  because  it 
causeth  thirst,  and  for  the  latter,  because  it  forceth  tears 
from  those  that  eat  it.  They  likewise  esteem  the  swine  as 
an  unhallowed  animal,  because  it  is  observed  to  be  most 
apt  to  engender  in  the  wane  of  the  moon,  and  because 
that  such  as  drink  its  milk  have  a leprosy  and  scabbed 
roughness  in  their  bodies.  But  the  story  which  they  that 
sacrifice  a swine  at  every  full  moon  are  wont  to  subjoin 
after  their  eating  of  it,  — how  that  Typhon,  being  once 
about  the  full  of  the  moon  in  pursuit  of  a certain  swine, 
found  by  chance  the  wooden  chest  wherein  lay  the  body 
of  Osiris,  and  scattered  it,  — is  not  received  by  all,  but 
looked  upon  as  a misrepresented  story,  as  a great  many 
more  such  are.  They  tell  us  moreover,  that  the  ancients 
did  so  much  despise  delicacy,  sumptuousness,  and  a soft 
and  effeminate  way  of  living,  that  they  erected  a pillar  in 
the  temple  at  Thebes,  having  engraven  upon  it  several 
grievous  curses  against  King  Meinis,  who  (as  they  tell  us) 
was  the  first  that  brought  off  the  Egyptians  from  a mean, 
wealthless,  and  simple  way  of  living.  There  goes  also 
another  story,  how  that  Technatis,  father  to  Bocchoris, 
commanding  an  army  against  the  Arabians,  and  his  bag- 
gage and  provisions  not  coming  in  as  soon  as  was  expected, 
heartily  fed  upon  such  things  as  he  could  next  light  on, 
and  afterwards  had  a sound  sleep  upon  a pallet,  where- 
upon he  fell  greatly  in  love  with  a poor  and  mean  life ; 
and  for  this  reason  he  cursed  Meinis,  and  that  ivith  the 
consent  of  all  the  priests,  and  carved  that  curse  upon  a 
pillar. 

9.  But  their  kings  (you  must  know)  were  always  chosen 
either  out  of  the  priesthood  or  soldiery,  the  latter  having 
the  right  of  succession  by  reason  of  their  military  valor, 


72 


OF  TSIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


and  the  former  by  reason  of  their  wisdom.  But  he  that 
was  chosen  out  of  the  soldiery  was  obliged  immediately  to 
turn  priest,  and  was  thereupon  admitted  to  the  participa- 
tion of  their  philosophy,  whose  genius  it  was  to  conceal 
the  greater  part  in  tales  and  romantic  relations,  containing 
dark  hints  and  resemblances  of  truth ; which  it  is  plain 
that  even  themselves  would  insinuate  to  us,  while  they  are 
so  kind  as  to  set  up  Sphinxes  before  their  temples,  to  in- 
timate that  their  theology  contained  in  it  an  enigmatical 
sort  of  learning.  Moreover,  the  temple  of  Minerva  which 
is  at  Sais  (whom  they  look  upon  as  the  same  with  Isis) 
had  upon  it  this  inscription : I am  whatever  was,  or  is,  or 
will  be ; and  my  veil  no  mortal  ever  took  up.  Besides, 
we  find  the  greater  part  to  be  of  opinion  that  the  proper 
name  of  Jupiter  in  the  Egyptian  tongue  is  Amun  (from 
which  we  have  derived  our  word  Ammon).  But  now 
Manetho  the  Sebennite  thinks  this  word  signifies  hidden 
and  hiding ; but  Hecataeus  of  Abdera  saitli,  the  Egyptians 
use  this  word  when  they  call  anybody ; for  that  it  is 
a term  of  calling.  Therefore  they  must  be  of  the  opinion 
that  the  first  God  is  the  same  with  the  universe ; and 
therefore,  while  they  invoke  him  who  is  unmanifest  and 
hidden,  and  pray  him  to  make  himself  manifest  and  known 
to  them,  they  cry  Amun.  So  great  therefore  was  the  piety 
of  the  Egyptians’  philosophy  about  things  divine. 

10.  This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  most  learned  of  the 
Greeks  (such  as  Solon,  Thales,  Plato,  Eudoxus,  Pythago- 
ras, and  as  some  say,  even  Lycurgus)  going  to  Egypt  and 
conversing  with  the  priests  ; of  whom  they  say  Eudoxus 
was  a hearer  of  Chonupliis  of  Memphis,  Solon  of  Son- 
cliis  of  Sais,  and  Pythagoras  of  Oenuphis  of  Heliopolis. 
Whereof  the  last  named,  being  (as  is  probable)  more  than 
ordinarily  admired  by  the  men,  and  they  also  by  him, 
imitated  their  symbolical  and  mysterious  way  of  talking, 
obscuring  his  sentiments  with  dark  riddles.  For  the  great- 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


73 


est  part  of  the  Pythagoric  precepts  fall  nothing  short  of 
those  sacred  writings  they  call  hieroglyphical,  such  as,  Do 
not  eat  in  a chariot ; Do  not  sit  on  a choenix  (or  measure) ; 
Plant  not  a palm-tree ; Stir  not  fire  with  a knife  within  the 
house.  And  I verily  believe,  that  their  terming  the  unit 
Apollo,  the  number  two  Diana,  the  number  seven  Minerva, 
and  the  first  cube  Neptune,  refers  to  the  columns  set  up  in 
their  temples,  and  to  things  there  acted,  aye,  and  painted 
too.  For  they  represent  their  king  and  lord  Osiris  by  an 
eye  and  a sceptre.  There  are  some  also  that  interpret  his 
name  by  many-eyed,  as  if  os  in  the  Egyptian  tongue  sig- 
nified many,  and  iri  an  eye.  And  the  heaven,  because  by 
reason  of  its  eternity  it  never  grows  old,  they  represent  by 
a heart  with  a censer  under  it.  There  were  also  statues 
of  judges  erected  at  Thebes,  having  no  hands ; and  the 
chief  of  them  had  also  his  eyes  closed  up,  hereby  signifying 
that  among  them  justice  was  not  to  be  solicited  with  either 
bribery  or  address.  Moreover,  the  men  of  the  sword  had 
a beetle  carved  upon  their  signets,  because  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  a female  beetle ; for  they  are  all  males,  and 
they  generate  their  young  in  certain  round  pellets  formed 
of  dirt,  being  herein  as  well  providers  of  the  place  in 
which  they  are  to  be  engendered,  as  of  the  matter  of  their 
nutrition.  , 

11.  When  therefore  you  hear  the  tales  which  the 
Egyptians  relate  about  the  Gods,  such  as  their  wanderings, 
discerptions,  and  such  like  disasters  that  befell  them,  you 
are  still  to  remember  that  none  of  these  things  have  been 
really  so  acted  and  done  as  they  are  told.  For  they  do  not 
call  the  dog  Hermes  properly,  but  only  attribute  the  ward- 
ing, vigilancy,  and  philosophic  acuteness  of  that  animal, 
which  by  knowing  or  not  knowing  distinguishes  between 
its  friend  and  its  foe  (as  Plato  speaks),  to  the  most  knowing 
and  ingenious  of  the  Gods.  Nor  do  they  believe  that  the 
sun  springs  up  a little  boy  from  the  top  of  the  lotus,  but 


74 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


they  thus  set  forth  his  rising  to  insinuate  the  kindling  of 
his  rays  by  means  of  humids.  Besides,  that  most  savage 
and  horrible  king  of  the  Persians  named  Ochus,  who, 
when  he  had  massacred  abundance  of  people,  afterwards 
slaughtered  the  Apis,  and  feasted  upon  him,  both  himself 
and  his  retinue,  they  called  the  Sword ; and  they  call  him 
so  to  this  very  day  in  their  table  of  kings,  hereby  not 
denoting  properly  his  person,  but  resembling  by  this  instru- 
ment of  murder  the  severity  and  mischievousness  of  his 
disposition.  When  therefore  you  thus  hear  the  stories  of 
the  Gods  from  such  as  interpret  them  with  consistency  to 
piety  and  philosophy,  and  observe  and  practise  those  rites 
that  are  by  law  established,  and  are  persuaded  in  your 
mind  that  you  cannot  possibly  either  offer  or  perform  a 
more  agreeable  thing  to  the  Gods  than  the  entertaining  of 
a right  notion  of  them,  you  will  then  avoid  superstition  as  a 
no  less  evil  than  atheism  itself. 

12.  The  story  is  thus  told  after  the  most  concise  manner, 
the  most  useless  and  unnecessary  parts  being  cut  off.  They 
tell  us  how  that  once  on  a time,  Rhea  having  accompanied 
with  Saturn  by  stealth,  the  Sun  found  them  out,  and  pro- 
nounced a solemn  curse  against  her,  containing  that  she 
should  not  be  delivered  in  any  month  or  year ; but  that 
Hermes,  afterwards  making  his  court  to  the  goddess,  ob- 
tained her  favor,  in  requital  of  which  he  went  and  played 
at  dice  with  the  Moon,  and  won  of  her  the  seventieth  part 
from  each  day,  and  out  of  all  these  made  five  new  days, 
which  he  added  to  the  three  hundred  and  sixty  other  days 
of  the  year ; and  these  the  Egyptians  therefore  to  this  day 
call  the  Epagomenae  (or  the  superadded  days),  and  they 
observe  them  as  the  birthdays  of  their  Gods.  Upon  the 
first  of  these,  as  they  say,  Osiris  was  born,  and  a voice 
came  into  the  world  Avitli  him,  saying,  The  Lord  of  all 
things  is  iioav  born.  There  are  others  that  affirm  that  one 
Pamyles,  as  he  was  fetching  water  at  Thebes,  heard  a voice 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


75 


out  of  the  temple  of  Jupiter,  bidding  him  to  publish  with 
a loud  voice  that  Osiris,  the  great  and  good  king,  was  now 
born ; and  that  he  thereupon  got  to  be  foster-father  to 
Osiris,  Saturn  entrusting  him  with  the  charge  of  him,  and 
that  the  feast  called  Pamylia  (resembling  the  Priapeian 
procession  which  the  Greeks  call  Phallephoria)  was  insti- 
tuted in  honor  of  him.  Upon  the  second  day  Arueris  was 
born,  whom  some  call  Apollo,  and  others  the  elder  Horus. 
Upon  the  third  Typhon  was  born,  who  came  not  into  the 
world  either  in  due  time  or  by  the  right  way,  but  broke  a 
hole  in  his  mother’s  side,  and  leaped  out  at  the  wound. 
Upon  the  fourth  Isis  was  born  in  Panygra.  And  upon  the 
fifth  Nephthys,  whom  they  sometimes  call  the  end,  and 
sometimes  Venus,  and  sometimes  also  Victory.  Of  these 
they  say  Osiris  and  Arueris  were  begot  by  the  Sun,  Isis 
by  Hermes,  and  Typhon  and  Nephthys  by  Saturn.  For 
which  reason  their  kings,  looking  upon  the  third  of  the 
Epagomenae  as  an  inauspicious  day,  did  no  business  upon 
it,  nor  took  any  care  of  their  bodies  until  the  evening. 
They  say  also  that  Nephthys  was  married  unto  Typhon, 
and  that  Isis  and  Osiris  were  in  love  with  one  another  be- 
fore they  were  born,  and  enjoyed  each  other  in  the  dark 
before  they  came  into  the  world.  Some  add  also  that 
Arueris  was  thus  begotten,  and  that  he  was  called  by  the 
Egyptians  the  elder  Horus,  and  by  the  Greeks  Apollo. 

13.  And  they  say  that  Osiris,  when  he  was  king  of 
Egypt,  drew  them  off  from  a beggarly  and  bestial  way  of 
living,  by  showing  them  the  use  of  grain,  and  by  making 
them  laws,  and  teaching  them  to  honor  the  Gods  ; and  that 
afterwards  he  travelled  all  the  world  over,  and  made  it 
civil,  having  but  little  need  of  arms,  for  he  drew  the  most 
to  him,  alluring  them  by  persuasion  and  oratory,  intermixed 
with  all  sorts  of  poetry  and  music ; whence  it  is  that  the 
Greeks  look  upon  him  as  the  very  same  with  Bacchus. 
They  further  add  that  Typhon,  while  he  was  from  home, 


76 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


attempted  nothing  against  him  ; for  Tsis  was  very  watchful, 
and  guarded  him  closely  from  harm.  But  when  he  came 
home,  he  formed  a plot  against  him,  taking  seventy-two 
men  for  accomplices  of  his  conspiracy,  and  being  also 
abetted  by  a certain  Queen  of  Ethiopia,  whose  name  they 
say  was  Aso.  Having  therefore  privately  taken  the  mea- 
sure of  Osiris’s  body,  and  framed  a curious  ark,  very  finely 
beautified  and  just  of  the  size  of  his  body,  he  brought  it 
to  a certain  banquet.  And  as  all  were  wonderfully  delight- 
ed with  so  rare  a sight  and  admired  it  greatly,  Typhon  in 
a sporting  manner  promised  that  whichsoever  of  the  com- 
pany should  by  lying  in  it  find  it  to  be  of  the  size  of  his 
body,  should  have  it  for  a present.  And  as  every  one  of 
them  was  forward  to  try,  and  none  fitted  it,  Osiris  at  last  got 
into  it  himself,  and  lay  along  in  it ; whereupon  they  that 
were  there  present  immediately  ran  to  it,  and  clapped  down 
the  cover  upon  it,  and  when  they  had  fastened  it  down 
with  nails,  and  soldered  it  with  melted  lead,  they  carried  it 
forth  to  the  river  side,  and  let  it  swim  into  the  sea  at  the 
Tanaitic  mouth,  which  the  Egyptians  therefore  to  this  day 
detest,  and  abominate  the  very  naming  of  it.  These  things 
happened  (as  they  say)  upon  the  seventeenth  of  the  month 
Athyr,  when  the  sun  enters  into  the  Scorpion,  and  that 
was  upon  the  eight  and  twentieth  year  of  the  reign  of 
Osiris.  But  there  are  some  that  say  that  was  the  time  of 
his  life,  and  not  of  his  reign. 

14.  And  because  the  Pans  and  Satyrs  that  inhabited  the 
region  about  Chemmis  were  the  first  that  knew  of  this 
disaster  and  raised  the  report  of  it  among  the  people,  all 
sudden  frights  and  discomposures  among  the  people  have 
been  ever  since  called  panics.  But  when  Isis  heard  of  it, 
she  cut  off  in  that  very  place  a lock  of  her  hair,  and  put 
on  a mourning  weed,  where  there  is  a town  at  this  day 
named  Kopto  ; others  think  that  name  signifies  bereaving, 
for  that  some  use  the  word  for  depriving.  And  as  she 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


77 


wandered  up  and  down  in  all  places,  being  deeply  per- 
plexed in  her  thoughts,  and  left  no  one  she  met  withal 
unspoken  to,  she  met  at  last  with  certain  little  children,  of 
whom  also  she  enquired  about  the  ark.  Now  these  had 
chanced  to  see  all  that  had  passed,  and  they  named  to  her 
the  very  mouth  of  the  Nile  by  which  Typhon’s  accomplices 
had  sent  the  vessel  into  the  sea;  for  which  reason  the 
Egyptians  account  little  children  to  have  a faculty  of  divin- 
ation, and  use  more  especially  to  lay  hold  on  their  omens 
when  they  play  in  sacred  places  or  chance  to  say  any  thing 
there,  whatever  it  be.  And  finding  afterwards  that  Osiris 
had  made  his  court  to  her  sister,  and  through  mistake  en- 
joyed her  instead  of  herself,  for  token  of  which  she  had 
found  the  melilot  garland  which  he  had  left  hard  by 
Nephthys,  she  went  to  seek  for  the  child ; for  her  sister 
had  immediately  exposed  it  as  soon  as  she  was  delivered 
of  it,  for  fear  of  her  husband  Typhon.  And  when  with 
great  difficulty  and  labor  she  had  found  it,  by  means  of 
certain  dogs  which  conducted  her  to  it,  she  brought  it  up  ; 
and  he  afterwards  became  her  guardsman  and  follower, 
being  named  Anubis,  and  reported  to  guard  the  Gods  as 
dogs  do  men. 

15.  Of  him  she  had  tidings  of  the  ark,  how  it  had  been 
thrown  out  by  the  sea  upon  the  coasts  of  Byblos,  and  the 
flood  had  gently  entangled  it  in  a certain  thicket  of  heath. 
And  this  heath  had  in  a very  small  time  run  up  into  a 
most  beauteous  and  large  tree,  and  had  wrought  itself 
about  it,  clung  to  it,  and  quite  enclosed  it  within  its  trunk. 
Upon  which  the  king  of  that  place,  much  admiring  at  the 
unusual  bigness  of  the  plant,  and  cropping  off  the  bushy 
part  that  encompassed  the  now  invisible  chest,  made  of  it 
a post  to  support  the  roof  of  his  house.  These  things  (as 
they  tell  us)  Isis  being  informed  of  by  the  divine  breath  of 
rumor,  went  herself  to  Byblos  ; where  when  she  was  come, 
she  sate  her  down  hard  by  a well,  very  pensive  and  full  of 


78 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


tears,  insomuch  that  she  refused  to  speak  to  any  person, 
save  only  to  the  queen’s  women,  whom  she  complimented 
and  caressed  at  an  extraordinary  rate,  and  would  often 
stroke  back  their  hair  with  her  hands,  and  withal  transmit 
a most  wonderful  fragrant  smell  out  of  her  body  into  theirs. 
The  queen,  perceiving  that  her  women’s  bodies  and  hair 
thus  breathed  of  ambrosia,  greatly  longed  to  become  ac- 
quainted with  this  new  stranger.  Upon  this  she  being 
sent  for,  and  becoming  very  intimate  with  the  queen,  was 
at  last  made  nurse  to  her  child.  Now  the  name  of  this 
king  (they  tell  us)  was  Malcander ; and  the  queen,  some 
say,  was  called  Astarte,  and  some  Saosis,  and  others  Ne- 
manun  (which  in  Greek  is  as  much  as  to  say  Athenais). 

16.  Isis  nursed  the  child  by  putting  her  finger  into  his 
mouth  instead  of  the  breast ; and  in  the  night-time  she 
would  by  a kind  of  lambent  fire  singe  away  what  was 
mortal  about  him.  In  the  mean  while,  herself  would  be 
turned  to  a swallow,  and  in  that  form  would  fly  round 
about  the  post,  bemoaning  her  misfortune  and  sad  fate  ; 
until  at  last,  the  queen,  who  stood  watching  hard  by, 
cried  out  aloud  as  she  saw  her  child  all  on  a light  flame, 
and  so  robbed  him  of  immortality.  Upon  which  the  God- 
dess discovered  herself,  and  begged  the  post  that  held  up 
the  roof ; which  when  she  had  obtained  and  taken  down, 
she  very  quickly  cropped  off  the  bushy  heath  from  about  it 
and  wrapping  the  trunk  in  fine  linen  and  pouring  perfumed 
oil  upon  it,  she  put  it  into  the  hands  of  their  kings ; and 
therefore  the  Byblians  to  this  very  day  worship  that  piece 
of  wood,  laying  it  up  in  the  temple  of  Isis.  Then  she 
threw  herself  down  upon  the  chest,  and  her  lamentations 
were  so  loud,  that  the  younger  of  the  king’s  two  sons  died 
for  very  fear ; but  she,  having  the  elder  in  her  own  pos- 
session, took  both  him  and  the  ark,  and  carried  them  on 
shipboard,  and  so  took  sail.  But  the  river  Phaedrus 
sending  forth  a very  keen  and  chill  air,  it  being  the  dawn- 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


79 


ing  of  tlie  mom,  she  grew  incensed  at  it,  and  dried  up  its 
current. 

17.  And  in  the  first  place  where  she  could  take  rest, 
and  found  herself  to  be  now  at  liberty  and  alone,  she 
opened  the  ark,  and  laid  her  cheeks  upon  the  cheeks  of 
Osiris,  and  embraced  him  and  wept  bitterly.  The  little 
boy  seeing  her  came  silently  behind  her,  and  peeping  saw 
what  it  was ; which  she  perceiving  cast  a terrible  look 
upon  him  in  the  height  of  her  passion ; the  fright  whereof 
the  child  could  not  endure,  and  immediately  died.  But 
there  are  some  that  say  it  was  not  so,  but  that  in  the  fore- 
mentioned  manner  he  dropped  into  the  sea,  and  was  there 
drowned.  And  he  hath  divine  honors  given  him  to  this 
very  day  upon  the  Goddess’s  account ; for  they  assure  us 
that  Maneros,  whom  the  Egyptians  so  often  mention  in 
their  carols  at  their  banquets,  is  the  very  same.  But  others 
say  that  the  boy  was  named  Palaestinus  or  Pelusius,  and 
that  the  city  of  that  name  was  so  called  from  him,  it 
having  been  built  by  the  Goddess.  They  also  relate  that 
this  Maneros,  so  often  spoken  of  in  their  songs,  was  the 
first  that  invented  music.  But  some  there  are  that  would 
make  us  believe  that  Maneros  was  not  the  name  of  any 
person,  but  a certain  form  of  speech,  made  use  of  to 
people  in  drinking  and  entertaining  themselves  at  feasts, 
by  way  of  wishing  that  all  things  might  prove  auspicious 
and  agreeable  to  them ; for  that  is  the  thing  which  the 
Egyptians  would  express  by  the  word  Maneros,  when  they 
so  often  roar  it  forth.  In  like  manner  they  affirm  that  the 
likeness  of  a dead  man,  which  is  carried  about  in  a little 
box  and  shown  at  feasts,  is  not  to  commemorate  the  disas- 
ter of  Osiris,  as  some  suppose,  but  was  designed  to  en- 
courage men  to  make  use  of  and  to  enjoy  the  present 
things  whilst  they  have  them,  since  all  men  must  quickly 
become  such  as  they  there  see ; for  which  reason  they 
bring  it  into  their  revels  and  feasts. 


80 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


18.  But  when  Isis  came  to  her  son  Horns,  who  was  then 
at  nurse  at  Buto,  and  had  laid  the  chest  out  of  the  way, 
Typhon,  as  he  was  hunting  by  moonshine,  by  chance 
lighted  upon  it,  and  knowing  the  body  again,  tore  it  into 
fourteen  parts,  and  threw  them  all  about.  Which  when 
Isis  had  heard,  she  went  to  look  for  them  again  in  a cer- 
tain barge  made  of  papyrus,  in  which  she  sailed  over  all 
the  fens.  Whence  (they  tell  us)  it  comes  to  pass,  that 
such  as  go  in  boats  made  of  this  rush  are  never  injured  by 
the  crocodiles,  they  having  either  a fear  or  else  a venera- 
tion for  it  upon  the  account  of  the  goddess  Isis.  And  this 
(they  say)  hath  occasioned  the  report  that  there  are  many 
sepulchres  of  Osiris  in  Egypt,  because  she  made  a partic- 
ular funeral  for  each  member  as  she  found  them.  There 
are  others  that  tell  us  it  was  not  so,  but  that  she  made  sev- 
eral effigies  of  him  and  sent  them  to  every  city,  taking  on 
her  as  if  she  had  sent  them  his  body ; so  that  the  greater 
number  of  people  might  pay  divine  honors  to  him,  and 
withal,  if  it  should  chance  that  Typhon  should  get  the  bet- 
ter of  Horus,  and  thereupon  search  for  the  body  of  Osiris, 
many  bodies  being  discoursed  of  and  shown  him,  he  might 
despair  of  ever  finding  the  right  one.  But  of  all  Osiris’s 
members,  Isis  could  never  find  out  his  private  part,  for  it 
had  been  presently  flung  into  the  river  Nile,  and  the  lepi- 
dotus,  sea-bream,  and  pike  eating  of  it,  these  were  for  that 
reason  more  scrupulously  avoided  by  the  Egyptians  than 
any  other  fish.  But  Isis,  in  lieu  of  it,  made  its  effigies, 
and  so  consecrated  the  phallus  for  which  the  Egyptians  to 
this  day  observe  a festival. 

19.  After  this,  Osiris  coming  out  of  hell  to  assist  his 
son  Horus,  first  labored  and  trained  him  up  in  the  disci- 
pline of  war,  and  then  questioned  him  what  he  thought  to 
be  the  gallantest  thing  a man  could  do  ; to  which  he  soon 
replied,  to  avenge  one’s  father’s  and  mother’s  quarrel  when 
they  suffer  injury.  He  asked  him  a second  time,  what  ani- 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


81 


mal  lie  esteemed  most  useful  to  such  as  would  go  to  battle. 
Horus  told  him,  a horse  ; to  which  he  said  that  he  won- 
dered much  at  his  answer,  and  could  not  imagine  why  he 
did  not  rather  name  a lion  than  a horse.  Horus  replied, 
that  a lion  might  indeed  be  very  serviceable  to  one  that 
needed  help,  but  a horse  would  serve  best  to  cut  off  and 
disperse  a flying  enemy.  Which  when  Osiris  heard,  he 
was  very  much  pleased  with  him,  looking  upon  him  now 
as  sufficiently  instructed  for  a soldier.  It  is  reported  like- 
wise that,  as  a great  many  went  over  daily  unto  Horus, 
Typhous  own  concubine  Thueris  deserted  also  ; but  that 
a certain  serpent,  pursuing  her  close  at  the  heels,  was  cut 
in  pieces  by  Horus’s  men,  and  that  for  that  reason  they 
still  fling  a certain  cord  into  the  midst  of  the  room  and 
then  chop  it  to  pieces.  The  battle  therefore  continued  for 
several  days,  and  Horus  at  last  prevailed ; but  Isis,  although 
she  had  Typhon  delivered  up  to  her  fast  bound,  yet  would 
not  put  him  to  death,  but  contrariwise  loosed  him  and  let 
him  go.  Which  when  Horus  perceived,  he  could  not 
brook  it  with  any  patience,  but  laid  violent  hands  upon  his 
mother,  and  plucked  the  royal  diadem  from  off  her  head. 
But  Hermes  presently  stepped  in,  and  clapped  a cow’s 
head  upon  her  instead  of  a helmet.  Likewise,  when  Ty- 
phon impeached  Horus  for  being  a bastard,  Hermes  be- 
came his  advocate,  and  Horus  was  judged  legitimate  by 
all  the  Gods.  After  this,  they  say  that  Typhon  was  worst- 
ed in  two  several  battles.  Isis  had  also  by  Osiris,  who 
accompanied  with  her  after  his  decease,  Harpo crates,  who 
came  into  the  world  before  his  time  and  was  lame  in  his 
lower  parts. 

20.  These  then  are  most  of  the  heads  of  this  fabular 
narration,  the  more  harsh  and  coarse  parts  (such  as  the 
description  of  Horus  and  the  beheading  of  Isis)  being 
taken  out.  If  therefore  they  say  and  believe  such  things 
as  these  of  the  blessed  and  incorruptible  nature  (which  is 

VOL.  IV.  6 


82 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


the  best  conception  we  can  have  of  divinity)  as  really  thus 
done  and  happening  to  it,  I need  not  tell  you  that  you 
ought  to  spit  and  to  make  clean  your  mouth  (as  Aeschylus 
speaks)  at  the  mentioning  of  them.  For  you  are  suffi- 
ciently averse  of  yourself  to  such  as  entertain  such  wicked 
and  barbarous  sentiments  concerning  the  Gods.  And  yet 
that  these  relations  are  nothing  akin  to  those  foppish  tales 
and  vain  fictions  which  poets  and  story-tellers  are  wont, 
like  spiders,  to  spin  out  of  their  own  bowels,  without  any 
substantial  ground  or  foundation  for  them,  and  then  weave 
and  wire-draw  them  out  at  their  own  pleasures,  but  con- 
tain in  them  certain  abstruse  questions  and  rehearsals  of 
events,  you  yourself  are,  I suppose,  convinced.  And  as 
mathematicians  do  assert  the  rainbow  to  be  an  appearance 
of  the  sun  so  variegated  by  reflection  of  its  rays  in  a cloud, 
so  likewise  the  fable  here  related  is  the  appearance  of  some 
doctrine  whose  meaning  is  transferred  by  reflection  to 
some  other  matter  ; as  is  plainly  suggested  to  us  as  well  by 
the  sacrifices  themselves,  in  which  there  appears  something 
lamentable  and  very  sad,  as  by  the  forms  and  makes  of 
their  temples,  which  sometimes  run  out  themselves  into 
wings,  and  into  open  and  airy  circs,  and  at  other  times 
again  have  under  ground  certain  private  cells,  resembling 
vaults  and  tombs.  And  this  is  most  plainly  hinted  to  us 
by  the  opinion  received  about  those  of  Osiris,  because  his 
body  is  said  to  be  interred  in  so  many  different  places. 
Though  it  may  be  they  will  tell  you  that  some  one  town, 
such  as  Abydos  or  Memphis,  is  named  for  the  place  where 
his  true  body  lies  ; and  that  the  most  powerful  and  weal- 
thy among  the  Egyptians  are  most  ambitious  to  be  buried 
at  Abydos,  that  so  they  may  be  near  the  body  of  their  God 
Osiris  ; and  that  the  Apis  is  fed  at  Memphis,  because  he 
is  the  image  of  Osiris’s  soul,  where  also  they  will  have  it 
that  his  body  is  interred.  Some  also  interpret  the  name 
of  this  city  to  signify  the  haven  of  good  things,  and  others, 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


83 


the  tomb  of  Osiris.  They  add,  that  the  little  island  at 
Pliilae  is  at  other  times  inaccessible  and  not  to  be  ap- 
proached to  by  any  man,  and  that  the  very  birds  dare  not 
venture  to  fly  over  it  nor  the  fish  to  touch  upon  its  banks  ; 
yet  upon  a certain  set  time  the  priests  go  over  into  it,  and 
there  perform  the  accustomed  rites  for  the  dead,  and  crown 
his  tomb,  which  stands  there  shaded  over  by  a tree  called 
methida,  exceeding  any  olive  in  bigness. 

21.  But  Eudoxus  saith  that,  though  there  be  in  Egypt 
many  tombs  reported  to  be  his,  yet  his  true  body  lies  at 
Busiris,  for  that  was  the  place  of  his  birth ; neither  can 
there  be  any  room  for  dispute  about  Taphosiris,  for  that  its 
very  name  bespeaks  it,  Osiris’s  tomb.  I pass  by  their 
cleaving  of  wood,  their  peeling  of  flax,  and  the  wine  liba- 
tions then  made  by  them,  because  many  of  their  secret 
mysteries  are  therein  contained.  And  it  is  not  of  this 
God  only,  but  of  all  others  also  that  are  not  ungotten  and 
incorruptible,  that  the  priests  pretend  that  their  bodies  lie 
buried  with  them  and  are  by  them  served,  but  their  souls 
are  stars  shining  in  heaven  ; and  they  say  that  the  soul  of 
Isis  is  by  the  Greeks  called  the  Dog,  but  by  the  Egyptians, 
Sothis;  and  that  of  Horus,  Orion;  and  that  of  Typhon,  the 
Bear.  They  also  tell  us,  that  towards  the  support  of  the 
animals  honored  by  them  all  others  pay  the  proportion  as- 
signed them  by  the  laws,  but  that  those  that  inhabit  the 
country  of  Thebais  are  the  only  men  that  refuse  to  contri- 
bute any  thing,  because  they  believe  in  no  mortal  God,  but 
in  him  only  whom  they  call  Cneph,  who  is  ungotten  and 
immortal. 

22.  They  therefore  who  suppose  that,  because  many 
things  of  this  sort  are  both  related  and  shown  unto  travel- 
lers, they  are  but  so  many  commemorations  of  the  actions 
and  disasters  of  mighty  kings  and  tyrants  who,  by  reason 
of  their  eminent  valor  or  puissance,  wrote  the  title  of  di- 
vinity upon  their  fame,  and  afterwards  fell  into  great 


84 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


calamities  and  misfortunes,  — these,  I say,  make  use  of  the 
most  ready  way  of  eluding  the  story,  and  plausibly  enough 
remove  things  of  harsh  and  uncouth  sound  from  Gods  to 
men.  Nay,  I will  add  this  farther,  that  the  arguments  they 
use  are  fairly  enough  deduced  from  the  things  themselves 
related.  For  the  Egyptians  recount,  that  Mercury  was,  in 
regard  to  the  make  of  his  body,  with  one  arm  longer  than 
the  other,  and  that  Typhon  was  by  complexion  red,  Horus 
white,  and  Osiris  black,  as  if  they  had  been  indeed  nothing 
else  but  men.  They  moreover  style  Osiris  a commander, 
and  Canopus  a pilot,  from  whom  they  say  the  star  of  that 
name  was  denominated.  Also  the  ship  which  the  Greeks 
call  Argo  — being  the  image  of  Osiris’s  ark,  and  therefore, 
in  honor  of  it,  made  a constellation  — they  make  to  ride 
not  far  from  Orion  and  the  Dog ; whereof  the  one  they 
believe  to  be  sacred  to  Horus,  and  the  other  to  Isis. 

23.  But  I fear  this  would  be  to  stir  things  that  are  not 
to  be  stirred,  and  to  declare  war  not  only  (as  Simonides 
speaks)  against  length  of  time,  but  also  against  many  na- 
tions and  families  of  mankind,  whom  a religious  reverence 
towards  these  Gods  holds  fast  bound  like  men  astonished 
and  amazed.  And  this  would  be  no  other  than  going  about 
to  remove  so  great  and  venerable  names  from  heaven  to 
earth,  thereby  shaking  and  dissolving  that  worship  and 
persuasion  that  hath  entered  into  almost  all  men’s  consti- 
tutions from  their  very  birth,  and  opening  vast  doors  to  the 
Atheists’  faction,  who  convert  all  divine  matters  into  human, 
giving  also  a large  license  to  the  impostures  of  Euhemerus 
the  Messenian,  who  out  of  his  own  brain  contrived  certain 
memoirs  of  a most  incredible  and  imaginary  mythology, 
and  thereby  spread  all  manner  of  Atheism  throughout  the 
world.  This  he  did  by  describing  all  the  received  Gods 
under  the  style  of  generals,  sea-captains,  and  kings,  whom 
he  makes  to  have  lived  in  the  more  remote  and  ancient 
times,  and  to  be  recorded  in  golden  characters  in  a certain 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


85 


country  called  Panchon,  with  which  notwithstanding  never 
any  man,  either  Barbarian  or  Grecian,  had  the  good  for- 
tune to  meet,  except  Euhemerus  alone,  who  (it  seems) 
sailed  to  the  land  of  the  Panchoans  and  Triphy Ilians,  that 
neither  have  nor  ever  had  a being. 

24.  And  although  the  actions  of  Semiramis  are  sung 
among  the  Assyrians  as  very  great,  and  likewise  those  of 
Sesostris  in  Egypt,  and  the  Phrygians  to  this  very  day  style 
all  illustrious  and  strange  actions  manic , because  Manis, 
one  of  their  ancient  kings  (whom  some  call  Masdes)  was  a 
brave  and  mighty  person  ; and  although  Cyrus  enlarged  the 
empire  of  the  Persians,  and  Alexander  that  of  the  Macedoni- 
ans, within  a little  matter  of  the  world’s  end;  yet  have  they 
still  retained  the  names  and  memorials  of  gallant  princes. 
And  if  some,  puffed  up  with  excessive  vain-glory  (as  Plato 
speaks),  having  their  minds  enflamed  at  once  with  both 
youthful  blood  and  folly,  have  with  an  unruly  extravagancy 
taken  upon  them  the  style  of  Gods  and  had  temples  erected 
in  their  honor,  yet  this  opinion  of  them  flourished  but  for 
a short  season,  and  they  afterwards  underwent  the  blame 
of  great  vanity  and  arrogancy,  conjoined  with  the  highest 
impiety  and  wickedness  ; and  so, 

Like  smoke  they  flew  away  with  swift-paced  Fate ; * 

and  being  dragged  away  from  the  altars  like  fugitive  slaves, 
they  have  now  nothing  left  them  but  their  tombs  and  graves. 
Which  made  Antigonus  the  Elder,  when  one  Hermodotus 
had  in  his  poems  declared  him  to  be  son  to  the  Sun  and  a 
God,  to  say  to  him : Friend,  he  that  empties  my  close-stool- 
pan  knows  no  such  matter  of  me.  And  Lysippus  the 
carver  had  good  reason  to  quarrel  with  the  painter  Apelles 
for  drawing  Alexander’s  picture  with  a thunder-bolt  in 
his  hand,  whereas  himself  had  made  him  but  with  a 
spear,  which  (he  said)  was  natural  and  proper  for  him, 


* From  Empedocles. 


86 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


and  a weapon  the  glory  of  which  no  time  would  rob 
him  of. 

25.  Therefore  they  maintain  the  wiser  opinion,  who  hold 
that  the  things  here  storied  of  Typhon,  Osiris,  and  Isis 
were  not  the  events  of  Gods,  nor  yet  of  men,  but  of  cer- 
tain grand  Daemons,  whom  Plato,  Pythagoras,  Xenocrates, 
and  Chrysippus  (following  herein  the  opinion  of  the  most 
ancient  theologists)  affirm  to  be  of  greater  strength  than 
men,  and  to  transcend  our  nature  by  much  in  power,  but 
not  to  have  a divine  part  pure  and  unmixed,  but  such  as 
participates  of  both  the  soul’s  nature  and  the  body’s  sensa- 
tion, capable  of  receiving  both  pleasure  and  pain,  and  all 
the  passions  that  attend  these  mutations,  which  disorder 
some  of  them  more  and  others  of  them  less.  For  there 
are  divers  degrees  both  of  virtue  and  vice,  as  among  men, 
so  also  among  Daemons.  For  what  they  sing  about  among 
the  Greeks,  concerning  the  Giants  and  the  Titans,  and  of 
certain  horrible  actions  of  Saturn,  as  also  of  Python’s  com- 
bats with  Apollo,  of  the  flights  of  Bacchus,  and  the  ram- 
blings  of  Ceres,  come  nothing  short  of  the  relations  about 
Osiris  and  Typhon  and  others  such,  which  everybody  may 
lawfully  and  freely  hear  as  they  are  told  in  the  mythology. 
The  like  may  be  also  said  of  those  things  that,  being  veiled 
over  in  the  mystic  rites  and  sacred  ceremonies  of  initiation, 
are  therefore  kept  private  from  the  sight  and  hearing  of 
the  common  sort. 

26.  We  also  hear  Homer  often  calling  such  as  are  extra- 
ordinary good  “ Godlike,”  and  “ God’s  compeers,”  and  “ gifted 
with  wisdom  by  the  Gods.”  * But  the  epithet  derived  from 
Daemons  we  find  him  to  bestow  upon  the  good  and  bad 
indifferently,  as, 

“ Daemon-like  sir,  make  baste,  why  do  you  fear  the  Argives  thus  1 ’’ 

And  then  on  the  contrary, 

“ When  the  fourth  time  he  rushed  on  like  a Daemon ; ” 

* See  Odyss.  VI.  12;  II.  XIII.  810 ; V.  438 ; IV.  31. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


87 


and  again  where  Jupiter  speaks  thus  to  Juno : 

Daemonial  dame,  what  hath  poor  Priam  done 
To  anger  you  so  much,  or  what  his  sons, 

That  you  resolve  fair  Ilium’s  overthrow, 

And  your  revengeful  purpose  won’t  forego  t 

where  he  seems  to  make  Daemons  to  be  of  a mixed  and 
unequal  temper  and  inclination.  Whence  it  is  that  Plato 
assigns  to  the  Olympic  Gods  dexter  things  and  odd  num- 
bers, and  the  opposite  to  these  to  Daemons.  And  Xeno- 
crates  also  is  of  opinion,  that  such  days  as  are  commonly 
accounted  unlucky,  and  those  holy  days  in  which  are  used 
scourgings,  beatings  of  breasts,  fastings,  uncouth  words,  or 
obscene  speeches,  do  not  appertain  to  the  honor  of  Gods 
or  of  good  Daemons ; but  he  thinks  there  are  in  the  air, 
that  environs  us  about,  certain  great  and  mighty  natures, 
but  withal  morose  and  tetrical  ones,  that  take  pleasure  in 
such  things  as  these,  and  if  they  have  them,  they  do  no 
farther  mischief.  On  the  other  side,  the  beneficent  ones 
are  styled  by  Hesiod  “ Holy  Daemons,”  and  “ Guardians 
of  Mankind,”  and, 

Givers  of  wealth,  this  royal  gift  they  have.  * 

And  Plato  calls  this  sort  the  interpreting  and  ministering 
kind,  and  saith,  they  are  in  a middle  place  betwixt  the 
Gods  and  men,  and  that  they  carry  up  men’s  prayers  and 
•addresses  thither,  and  bring  from  thence  hither  prophetic 
answers  and  distributions  of  good  things.  Empedocles 
saith  also  that  Daemons  undergo  severe  punishments  for 
their  evil  deeds  and  misdemeanors  : — 

The  force  of  air  them  to  the  sea  pursues ; 

The  sea  again  upon  the  land  them  spews ; 

From  land  to  th’  sun’s  unwearied  beams  they’re  hurled, 

Thence  far  into  the  realm  of  aether  whirled, 

Received  by  each  in  turn,  by  all  abhorred ; 

until,  being  thus  chastened  and  purified,  they  are  again 
admitted  to  that  region  and  order  that  suits  their  nature. 

* Hesiod,  Works  and  Days,  126. 


88 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


27.  Now  such  things  and  such  like  things  as  these  they 
tell  us  are  here  meant  concerning  Typhon  ; how  he,  moved 
with  envy  and  spite,  perpetrated  most  wicked  and  horrible 
things,  and  putting  all  things  into  confusion,  filled  both 
land  and  sea  with  infinite  calamities  and  evils,  and  after- 
wards suffered  for  it  condign  punishment.  But  now  the 
avenger  of  Osiris,  who  was  both  his  sister  and  wife,  having 
extinguished  and  put  an  end  to  the  rage  and  madness  of 
Typhon,  did  not  forget  the  many  contests  and  difficulties 
she  had  encountered  withal,  nor  her  wanderings  and  travels 
to  and  fro,  so  far  as  to  commit  her  many  acts  both  of  wis- 
dom and  courage  to  utter  oblivion  and  silence ; but  she 
mixed  them  with  their  most  sacred  rites  of  initiation,  and 
together  consecrated  them  as  resemblances,  dark  hints, 
and  imitations  of  her  former  sufferings,  both  as  an  example 
and  an  encouragement  of  piety  for  all  men  and  women  that 
should  hereafter  fall  under  the  like  hard  circumstances  and 
distresses.  And  now  both  herself  and  Osiris  being  for 
their  virtue  changed  from  good  Daemons  into  Gods,  as 
were  Hercules  and  Bacchus  after  them,  they  have  (and  not 
without  just  grounds)  the  honors  of  both  Gods  and  Dae- 
mons joined  together,  their  power  being  indeed  everywhere 
great,  but  yet  more  especial  and  eminent  in  things  upon 
and  under  the  earth.  For  Serapis  they  say  is  no  other 
than  Pluto,  and  Isis  the  same  with  Proserpine  ; as  Arche- 
machus  of  Euboea  informs  us,  as  also  Heraclides  of 
Pontus,  who  delivers  it  as  his  opinion  that  the  oracle  at 
Canopus  appertains  to  Pluto. 

28.  Besides,  Ptolemaeus  Soter  saw  in  a dream  the  colossus 
of  Pluto  that  stood  at  Sinope  (although  he  knew  it  not,  nor 
had  ever  seen  what  shape  it  was  of)  calling  upon  him,  and 
bidding  him  to  convey  it  speedily  away  to  Alexandria. 
And  as  he  was  ignorant  and  at  a great  loss  where  it  should 
be  found,  and  was  telling  his  dream  to  his  familiars,  there 
was  found  by  chance  a certain  fellow  that  had  been  a 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


89 


general  rambler  in  all  parts  (bis  name  was  Sosibius),  who 
affirmed  be  bad  seen  at  Sinope  such  a colossus  as  the  king 
bad  dreamt  of.  He  therefore  sent  Soteles  and  Bacchus 
thither,  who  in  a long  time  and  with  much  difficulty,  and 
not  without  the  special  help  of  a Divine  Providence,  stole 
it  away  and  brought  it  to  Alexandria.  When  therefore  it 
was  conveyed  thither  and  viewed,  Timothy  the  expositor 
and  Manetho  the  Sebennite,  concluding  from  the  Cerberus 
and  serpent  that  stood  by  it  that  it  must  be  the  statue  of 
Pluto,  persuaded  Ptolemy  it  could  appertain  to  no  other  God 
but  Serapis ; for  he  had  not  this  name  when  he  came  from 
thence,  but  after  he  was  removed  to  Alexandria,  he  ac- 
quired the  name  of  Serapis,  which  is  the  Egyptian  for 
Pluto.  And  when  Heraclitus  the  physiologist  saith,  Pluto 
and  Bacchus  are  one  and  the  same,  in  whose  honor  men 
are  mad  and  rave,  we  are  thus  led  to  the  same  doctrine. 
For  those  that  will  needs  have  Pluto  to  be  the  body,  the 
soul  being  as  it  were  distracted  and  drunken  in  it,  do  in 
my  opinion  make  use  of  an  over  fine  and  subtle  allegory. 
It  is  therefore  better  to  make  Osiris  to  be  the  same  with 
Bacchus,  and  Serapis  again  with  Osiris,  he  obtaining  that 
appellation  since  the  change  of  his  nature.  For  which 
reason  Serapis  is  a common  God  to  all,  as  they  who  par- 
ticipate of  divine  matters  best  understand. 

29.  For  there' is  no  reason  we  should  attend  to  the  writ- 
ings of  the  Phrygians,  which  say  that  one  Charopos  was 
daughter  to  Hercules,  and  that  Typhon  was  son  to  Isaea- 
cus,  son  of  Hercules ; no  more  than  we  have  not  to  con- 
temn Phylarchus,  when  he  writes  that  Bacchus  first  brought 
two  bullocks  out  of  India  into  Egypt,  and  that  the  name 
of  the  one  was  Apis,  and  the  other  Osiris  ; but  that  Serapis 
is  the  name  of  him  who  orders  the  universe,  from  ou(qw, 
which  some  use  for  beautifying  and  setting  forth.  For 
these  sentiments  of  Phylarchus’s  are  very  foolish  and  ab- 
surd; but  theirs  are  much  more  so  who  affirm  Serapis  to 


90 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


be  no  God  at  all,  but  only  the  name  of  the  chest  in  which 
Apis  lies ; and  that  there  are  at  Memphis  certain  great 
gates  of  copper,  called  the  gates  of  oblivion  and  lamenta- 
tion, which,  being  opened  when  they  bury  the  Apis,  make 
a doleful  and  hideous  noise  ; which  (say  they)  is  the  reason 
that,  when  we  hear  any  sort  of  copper  instrument  sound- 
ing, we  are  presently  startled  and  seized  with  fear.  But 
they  judge  more  discreetly  who  suppose  his  name  to  be 
derived  from  osvsodcu  or  oovaOui  (which  signifies  to  be  borne 
along ) and  so  make  it  to  mean,  that  the  motion  of  the 
universe  is  hurried  and  borne  along  violently.  But  the 
greatest  part  of  the  priests  do  say  that  Osiris  and  Apis  are 
both  of  them  but  one  complex  being,  while  they  tell  us  in 
their  sacred  commentaries  and  sermons  that  we  are  to  look 
upon  the  Apis  as  the  beautiful  image  of  the  soul  of  Osiris. 
I,  for  my  part,  do  believe  that,  if  the  name  of  Serapis  be 
Egyptian,  it  may  not  improperly  denote  joy  and  merri- 
ment, because  I find  the  Egyptians  term  the  festival  which 
we  call  merry-making  in  their  language  sairei.  Besides,  I 
find  Plato  to  be  of  opinion,  that  Pluto  is  called  Hades 
because  he  is  the  son  of  A!8w  (which  is  Modesty ) and  be- 
cause he  is  a gentle  God  to  such  as  are  conversant  with 
him.  And  as  among  the  Egyptians  there  are  a great  many 
other  names  that  are  also  definitions  of  the  things  they 
express,  so  they  call  that  place  whither  they  believe  men’s 
souls  to  go  after  death,  Amenthes,  which  signifies  in  their 
language  the  receiver  and  the  giver.  But  whether  this  be 
one  of  those  names  that  have  been  anciently  brought  over 
and  transplanted  out  of  Greece  into  Egypt,  we  shall  con- 
sider some  other  time ; but  at  present  we  must  hasten  to 
despatch  the  remaining  parts  of  the  opinion  here  handled. 

30.  Osiris  therefore  and  Isis  passed  from  the  number  of 
good  Daemons  into  that  of  Gods  ; but  the  power  of  Typhon 
being  much  obscured  and  weakened,  and  himself  besides 
in  great  dejection  of  mind  and  in  agony  and,  as  it  were,  at 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


91 


the  last  gasp,  they  therefore  one  while  use  certain  sacri- 
fices to  comfort  and  appease  his  mind,  and  another  while 
again  have  certain  solemnities  wherein  they  abase  and 
affront  him,  both  by  mishandling  and  abusing  such  men  as 
they  find  to  have  red  hair,  and  by  breaking  the  neck  of  an 
ass  down  a precipice  (as  do  the  Coptites),  because  Typhon 
was  red-haired  and  of  the  ass’s  complexion.  Moreover, 
those  of  Busiris  and  Lycopolis  never  make  any  use  of 
trumpets,  because  they  give  a sound  like  that  of  asses. 
And  they  altogether  esteem  the  ass  as  an  animal  not  clean 
but  daemoniac,  because  of  its  resemblance  to  Typhon ; 
and  when  they  make  cakes  at  their  sacrifices  upon  the 
months  of  Payni  and  Phaophi,  they  impress  upon  them  an 
ass  bound.  Also,  when  they  do  their  sacrifices  to  the  Sun, 
they  enjoin  such  as  perform  worship  to  that  God  neither 
to  wear  gold  nor  to  give  fodder  to  an  ass.  It  is  also  most 
apparent  that  the  Pythagoreans  look  upon  Typhon  as  a 
daemoniac  power ; for  they  say  he  was  produced  in  an 
even  proportion  of  numbers,  to  wit,  in  that  of  fifty-six. 
And  again,  they  say  that  the  property  of  the  triangle 
appertains  to  Pluto,  Bacchus,  and  Mars  ; of  the  quadrangle 
to  Bhea,  Venus,  Ceres,  Vesta,  and  Juno  ; of  the  figure  of 
twelve  angles  to  J upiter ; and  of  the  figure  of  fifty-six 
angles  to  Typhon  ; — as  Eudoxus  relates. 

31.  And  because  the  Egyptians  are  of  opinion  that 
Typhon  was  bom  of  a red  complexion,  they  are  therefore 
used  to  devote  to  him  such  of  the  neat  kind  as  they  find 
to  be  of  a red  color ; and  their  observation  herein  is  so 
very  nice  and  strict  that,  if  they  perceive  the  beast  to  have 
but  one  hair  about  it  that  is  either  black  or  white,  they 
account  it  unfit  for  sacrifice.  For  they  hold  that  what  is 
fit  to  be  made  a sacrifice  must  not  be  of  a thing  agreeable 
to  the  Gods,  but  contrariwise,  such  things  as  contain  the 
souls  of  ungodly  and  wicked  men  transformed  into  their 
shapes.  Wherefore  in  the  more  ancient  times  they  were 


92 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


wont,  after  they  had  pronounced  a solemn  curse  upon  the 
head  of  the  sacrifice,  and  had  cut  it  off,  to  fling  it  into  the 
river  Nile ; but  now  they  distribute  it  among  strangers. 
Those  also  among  the  priests  that  were  termed  Sphragistae 
or  Sealers  were  wont  to  seal  the  beast  that  was  to  be  of- 
fered ; and  the  engraving  of  their  seal  was  (as  Castor  tells 
us)  a man  upon  his  knees  with  his  hands  tied  behind  him, 
and  a knife  set  under  his  throat.  They  believe,  moreover, 
that  the  ass  suffers  for  being  like  him  (as  hath  been  al- 
ready spoken  of),  as  much  for  the  stupidity  and  sensualness 
of  his  disposition  as  for  the  redness  of  his  color.  Where- 
fore, because  of  all  the  Persian  monarchs  they  had  the 
greatest  aversion  for  Ochus,  as  looking  upon  him  as  a 
villanous  and  abominable  person,  they  gave  him  the  nick- 
name of  the  ass ; upon  which  he  replied : But  this  ass 
shall  dine  upon  your  ox^  And  so  he  slaughtered  the  Apis, 
as  Dinon  relates  to  us  in  his  history.  As  for  those  that 
tell  us  that  Typhon  was  seven  days  flying  from  the  battle 
upon  the  back  of  an  ass,  and  having  narrowly  escaped 
with  his  life,  afterwards  begat  two  sons  called  Hierosoly- 
mus  and  Judaeus,  they  are  manifestly  attempting,  as  is 
shown  by  the  very  matter,  to  wrest  into  this  fable  the 
relations  of  the  Jews. 

32.  And  so  much  for  the  allegories  and  secret  meanings 
which  this  head  affords  us.  And  now  we  begin  at  another 
head,  which  is  the  account  of  those  who  seem  to  offer  at 
something  more  philosophical ; and  of  these  we  will  first 
consider  the  more  simple  and  plain  sort.  And  they  are 
those  that  tell  us  that,  as  the  Greeks  are  used  to  allegorize 
Kronos  (or  Saturn)  into  chronos  (lime),  and  Hera  (or  Juno) 
into  aer  (air)  and  also  to  resolve  the  generation  of  Vulcan 
into  the  change  of  air  into  fire,  so  also  among  the  Egyp- 
tians, Osiris  is  the  river  Nile,  who  accompanies  with  Isis, 
which  is  the  earth ; and  Typhon  is  the  sea,  into  which  the 
Nile  falling  is  thereby  destroyed  and  scattered,  excepting 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIKIS. 


93 


only  that  part  of  it  which  the  earth  receives  and  drinks 
up,  by  means  whereof  she  becomes  prolific.  There  is  also 
a kind  of  a sacred  lamentation  used  to  Saturn,  wherein 
they  bemoan  him  “ who  was  born  in  the  left  side  of  the 
world,  and  died  in  the  right.”  For  the  Egyptians  believe 
the  eastern  part  to  be  the  world’s  face,  and  the  northern 
its  right  hand,  and  the  southern  its  left.  And  therefore 
the  river  Nile,  holding  its  course  from  the  southern  parts 
towards  the  northern,  may  justly  be  said  to  have  its  birth 
in  the  left  side  and  its  death  in  the  right ; for  which 
reason,  the  priests  account  the  sea  abominable,  and  call 
salt  Typhon’s  foam.  And  it  is  one  of  the  things  they  look 
upon  as  unlawful  and  prohibited  to  them,  to  use  salt  at 
their  tables.  And  they  use  not  to  salute  any  pilots,  be- 
cause they  have  to  do  with  the  sea.  And  this  is  not  the 
least  reason  of  their  so  great  aversedness  to  fish.  They 
also  make  the  picture  of  a fish  to  denote  hatred.  And 
therefore  at  the  temple  of  Minerva  at  Sais  there  was  carved 
in  the  porch  an  infant  and  an  old  man,  and  after  them  a 
hawk,  and  then  a fish,  and  after  all  a hippopotamus,  which, 
in  a symbolical  manner,  contained  this  sentence : O ! ye 
that  are  born  and  that  die,  God  hateth  impudence.  From 
whence  it  is  plain,  that  by  a child  and  an  old  man  they 
express  our  being  born  and  our  dying ; by  a hawk,  God ; 
by  a fish,  hatred  (by  reason  of  the  sea,  as  hath  been  before 
spoken);  and  by  a river-horse,  impudence,  because  (as 
they  say)  he  killeth  his  sire  and  forceth  his  dam.  That 
also  which  the  Pythagoreans  are  used  to  say,  that  the  sea 
is  the  tear  of  Saturn,  may  seem  to  hint  out  to  us  that  it  is 
not  pure  nor  congenial  with  our  race. 

33.  These  then  are  the  things  that  may  be  uttered  with- 
out doors  and  in  public,  they  containing  nothing  but  mat- 
ters of  common  cognizance.  But  now  the  most  learned 
and  reserved  of  the  priests  do  not  term  the  Nile  only  Osi- 
ris, and  the  sea  Typhon;  but  in  general,  the  whole  princi- 


94 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


pie  and  faculty  of  rendering  moist  they  call  Osiris,  as 
believing  it  to  be  the  cause  of  generation  and  the  very 
substance  of  the  seminal  moisture.  And  on  the  other  hand, 
whatever  is  a-dust,  fiery,  or  any  way  drying  and  repugnant 
to  wet,  they  call  Typhon.  And  therefore,  because  they  be- 
lieve he  was  of  a red  and  sallow  color  when  he  was  born, 
they  do  not  greatly  care  to  meet  with  men  of  such  looks 
nor  willingly  converse  with  them.  On  the  other  side  again 
they  report  that  Osiris,  when  he  was  born,  was  of  a black 
complexion,  because  that  all  water  renders  earth,  clothes, 
and  clouds  black,  when  mixed  with  them  ; and  the  mois- 
ture also  that  is  in  young  persons  makes  their  hair  black ; 
but  grayness,  like  a sort  of  paleness,  comes  up  thiough 
over  much  draught  upon  such  as  are  now  past  their  vigor 
and  begin  to  decline  in  years.  In  like  manner,  the  spiing 
time  is  gay,  fecund,  and  very  agreeable ; but  the  autumn, 
through  defect  of  moisture,  is  both  destructive  to  plants 
and  sickly  to  men.  Moreover  the  ox  called  Mnevis,  which 
is  kept  at  Heliopolis  (and  is  sacred  to  Osiris,  and  judged 
by  some  to  be  the  sire  of  Apis),  is  of  a coal-black  color, 
and  is  honored  in  the  second  place  after  Apis.  To  which 
we  may  add,  that  they  call  Egypt  (which  is  one  of  the 
blackest  soils  in  the  world)  as  they  do  the  black  part  of 
the  eye,  Chemia.  They  also  liken  it  to  the  heart,  b)  rea- 
son of  its  great  warmth  and  moisture,  and  because  it  is 
mostly  enclosed  by  and  removed  towards  the  left  (that  is, 
the  southern)  part  of  the  earth,  as  the  heart  is  with  respect 
to  a man’s  body. 

34.  They  believe  also  that  the  sun  and  moon  do  not  go 
in  chariots,  hut  sail  about  the  world  perpetually  in  certain 
boats  ; hinting  hereby  at  their  feeding  upon  and  springing 
first  out  of  moisture.  They  are  likewise  of  the  opinion 
that  Homer  (as  well  as  Thales)  had  been  instructed  by 
the  Egyptians,  which  made  him  affirm  water  to  be  the 
spring  and  first  original  of  all  things  ; for  that  Oceanus 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


95 


is  t-lie  same  with  Osiris,  and  Tethys  with  Isis,  so  named 
from  rhdij,  a nurse , because  she  is  the  mother  and  nurse 
of  all  things.  For  the  Grecians  call  the  emission  of  the 
genital  humor  dnovala,  and  carnal  knowledge  awovaia : they 
also  call  a son  viog,  from  vSwq,  water , and  vocu,  to  wet ; and 
likewise  Bacchus  vrjg,  the  wetter , they  looking  upon  him  as 
the  lord  of  the  humid  nature,  he  being  no  other  than 
Osiris.  For  Hellanicus  hath  set  him  down  Hysiris,  affirm- 
ing that  he  heard  him  so  pronounced  by  the  priests ; for  so 
he  hath  written  the  name  of  this  God  all  along  in  his  his- 
tory, and  that,  in  my  opinion,  not  without  good  reason, 
derived  as  well  from  his  nature  as  his  invention. 

35.  And  that  therefore  he  is  one  and  the  same  with 
Bacchus,  who  should  better  know  than  yourself,  Dame 
Clea,  who  are  not  only  president  of  the  Delphic  prophet- 
esses, but  have  been  also,  in  right  of  both  your  par- 
ents, devoted  to  the  Osiriac  rites  1 And  if,  for  the  sake  of 
others,  we  shall  think  ourselves  obliged  to  lay  down  testi- 
monies for  the  proof  of  our  present  assertion,  we  shall 
notwithstanding  remit  those  secrets  that  must  not  be  re- 
vealed to  their  proper  place.  But  now  the  things  which 
the  priests  do  publicly  at  the  interment  of  the  Apis, 
when  they  carry  his  body  on  a raft  to  be  buried,  do  noth- 
ing differ  from  the  procession  of  Bacchus.  For  they  hang 
about  them  the  skins  of  hinds,  and  carry  branches  in  their 
hands,  and  use  the  same  kind  of  shoutings  and  gesticula- 
tions that  the  ecstatics  do  at  the  inspired  dances  of  Bac- 
chus. For  which  reason  also  many  of  the  Greeks  make 
statues  of  Dionysos  Tauromorphos  (or  Bacchus  in  the  form 
of  a bull).  And  the  Elean  women,  in  their  ordinary  form 
of  prayer,  beseech  the  God  to  come  to  them  with  his  ox’s 
foot.  The  Argives  also  have  a Bacchus  named  Bougenes 
(or  ox-gotten ) ; and  they  call  him  up  out  of  the  waters  by 
sounding  of  trumpets,  flinging  a young  lamb  into  the 
abyss  for  him  that  keeps  the  door  there ; and  these  trum- 


96 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


pets  they  hide  within  their  thyrsi  (or  green  boughs),  as 
Socrates,  in  his  Treatise  of  Rituals,  relates.  Likewise  the 
tales  about  the  Titans,  and  what  they  call  the  Mystic 
Night,  have  a strange  agreement  with  what  they  tell  us  of 
the  discerptions,  resurrections,  and  regenerations  of  Osiris  ; 
as  also  what  relates  to  their  sepulchres.  For  not  only  the 
Egyptians  (as  hath  been  already  spoken)  do  show  in  many 
several  places  the  chests  in  which  Osiris  lies  ; but  the  Del- 
phians  also  believe  that  the  relics  of  Bacchus  are  laid  up 
with  them  just  by  the  oracle-place  ; and  the  Hosii  (or  holy 
men)  perform  a secret  sacrifice  within  the  temple  of  Apollo, 
when  the  Thyiades  rouse  the  God  of  the  fan  (as  they  call 
him).  Now  that  the  Greeks  do  not  esteem  Bacchus  as  the 
lord  and  president  of  wine  only,  but  also  of  the  whole 
humid  nature,  Pindar  alone  is  a sufficient  witness,  when 
he  saith, 

May  joyous  Bacchus  send  increase  of  fruit, 

The  chaste  autumnal  light,  to  all  my  trees. 

For  which  cause  it  is  forbidden  to  such  as  worship  Osiris, 
either  to  destroy  a fruit-tree  or  to  stop  up  a well. 

36.  And  they  call  not  only  the  Nile,  but  in  general 
every  humid,  the  efflux  of  Osiris.  And  a pitcher  of 
water  goes  always  first  in  their  sacred  processions,  in 
honor  of  the  God.  And  they  make  the  figure  of  a fig- 
leaf  both  for  the  king  and  the  southern  climate,  which  fig- 
leaf  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  watering  and  fructifying  of 
the  universe,  for  it  seems  to  bear  some  resemblance  in  its 
make  to  the  virilities  of  a man.  Moreover,  when  they 
keep  the  feast  of  the  Pamylia,  which  is  a Phallic  or  Pri- 
apeian  one  (as  was  said  before),  they  expose  to  view  and 
carry  about  a certain  image  of  a man  with  a threefold 
privity  ; for  this  God  is  a first  origin,  and  every  first  origin 
doth  by  its  fecundity  multiply  what  proceeds  from  it.  And 
we  are  commonly  used  instead  of  “ many  times  ” to  say 
“ thrice,”  as  “ thrice  happy,”  and, 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


97 


As  many  bonds  thrice  told,  and  infinite.* 

Unless  (by  Jove)  we  are  to  understand  the  word  treble  as 
spoken  by  the  ancients  in  a proper  sense.  For  the  humid 
nature,  being  in  the  beginning  the  chief  source  and  origin  of 
the  universe,  must  of  consequence  produce  the  three  first 
bodies,  — the  earth,  air,  and  fire.  For  the  story  which  is 
here  told  by  way  of  surplusage  to  the  tale  — how  that  Ty- 
phon  threw  the  privity  of  Osiris  into  the  river,  and  that 
Isis  could  not  find  it,  and  therefore  fashioned  and  prepared 
the  resemblance  and  effigies  of  it,  and  appointed  it  to  be 
woi shipped  and  carried  about  in  their  processions,  like  as 
m the  Grecian  Phallephoria  — amounts  but  to  this,  to  in- 
struct and  teach  us  that  the  prolific  and  generative  proper- 
ty of  this  God  had  moisture  for  its  first  matter,  and  that  by 
means  of  moisture  it  came  to  immix  itself  with  things 
capable  of  generation.  We  have  also  another  story  told 
us  by  the  Egyptians,  — how  that  once  Apopis,  brother  to 
the  Sun,  fell  at  variance  with  Jupiter  and  made  war  upon 
him;  but  Jupiter,  entering  into  an  alliance  with  Osiris 
and  by  his  means  overthrowing  his  enemy  in  a pitched 
battle,  afterwards  adopted  him  for  his  son  and  gave  him 
the  name  of  Dionysus.  It  is  easy  to  show  that  this  fabu- 
lar  relation  borders  also  upon  the  verity  of  physical  sci- 
ence. For  the  Egyptians  call  the  wind  Jupiter,  with  which 
the  parching  and  fiery  property  makes  war ; and  though 
this  be  not  the  sun,  yet  hath  it  some  cognation  with  the 
sun.  But  now  moisture,  extinguishing  the  excessiveness 
of  drought,  increases  and  strengthens  the  exhalations  of 
wet,  which  give  food  and  vigor  to  the  air. 

37.  Moreover,  the  ivy,  which  the  Greeks  use  to  conse- 
crate to  Bacchus,  is  called  by  the  Egyptians  chenosiris, 
which  word  (as  they  tell  us)  signifies  in  their  language 
Osiris  s tree.  Ariston  therefore,  who  wrote  of  the  colony 
of  the  Athenians,  lighted  upon  a certain  epistle  of  Alex- 


VOL.  IV. 


* Odyss.  VIII.  340. 
7 


98 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


archils,  in  which  it  is  related  that  Bacchus,  the  son  of  Ju- 
piter and  Isis,  is  not  called  Osiris  by  the  Egyptians,  but 
Arsaphes,  which  denotes  valiant.  This  is  hinted  at  by  Her- 
maeus  also,  in  his  first  book  about  the  Egyptians  ; for  he 
saith,  the  name  of  Osiris  is  to  be  interpreted  stout.  I shall 
now  pass  by  Mnaseas,  who  joins  Bacchus,  Osins,  and  Seia- 
pis  together,  and  makes  them  the  same  with  Epaplius. 

I shall  also  omit  Anticlides,  who  saith  that  Isis  was  the 
daughter  of  Prometheus,  and  that  she  was  married  to  Bac- 
chus. For  the  fore-mentioned  proprieties  of  their  festivals 
and  sacrifices  afford  us  a much  more  clear  evidence  than 

the  authorities  of  writers.  , ,,  o 

38  They  believe  likewise  that  of  all  the  stars,  the 
ins  (or  Dog)  is  proper  to  Isis,  because  it  bringeth  on  the 
flowing  of  the  Nile.  They  also  pay  divine  honor  to  the 
lion,  and  adorn  the  gates  of  their  temples  with  the  yawn- 
ing mouths  of  lions,  because  the  Nile  then  overflows  its 

banks, 

When  first  the  mounting  sun  the  Lion  meets.* 

And  as  they  term  the  Nile  the  efflux  of  Osiris,  so  they 
hold  and  esteem  the  earth  for  the  body  of  Isis  ; and  not  all 
of  it  either,  but  that  part  only  which  the  Nile,  as  it  were, 
leaps  over,  and  thereby  impregnates  and  mixes  with  it. 
And  by  this  amorous  congress  they  produce  Horns.  Non 
this  Horus  is  that  Hora,  or  sweet  season  and  just  temper- 
ament of  the  ambient  air,  which  noimsheth  and  preseneth 
all  things ; and  they  report  him  to  have  been  nursed  by 
Latona  in  the  marshy  grounds  about  Buto  because  moi 
and  watery  land  best  feeds  those  exhaled  vapors  which 
quench  and  relax  drought  and  parching  heat.  But  those 
parts  of  the  country  which  are  outmost  and  upon  the  con- 
fines and  sea-coast  they  call  Nephthys ; and  therefore  they 
give  her  the  name  of  Teleutaea  (or  the  outmost)  and  repo  t 
her  to  be  married  to  Typhon.  When  therefore  the  Nile 

* From  Aratus. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


99 


is  excessive  great,  and  so  far  passes  its  ordinary  bounds 
that  it  approaches  to  those  that  inhabit  the  outmost  quar- 
ters, they  call  this  Osiris’s  accompanying  with  Neplithys, 
found  out  by  the  springing  up  of  plants  thereupon,  whereof 
the  melilot  is  one  ; which  (as  the  story  tells  us),  being 
dropped  behind  and  left  there,  gave  Typhon  to  understand 
the  wrong  that  had  been  done  to  his  bed.  Which  made 
them  say  that  Isis  had  a lawful  son  called  Horus,  and 
Neplithys  a bastard  called  Anubis.  And  indeed  they  re- 
cord in  the  successions  of  their  kings,  that  Neplithys  being 
married  to  Typhon  was  at  first  barren.  Now  if  they  do 
not  mean  this  of  a woman  but  of  a Goddess,  they  must 
needs  hint  that  the  earth,  by  reason  of  its  solidity,  is  in  its 
own  nature  unfruitful  and  barren. 

39.  And  the  conspiracy  and  usurpation  of  Typhon  will 
be  the  power  of  the  drought,  which  then  prevails  and  dis- 
sipates that  generative  moisture  which  both  begets  the  Nile 
and  increases  it.  And  the  queen  of  Ethiopia,  that  abetted 
his  quarrel,  will  denote  the  southern  winds  that  come  from 
Ethiopia.  For  when  these  come  to  overpower  the  Etesian 
(or  anniversary)  winds  which  drive  the  clouds  towards 
Ethiopia,  and  by  that  means  prevent  those  showers  of  ram 
which  should  augment  the  Nile  from  discharging  them- 
selves down,  Typhon  then  being  rampant  scorclieth  all, 
and  being  wholly  master  of  the  Nile,  which  now  through 
weakness  and  debility  draws  in  its  head  and  takes  a con- 
trary course,  he  next  thrusts  him  hollow  and  sunk  as  he  is 
into  the  sea.  For  the  story  that  is  told  us  of  the  closing 
up  of  Osiris  in  a chest  seems  to  me  to  be  nothing  else  but 
an  imitation  of  the  withdrawing  and  disappearing  of  the 
water.  For  which  reason  they  tell  us  that  Osiris  was  miss-, 
ing  upon  the  month  of  Athyr ; at  which  time  the  Etesian 
winds  being  wholly  ceased,  the  Nile  returns  to  his  channel, 
and  the  country  looks  bare ; the  night  also  growing  longer, 
the  darkness  increases,  and  so  the  power  of  light  fades 


100 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


away  and  is  overcome.  And  as  the  priests  act  several 
other  melancholy  things  upon  this  occasion,  so  they  cover 
a gilded  cow  with  a black  linen  pall,  and  thus  expose  her 
to  public  view  at  the  mourning  of  the  Goddess,  for  four 
days  together,  beginning  at  the  seventeenth  of  the  month. 
For  the  things  they  mourn  for  are  also  four;  the  first 
whereof  is  the  falling  and  recess  of  the  river  Nile ; the 
second,  because  the  northern  winds  are  then  quite  sup- 
pressed by  the  southern  overpowering  them;  the  third, 
because  the  day  is  grown  shorter  than  the  night ; and  the 
last  and  chiefest  of  all,  the  barrenness  of  the  earth,  to- 
gether with  the  nakedness  of  the  trees,  which  then  cast 
their  leaves.  And  on  the  nineteenth  day  at  night  they  go 
down  to  the  sea-side,  and  the  priest  and  sacred  livery  bring 
forth  the  chest,  having  within  it  a little  golden  ark  into 
which  they  pour  fresh  and  potable  water,  and  all  that  are 
there  present  give  a great  shout  for  joy  that  Osiris  is  now 
found.  Then  they  take  fertile  mould,  and  stir  it  about  in 
that  water,  and  when  they  have  mixed  with  it  several  very 
costly  odors  and  spices,  they  form  it  into  a little  image,  in 
fashion  like  a crescent,  and  then  dress  it  up  in  fine  clothes 
and  adorn  it,  intimating  hereby  that  they  believe  these 
Gods  to  be  the  substance  of  earth  and  water. 

40.  But  Isis  again  recovering  Osiris,  and  rearing  up 
Horus,  made  strong  by  exhalations,  mists,  and  clouds, 
Typhon  was  indeed  reduced,  but  not  executed ; for  the 
Goddess  who  is  sovereign  over  the  earth  would  not  suffer 
the  opposite  nature  to  wet  to  be  utterly  extinguished,  but 
loosed  it  and  let  it  go,  being  desirous  the  mixture  should 
continue.  For  it  would  be  impossible  for  the  world  to  be 
complete  and  perfect,  if  the  property  of  fire  should  fail 
*and  be  wanting.  And  as  these  things  are  not  spoken  by 
them  without  a considerable  show  of  reason,  so  neither 
have  we  reason  wholly  to  contemn  this  other,  account  which 
they  give  us ; which  is,  that  Typhon  in  the  more  ancient 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


101 


times  was  master  of  Osiris’s  portion.  For  (say  they)  Egypt 
was  once  all  sea.  For  which  reason  it  is  found  at  this  clay 
to  have  abundance  of  fish-shells,  both  in  its  mines  and  on 
its  mountains.  And  besides  that,  all  the  springs  and  wells 
(which  in  that  country  are  extreme  numerous)  have  in 
them  a salt  and  brackish  water,  as  if  some  remainder  of 
the  ancient  sea  had  run  thither,  to  be  laid  up  in  store.  But 
in  process  of  time,  Horus  got  the  upper  hand  of  Typhon ; 
that  is,  there  happened  such  an  opportunity  of  sudden  and 
tempestuous  showers  of  rain,  that  the  Nile  pushed  the  sea 
out,  and  discovered  the  champaign  land,  and  afterwards 
filled  it  up  with  continual  profusions  of  mud ; all  which 
hath  the  testimony  of  sense  to  confirm  it.  For  we  see  at 
this  day  that,  as  the  river  drives  down  fresh  mud  and  lays 
new  earth  unto  the  old,  the  sea  by  degrees  gives  back  and 
the  salt  water  runs  off,  as  the  parts  in  the  bottom  gam 
height  by  new  accessions  of  mud.  We  see,  moreover,  that 
the  Pharos,  which  Homer  observed  in  his  time  to  be  a 
whole  day’s  sail  from  Egypt,  is  now  a part  of  it ; not  be- 
cause it  changed  its  place  or  came  nearer  the  shore  than 
before,  but  because,  the  river  still  adding  to  and  increasing 
the  main  land,  the  intermediate  sea  was  obliged  to  retire. 

To  speak  the  truth,  these  things  are  not  far  unlike  the 
explications  which  the  Stoics  used  to  give  of  the  Gods. 
For  they  also  say  that  the  generative  and  nutritive 
property  of  the  air  is  called  Bacchus  ; the  striking  and 
dividing  property,  Hercules  ; the  receptive  property,  Am- 
mon ; that  which  passes  through  the  earth  and  fruits, 
Ceres  and  Proserpine ; and  that  which  passes  through  the 
sea,  Neptune. 

41.  But  those  who  join  with  these  physiological  ac- 
counts certain  mathematical  matters  relating  to  astronomy 
suppose  Typhon  to  mean  the  world  of  the  sun,  and  Osiris 
that  of  the  moon ; for  that  the  moon,  being  endued  with  a 
prolific  and  moistening  light,  is  very  favorable  both  to  the 


102 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


breeding  of  animals  and  the  springing  up  of  plants  ; but 
the  sun,  having  in  it  an  immoderate  and  excessive  fire, 
burns  and  dries  up  such  things  as  grow  up  and  look  green, 
and  by  its  scorching  heat  renders  a great  part  of  the  world 
wholly  uninhabitable,  and  very  often  gets  the  better  of  the 
moon.  For  which  reason  the  Egyptians  always  call  Typhon 
Seth,  which  in  their  language  signifies  a domineering  and 
compelling  power.  And  they  tell  us  in  their  mythology, 
that  Hercules  is  placed  in  the  sun  and  rides  about  the 
world  in  it,  and  that  Hermes  doth  the  like  in  the  moon. 
For  the  operations  of  the  moon  seem  to  resemble  reason 
and  to  proceed  from  wisdom,  but  those  of  the  sun  to  be 
like  unto  strokes  effected  by  violence  and  mere  strength. 
But  the  Stoics  affirm  the  sun  to  be  kindled  and  fed  by  the 
sea,  and  the  moon  by  the  waters  of  springs  and  pools, 
which  send  up  a sweet  and  soft  exhalation  to  it. 

42.  It  is  fabled  by  the  Egyptians  that  Osiris’s  death 
happened  upon  the  seventeenth  day  of  the  month,  at  which 
time  it  is  evident  that  the  moon  is  at  the  fullest.  For 
which  reason  the  Pythagoreans  call  that  day  Antiphraxis 
(or  disjunction ) and  utterly  abominate  the  very  number. 
For  the  middle  number  seventeen,  falling  in  betwixt  the 
square  number  sixteen  and  the  oblong  parallelogram 
eighteen  (which  are  the  only  plane  numbers  that  have 
their  peripheries  equal  with  their  areas),  disjoins  and 
separates  them  from  each  other  ; and  being  divided  into 
unequal  portions,  it  makes  the  sesquioctave  proportion 
(9  : 8).  Moreover,  there  are  some  that  affirm  Osiris  to  have 
lived  eight  and  twenty  years ; and  others  again,  that  he 
only  reigned  so  long,  for  that  is  the  just  number  of  the 
moon’s  degrees  of  light  and  of  the  days  wherein  she  per- 
forms her  circuit.  And  after  they  have  cleft  the  tree,  at 
the  solemnity  they  call  Osiris’s  Burial,  they  next  form  it 
into  an  ark  in  fashion  like  a crescent,  because  the  moon, 
when  it  joins  the  sun,  becomes  first  of  that  figure  and 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


103 


then  vanishes  away.  Likewise  the  division  of  Osiris  into 
fourteen  parts  sets  forth  unto  us  symbolically  the  number 
of  days  in  which  that  luminary  is  decreasing,  from  the  full 
to  the  change.  Moreover,  the  day  upon  which  she  first 
appears,  after  she  hath  now  escaped  the  solar  rays  and 
passed  by  the  sun,  they  term  “ imperfect  good ; ” for  Osiris 
is  beneficent,  and  as  this  name  hath  many  other  significa- 
tions, so  what  they  call  “ effectuating  and  beneficent  force  ” 
is  none  of  the  least.  Hermaeus  also  tells  us,  that  his  other 
name  of  Omphis,  when  interpreted,  denotes  a benefactor. 

43.  They  moreover  believe  that  the  several  risings  of 
the  river  Nile  bear  a certain  proportion  to  the  variations  of 
light  in  the  moon.  For  they  say  that  its  highest  rise, 
which  is  at  Elephantine,  is  eight  and  twenty  cubits  high, 
which  is  the  number  of  its  several  lights  and  the  measures 
of  its  monthly  course ; and  that  at  Mendes  and  Xois, 
which  is  the  lowest  of  all,  it  is  six  cubits  high,  which 
answers  the  half-moon ; but  that  the  middlemost  rise, 
which  is  at  Memphis,  is  (when  it  is  at  its  just  height)  four- 
teen cubits  high,  which  answers  the  full  moon.  They  also 
say  that  the  Apis  is  the  living  image  of  Osiris,  and  that  he 
is  begotten  when  a prolific  light  darts  down  from  the  moon 
and  touches  the  cow  when  she  is  disposed  for  procreation ; 
for  which  reason  many  things  in  the  Apis  bear  resemblance 
to  the  shapes  of  the  moon,  it  having  light  colors  intermixed 
with  shady  ones.  Moreover,  upon  the  kalends  of  the 
month  Phamenoth  they  keep  a certain  holiday,  by  them 
called  Osiris’s  ascent  into  the  moon,  and  they  account  it  the 
beginning  of  their  spring.  Thus  they  place  the  power  of 
Osiris  in  the  moon,  and  affirm  him  to  be  there  married  Avitli 
Isis,  which  is  generation.  For  which  cause  they  style  the 
moon  the  mother  of  the  world,  and  believe  her  to  have  the 
nature  both  of  male  and  female,  because  she  is  first  filled 
and  impregnated  by  the  sun,  and  then  herself  sends  forth 
generative  principles  into  the  air,  and  from  thence  scatters 


104 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


them  down  upon  the  earth.  For  that  Typhonian  destruc- 
tion doth  not  always  prevail ; but  it  is  very  often  subdued 
by  generation  and  fast  bound  like  a prisoner,  but  after- 
wards gets  up  again  and  makes  war  upon  Horus.  Now 
this  Horus  is  the  terrestrial  world,  which  is  not  wholly 
exempted  from  either  generation  or  destruction. 

44.  But  there  are  some  that  will  have  this  tale  to  be  a 
figurative  representation  of  the  eclipses.  For  the  moon  is 
under  an  eclipse  at  the  full,  when  the  sun  is  in  opposition 
to  her,  because  she  then  falls  into  the  shadow  of  the 
earth,  as  they  say  Osiris  did  into  his  chest.  But  she  hides 
and  obscures  the  sun  at  the  new  moon,  upon  the  thirtieth 
day  of  the  month,  but  doth  not  extinguish  the  sun  quite, 
any  more  than  Isis  did  Typhon.  And  when  Nephthys  was 
delivered  of  Anubis,  Isis  owned  the  child.  For  Nephthys 
is  that  part  of  the  world  which  is  below  the  earth,  and 
invisible  to  us ; and  Isis  that  which  is  above  the  earth,  and 
visible.  But  that  which  touches  upon  both  these,  and  is 
called  the  horizon  (or  bounding  circle)  and  is  common  to 
them  both,  is  called  Anubis,  and  resembles  in  shape  the 
dog,  because  the  dog  makes  use  of  his  sight  by  night  as 
well  as  by  day.  And  therefore  Anubis  seems  to  me  to 
have  a power  among  the  Egyptians  much  like  to  that  of 
Hecate  among  the  Grecians,  he  being  as  well  terrestrial  as 
Olympic.  Some  again  think  Anubis  to  be  Saturn  ; where- 
fore, they  say,  because  he  produces  all  things  out  of  him- 
self and  breeds  them  in  himself,  he  had  the  name  of  Kyon 
(which  signifies  in  Greek  both  a dog  and  a breeder). 
Moreover,  those  that  worship  the  dog  have  a certain  secret 
meaning  that  must  not  be  here  revealed.  And  in  the  more 
remote  and  ancient  times,  the  dog  had  the  highest  honor 
paid  him  in  Egypt ; but  after  that  Cambyses  had  slain  the 
Apis  and  thrown  him  away  contemptuously  like  a carrion, 
no  animal  came  near  to  him  except  the  dog  only  ; upon 
this  he  lost  his  first  honor  and  the  right  he  had  of  being 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


105 


worshipped  above  other  creatures.  There  are  also  some 
that  will  have  the  shadow  of  the  earth,  into  which  they 
believe  the  moon  to  fall  when  eclipsed,  to  be  called 
Typhon. 

45.  Wherefore  it  seems  to  me  not  to  be  unconsonant  to 
reason  to  hold  that  each  of  them  apart  is  not  in  the  right, 
but  all  together  are.  For  it  is  not  drought,  nor  wind,  nor 
sea,  nor  darkness,  but  every  part  of  Nature  that  is  hurtful 
or  destructive,  that  belongs  to  Typhon.  For  we  are  not  to 
place  the  first  origins  of  the  universe  in  inanimate  bodies, 
as  do  Democritus  and  Epicurus ; nor  to  make  one  reason, 
and  one  forecast  overruling  and  containing  all  things,  the 
creator  of  matter  without  attribute,  as  the  Stoics  do ; for  it 
is  alike  impossible  for  any  thing  bad  to  exist  where  God  is 
the  cause  of  all  things,  and  for  any  thing  good  to  exist 
where  he  is  the  cause  of  nothing.  For  the  harmony  of 
the  world  is  (according  to  Heraclitus)  like  that  of  a bow 
or  a harp,  alternately  tightened  and  relaxed;  and  according 
to  Euripides, 

Nor  good  nor  bad  here’s  to  be  found  apart ; 

But  both  immixed  in  one,  for  greater  art.  * 

And  therefore  this  most  ancient  opinion  hath  been  handed 
down  from  the  tlieologists  and  law-givers  to  the  poets  and 
philosophers,  it  having  an  original  fathered  upon  none,  but 
having  gained  a persuasion  both  strong  and  indelible,  and 
being  everywhere  professed  and  received  by  barbarians  as 
well  as  Grecians,  — and  that  not  only  in  vulgar  discourses 
and  public  fame,  but  also  in  their  secret  mysteries  and 
open  sacrifices,  — that  the  world  is  neither  hurried  about 
by  wild  chance  without  intelligence,  discourse,  and  direc- 
tion, nor  yet  that  there  is  but  one  reason,  which  as  it  were 
with  a rudder  or  with  gentle  and  easy  reins  directs  it  and 
holds  it  in ; but  that  on  the  contrary,  there  are  in  it  several 
differing  things,  and  those  made  up  of  bad  as  well  as  good; 

* From  the  Aeolus  of  Euripides,  Frag.  21. 


106 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


or  rather  (to  speak  more  plainly)  that  Nature  produces 
nothing  here  but  what  is  mixed  and  tempered.  Not  that 
there  is  as  it  Avere  one  store-keeper,  who  out  of  tAVO  differ- 
ent casks  dispenses  to  us  human  affairs  adulterated  and 
mixed  together,  * as  a host  doth  his  liquors ; but  by 
reason  of  tAVO  contrary  origins  and  opposite  poAvers  — 
whereof  the  one  leads  to  the  right  hand  and  in  a direct 
line,  and  the  other  turns  to  the  contrary  hand  and  goes 
athwart  — both  human  life  is  mixed,  and  the  world  (if  not 
all,  yet  that  part  Avhich  is  about  the  earth  and  beloAv  the 
moon)  is  become  very  unequal  and  various,  and  liable  to 
all  manner  of  changes.  For  if  nothing  can  come  Avithout 
a cause,  and  if  a good  thing  cannot  afford  a cause  of  evil, 
Nature  then  must  certainly  have  a peculiar  source  and 
origin  of  evil  as  well  as  of  good. 

46.  And  this  is  the  opinion  of  the  greatest  and  Avisest 
part  of  mankind.  For  some  believe  that  there  are  tAvo 
Gods,  as  it  Avere  tAvo  rival  workmen,  the  one  whereof  they 
make  to  be  the  maker  of  good  things,  and  the  other  of 
bad.  And  some  call  the  better  of  these  God,  and  the  other 
Daemon ; as  doth  Zoroaster  the  Magian  Avhom  they  report 
to  be  five  thousand  years  elder  than  the  Trojan  times. 
This  Zoroaster  noAV  called  the  one  of  these  Horomazes, 
and  the  other  Arimanius ; and  affirmed,  moreover,  that  the 
one  of  them  did,  of  any  thing  sensible,  the  most  resemble 
light,  and  the  other  darkness  and  ignorance ; but  that 
Mithras  Avas  in  the  middle  betwixt  them.  For  Avhich  cause 
the  Persians  call  Mithras  the  Mediator.  And  they  tell  us, 
that  he  first  taught  mankind  to  make  voavs  and  offerings  of 
thanksgiving  to  the  one,  and  to  offer  averting  and  feral 
sacrifice  to  the  other.  For  they  beat  a certain  plant  called 
omomi  in  a mortar,  and  call  upon  Pluto  and  the  dark  ; and 
then  mix  it  Avitli  the  blood  of  a sacrificed  Avolf,  and  convey 

* He  alludes  to  Homer,  who  feigns  Jupiter  to  have  in  his  house  two  differing 
jars,  the  one  filled  with  good  things,  and  the  other  with  bad.  See  II.  XXIV.  527. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


107 


it  to  a certain  place  where  the  sun  never  shines,  and  there 
cast  it  away.  For  of  plants  they  believe  that  some  apper- 
tain to  the  good  God,  and  others  again  to  the  evil  Daemon  ; 
and  likewise  they  think  that  such  animals  as  dogs,  fowls, 
and  urchins  belong  to  the  good,  but  water  animals  to  the 
bad,  for  which  reason  they  account  him  happy  that  kills 
most  of  these. 

47.  These  men  moreover  tell  us  a great  many  romantic 
things  about  these  Gods,  whereof  these  are  some.  They 
say  that,  Horomazes  springing  from  purest  light,  and  Ari- 
manius  on  the  other  hand  from  pitchy  darkness,  these  two 
are  therefore  at  war  with  one  another;  and  that  Horo- 
mazes made  six  Gods,  whereof  the  first  was  the  author  of 
benevolence,  the  second  of  truth,  the  third  of  law  and 
order ; and  the  rest,  one  of  wisdom,  another  of  wealth, 
and  a third  of  that  pleasure  which  accrues  from  good 
actions ; and  that  Arimanius  likewise  made  the  like  num- 
ber of  contrary  Gods  to  confront  them.  After  this,  Horo- 
mazes, having  first  trebled  his  own  magnitude,  mounted 
up  aloft,  as  far  above  the  sun  as  the  sun  itself  above  the 
earth,  and  so  bespangled  the  heavens  with  stars.  But  one 
star  (called  Sirius,  or  the  Dog)  he  set  as  a kind  of  sentinel 
or  scout  before  all  the  rest.  And  after  he  had  made  four 
and  twenty  Gods  more,  he  placed  them  all  in  an  egg-shell. 
But  those  that  were  made  by  Arimanius  (being  themselves 
also  of  the  like  number)  breaking  a hole  in  this  beauteous 
and  glazed  egg-shell,  bad  things  came  by  this  means  to  be 
intermixed  with  good.  But  the  fatal  time  is  now  approach- 
ing, in  which  Arimanius,  who  by  means  of  this  brings 
plagues  and  famines  upon  the  earth,  must  of  necessity  be 
himself  utterly  extinguished  and  destroyed  ; at  which  time, 
the  earth  being  made  plain  and  level,  there  will  be  one 
life  and  one  society  of  mankind,  made  all  happy  and  of 
one  speech.  But  Theopompus  saith,  that,  according  to 
the  opinion  of  the  Magi,  each  of  these  Gods  subdues  and 


108 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


is  subdued  by  turns  for  the  space  of  three  thousand  years 
apiece,  and  that  for  three  thousand  years  more  they  quarrel 
and  tight,  and  destroy  each  other’s  works ; but  that  at  last 
Pluto  shall  fail,  and  mankind  shall  be  happy,  and  neither 
need  food  nor  yield  a shadow.  And  that  the  God  who  has 
projected  these  things  shall  then  for  some  time  take  his 
repose  and  rest ; but  yet  this  time  is  not  so  much  to  him, 
although  it  seem  so  to  man,  whose  sleep  is  but  short. 

48.  Such  then  is  the  mythology  of  the  Magi.  But  the 
Chaldaeans  say,  there  are  Gods  of  the  planets  also,  two 
whereof  they  style  benefics,  and  two  malefics  ; the  other 
three  they  pronounce  to  be  common  and  indifferent.  As 
for  the  Grecians,  their  opinions  are  obvious  and  well 
known  to  every  one ; to  wit,  that  they  make  the  good 
part  of  the  world  to  appertain  to  Jupiter  Olympius,  and  the 
hateful  part  to  Pluto;  and  likewise,  that  they  fable  Har- 
monia  to  have  been  begotten  by  Venus  and  Mars,  the  one 
whereof  is  rough  and  quarrelsome,  and  the  other  sweet 
and  generative.  In  the  next  place  consider  we  the  great 
agreement  of  the  philosophers  with  these  people.  For 
Heraclitus  doth  in  plain  and  naked  terms  call  war  the 
father,  the  king,  and  the  lord  of  all  things ; and  saith  that 
Homer,  when  he  first  prayed, 

Discord  be  damned  from  Gods  and  human  race,* 

little  thought  he  was  then  cursing  the  origination  of  all 
things,  they  owing  their  rise  to  aversation  and  quarrel. 
He  also  saith,  that  the  sun  will  never  exceed  his  proper 
bounds ; and  if  he  should,  that 

Tongues,  aids  of  justice,  soon  will  find  him  out. 

Empedocles  also  calls  the  benefic  principle  love  and  friend- 
ship, and  very  often  sweet-looked  harmony ; and  the  evil 
principle 

Pernicious  enmity  and  bloody  hate. 

* II.  XVIII.  107. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


109 


The  Pythagoreans  use  a great  number  of  terms  as  attri- 
butes of  these  two  principles ; of  the  good,  they  use  the 
unit,  the  terminate,  the  permanent,  the  straight,  the  odd, 
the  square,  the  equal,  the  dexter,  and  the  lucid  ; and 
again  of  the  bad,  the  two,  the  interminate,  the  fluent,  the 
crooked,  the  even,  the  oblong,  the  unequal,  the  sinister, 
and  the  dark ; insomuch  that  all  these  are  looked  upon  as 
principles  of  generation.  But  Anaxagoras  made  but  two, 
the  intelligence  and  the  interminate ; and  Aristotle  called 
the  first  of  these  form,  and  the  latter  privation.  But  Plato 
in  many  places,  as  it  were  shading  and  veiling  over  his 
opinion,  names  the  first  of  these  opposite  principles  the 
Same,  and  the  second  the  Other.  But  in  his  book  of  Laws, 
when  he  was  now  grown  old,  he  affirmed,  not  in  riddles 
and  emblems  but  in  plain  and  proper  words,  that  the 
world  is  not  moved  by  one  soul,  but  perhaps  by  a great 
many,  but  not  by  fewer  than  two ; the  one  of  which  is 
beneficent,  and  the  other  contrary  to  it  and  the  author  of 
things  contrary.  He  also  leaves  a certain  third  nature  in 
the  midst  between,  which  is  neither  without  soul  nor  with- 
out reason,  nor  void  of  a self-moving  power  (as  some  sup- 
pose), but  rests  upon  both  of  the  preceding  principles,  but 
yet  so  as  still  to  affect,  desire,  and  pursue  the  better  of 
them ; as  I shall  make  out  in  the  ensuing  part  of  this  dis- 
course, in  which  I design  to  reconcile  the  theology  of  the 
Egyptians  principally  with  this  sort  of  philosophy. 

49.  For  the  frame  and  constitution  of  this  world  is  made 
up  of  contrary  powers,  but  yet  such  as  are  not  of  such 
equal  strength  but  that  the  better  is  still  predominant. 
But  it  is  impossible  for  the  ill  one  to  be  quite  extinguished, 
because  much  of  it  is  interwoven  with  the  body  and  much 
with  the  soul  of  the  universe,  and  it  always  maintains  a 
fierce  combat  with  the  better  part.  And  therefore  in  the 
soul,  intellect  and  reason,  which  is  the  prince  and  master 
of  all  the  best  things,  is  Osiris ; and  in  the  earth,  iri  the 


110 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


winds,  in  the  waters,  in  the  heaven,  and  in  the  stars,  what 
is  ranged,  fixed,  and  in  a sound  constitution  (as  orderly 
seasons,  due  temperament  of  air,  and  the  revolutions  of 
the  stars)  is  the  efflux  and  appearing  image  of  Osiris. 
Again,  the  passionate,  Titanic,  irrational,  and  brutal  part 
of  the  soul  is  Typhon ; and  what  in  the  corporeal  nature 
is  adventitious,  morbid,  and  tumultuous  (as  irregular  seas- 
ons, distemperatures  of  air,  eclipses  of  the  sun,  and  dis- 
appearings  of  the  moon)  is,  as  it  were,  the  incursions  and 
devastations  of  Typhon.  And  the  name  of  Seth,  by  which 
they  call  Typhon,  declares  as  much;  for  it  denotes  a 
domineering  and  compelling  power,  and  also  very  often 
an  overturning,  and  again  a leaping  over.  There  are  also 
some  that  say  that  Bebon  was  one  of  Typhon’s  companions  ; 
but  Manetho  saith,  Typhon  himself  was  called  Bebon. 
Now  that  name  signifies  restraining  and  hindering ; as 
who  should  say,  “ while  all  things  march  along  in  a reg- 
ular course  and  move  steadily  toward  their  natural  end, 
the  power  of  Typhon  stands  in  their  way  and  stops  them.” 
50.  For  which  reason  they  assign  him  the  ass,  the  most 
brutal  and  sottish  of  all  the  tame  beasts,  and  the  crocodile 
and  river-horse,  the  most  savage  and  fierce  of  all  the  wild 
beasts.  Of  the  ass  we  have  spoken  already.  They  show 
us  at  ITermopolis  the  statue  of  Typhon,  which  is  a river- 
horse  with  a hawk  on  his  back  fighting  with  a serpent ; 
where  they  set  out  Typhon  by  the  river-horse,  and  by  the 
hawk  that  power  and  principle  which  Typhon  possesses 
himself  of  by  violence,  and  thereupon  ceases  not  to  disturb 
others  and  to  be  disturbed  himself  by  his  malice.  For 
which  reason  also,  when  they  are  to  offer  sacrifice  upon 
the  seventh  day  of  the  month  Tybi,  at  the  festival  which 
they  call  the  Arrival  of  Isis  out  of  Phoenicia,  they  print 
the  river-horse  bound  upon  their  sacred  cakes.  Besides 
this,  there  is  a constant  custom  at  the  town  of  Apollo,  for 
every  one  to  eat  some  part  of  a crocodile ; and  having 


OF  ISIS  ANE>  OSIRIS. 


Ill 


\ 


upon  a certain  set  day  hunted  down  as  many  of  them  as 
they  are  able,  they  kill  them,  and  throw  down  their  car- 
casses before  the  temple.  And  they  tell  us  that  Typhon 
made  his  escape  from  Horus  in  the  form  of  a crocodile ; 
for  they  make  all  bad  and  noxious  -things  — whether  ani- 
mals, plants  or  passions  — to  be  the  works,  the  members, 
and  the  motions  of  Typhon. 

51.  On  the  other  hand,  they  represent  Osiris  by  an  eye 
and  a sceptre,  the  one  whereof  expresses  forecast,  and  the 
other  power.  In  like  manner  Homer,  when  he  called  the 
governor  and  monarch  of  all  the  world 

Supremest  Jove,  and  mighty  Counsellor,* 

seems  to  me  to  denote  his  imperial  power  by  supremest, 
and  his  well-advisedness  and  discretion  by  Counsellor. 
They  also  oftentimes  describe  this  God  by  a hawk,  because 
he  exceeds  in  quickness  of  sight  and  velocity  in  flying,  and 
sustains  himself  with  very  little  food.  He  is  also  said  to 
fly  over  the  bodies  of  dead  men  that  lie  unburied,  and 
to  drop  down  earth  upon  their  eyes.  Likewise,  when  he 
alights  down  upon  the  bank  of  any  river  to  assuage  his 
thirst,  he  sets  his  feathers  up  on  end,  and  after  he  hath 
done  drinking,  he  lets  them  fall  again.  Which  he  plainly 
doth  because  he  is  now  safe  and  escaped  from  the  danger 
of  the  crocodile ; but  if  he  chances  to  be  catched,  his 
feathers  then  continue  stiff  as  before.  They  also  show  us 
everywhere  Osiris’s  statue  in  the  shape  of  a man,  with  his 
private  part  erect,  to  betoken  unto  us  his  faculty  of  gen- 
eration and  nutrition ; and  they  dress  up  his  images  in  a 
flame-colored  robe,  esteeming  the  sun  as  the  body  of  the 
power  of  good,  and  as  the  visible  image  of  intelligible 
substance.  Wherefore  we  have  good  reason  to  reject 
those  that  ascribe  the  sun’s  globe  unto  Typhon,  to  whom 
appertaineth  nothing  of  a lucid  or  salutary  nature,  nor 
order,  nor  generation,  nor  motion  attended  with  measure 

* II.  VIII.  22. 


112 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


and  proportion,  but  tbe  clean  contrary  to  them.  Neither 
is  that  parching  drought,  which  destroys  many  animals 
and  plants,  to  be  accounted  as  an  effect  of  the  sun,  but 
of  those  winds  and  waters  which  in  the  earth  and  ah*  are 
not  tempered  according  to  the  season,  at  which  time  the 
principle  of  the  unordered  and  interminate  nature  acts  at 
random,  and  so  stifles  and  suppresses  those  exhalations 
that  should  ascend. 

52.  Moreover,  in  the  sacred  hymns  of  Osiris  they  call 
him  up  “ who  lies  hidden  in  the  arms  of  the  sun.”  And 
upon  the  thirtieth  day  of  the  month  Epiphi  they  keep  a 
certain  festival  called  the  Birthday  of  the  eyes  of  Horus, 
when  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  in  one  direct  line ; as  es- 
teeming not  only  the  moon  but  also  the  sun  to  be  the  eye 
and  light  of  Horus.  Likewise  the  three  and  twentieth 
day  of  the  month  Phaophi  they  make  to  be  the  nativity 
of  the  staves  of  the  sun,  which  they  observe  after  the 
autumnal  equinox,  intimating  hereby  that  he  now  wants, 
as  it  were,  a prop  and  a stay,  as  suffering  a great  diminution 
both  of  heat  and  light  by  his  declining  and  moving  ob- 
liquely from  us.  Besides  this,  they  lead  the  sacred  cow 
seven  times  about  her  temple  at  the  time  of  the  winter 
solstice.  And  this  going  round  is  called  the  seeking  of 
Osiris,  the  Goddess  being  in  great  distress  for  water  in 
winter  time.  And  the  reason  of  her  going  round  so  many 
times  is  because  the  sun  finishes  his  passage  from  the  win- 
ter to  the  summer  tropic  in  the  seventh  month.  It  is  re- 
ported also  that  Horus,  the  son  of  Isis,  was  the  first  that 
ever  sacrificed  to  the  sun  upon  the  fourth  day  of  the  month, 
as  we  find  it  written  in  a book  called  the  Birthdays  of 
Horus.  Moreover,  they  offer  incense  to  the  sun  three 
times  every  day ; resin  at  his  rising,  myrrh  when  it  is  in 
the  mid-heaven,  and  that  they  call  Kyphi  about  the  time 
of  his  setting.  (What  each  of  these  means,  I shall  after- 
wards explain.)  Now  they  are  of  opinion  that  the  sun  is 
atoned  and  pacified  by  all  these. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


113 


But  to  what  purpose  should  I heap  together  many  things 
of  this  nature  \ For  there  are  some  that  scruple  not  to  say 
plainly  that  Osiris  is  the  sun,  and  that  he  is  called  Sirius 
by  the  Greeks,  although  the  Egyptians,  adding  the  article 
to  his  name,  have  obscured  and  brought  its  sense  into 
question.  They  also  declare  Isis  to  be  no  other  than  the 
moon,  and  say  that  such  statues  of  her  as  are  horned 
were  made  in  imitation  of  the  crescent ; and  that  the  black 
habit  in  which  she  so  passionately  pursues  the  sun,  sets 
forth  her  disappearings  and  eclipses.  For  which  reason 
they  used  to  invoke  the  moon  in  love-concerns ; and  Eu- 
doxus also  saith  that  Isis  presides  over  love-matters.  Now 
these  things  have  in  them  a show  and  semblance  of  reason  ; 
whereas  they  that  would  make  Typhon  to  be  the  sun  de- 
serve not  to  be  heard. 

53.  But  we  must  again  resume  our  proper  discourse. 
Isis  is  indeed  that  property  of  Nature  which  is  feminine 
and  receptive  of  all  production ; in  which  sense  she  was 
called  the  nurse  and  the  all-receiver  by  Plato,  and  the  God- 
dess with  ten  thousand  names  by  the  common  sort,  be- 
cause being  transmuted  by  reason  she  receives  all  manner 
of  shapes  and  guises.  But  she  hath  a natural  love  to  the 
prime  and  principal  of  all  beings  (which  is  the  good  prin- 
ciple), and  eagerly  affects  it  and  pursues  after  it ; and  she 
shuns  and  repels  her  part  of  the  evil  one.  And  although 
she  be  indeed  both  the  receptacle  and  matter  of  either 
nature,  yet  she  always  of  herself  inclines  to  the  better  of 
them,  and  readily  gives  way  to  it  to  generate  upon  her  and 
to  sow  its  effluxes  and  resemblances  into  her  ; and  she  re- 
joices and  is  very  glad  when  she  is  impregnated  and  filled 
with  productions.  For  generation  is  the  production  of  an 
image  of  the  real  substance  upon  matter,  and  what  is  gen- 
erated is  an  imitation  of  what  is  in  truth. 

54.  And  therefore  not  without  great  consonancy  do  they 
fable  that  the  soul  of  Osiris  is  eternal  and  incorruptible, 

VOL.  IV.  8 


114 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


but  tliat  his  body  is  often  torn  in  pieces  and  destroyed  by 
Typhon,  and  that  Isis  wanders  to  and  fro  to  look  him  out, 
and  when  she  hath  found  him,  puts  him  together  again. 
For  the  permanent  being,  the  mental  nature,  and  the  good, 
is  itself  above  corruption  and  change ; but  the  sensitive 
and  corporeal  part  takes  off  certain  images  from  it,  and 
receives  certain  proportions,  shapes,  and  resemblances, 
which,  like  impressions  upon  wax,  do  not  continue  always, 
but  are  swallowed  up  by  the  disorderly  and  tumultuous 
part,  which  is  chased  hither  from  the  upper  region  and 
makes  war  with  Horus,  who  is  born  of  Isis,  being  the  sen- 
sible image  of  the  mental  world.  For  which  reason  he  is 
said  to  be  prosecuted  for  bastardy  by  Typhon,  as  not  being 
pure  and  sincere,  — like  his  father,  the  pure  absolute  reason, 
unmixed  and  impassible,  — but  embased  with  matter  by 
corporeity.  But  he  gets  the  better  of  him,  and  carries  the 
cause,  Hermes  (that  is,  reason)  witnessing  and  proving 
that  Nature  produces  the  world  by  becoming  herself  of 
like  form  with  the  mental  property.  Moreover,  the  gen- 
eration of  Apollo  by  Isis  and  Osiris,  while  the  Gods  were 
yet  in  Rhea’s  womb,  hints  out  unto  us  that,  before  this 
world  became  visible  and  was  completed  by  reason,  matter, 
being  convinced  by  Nature  that  she  was  imperfect  alone, 
brought  forth  the  first  production.  For  which  reason  they 
also  say,  this  deity  was  born  a cripple  in  the  dark,  and 
they  call  him  the  elder  Horus ; for  he  was  not  the  world, 
but  a kind  of  a picture  and  phantom  of  the  world  to  be 
afterwards. 

55.  This  Horus  is  terminate  and  complete  of  himself, 
yet  hath  he  not  quite  destroyed  Typhon,  but  only  taken  off 
his  over  great  activity  and  brutal  force.  Whence  it  is  they 
tell  us  that  at  Copto  the  statue  of  Horus  holds  fast  in 
hand  the  privities  of  Typhon  ; and  they  fable  that  Mercury 
took  out  Typhon’s  sinews  and  used  them  for  harp-strings, 
to  denote  unto  us  that,  when  reason  composed  the  universe, 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


115 


it  made  one  concord  out  of  many  discords,  and  did  not 
abolish  but  accomplish  * the  corruptible  faculty.  Whence 
it  comes  that  this  power,  being  weak  and  feeble  in  the 
present  state  of  things,  blends  and  mixes  with  passible  and 
mutable  parts  of  the  world,  and  so  becomes  in  the  earth 
the  causer  of  concussions  and  shakings,  and  in  the  air  of 
parching  droughts  and  tempestuous  winds,  as  also  of  hur- 
ricanes and  thunders.  It  likewise  infects  both  waters  and 
winds  with  pestilential  diseases,  and  runs  up  and  insolently 
rages  as  high  as  the  very  moon,  suppressing  many  times 
and  blackening  the  lucid  part,  as  the  Egyptians  believe. 
They  relate  that  Typhon  one  while  smote  Horus’s  eye,  and 
another  while  plucked  it  out  and  swallowed  it  up,  and 
afterwards  gave  it  back  to  the  sun ; intimating  by  the  blow 
the  monthly  diminution  of  the  moon,  and  by  the  blinding 
of  him  its  eclipse,  which  the  sun  cures  again  by  shining 
presently  upon  it  as  soon  as . it  hath  escaped  from  the 
shadow  of  the  earth. 

56.  Now  the  better  and  more  divine  nature  consists  of 
three ; or  of  the  intelligible  part,  of  matter,  and  of  that 
which  is  made  up  of  both,  which  the  Greeks  call  Cosmos 
(that  is  trimness ) and  we  the  world.  Plato  therefore  uses 
to  name  the  intelligible  part  the  form,  the  sample,  and  the 
father ; and  matter  the  mother,  the  nurse,  and  the  seat  and 
receptacle  of  generation ; and  that  again  which  is  made 
up  of  both,  the  offspring  and  the  production.  And  one 
would  conjecture  that  the  Egyptians  called  it  the  most  per- 
fect of  triangles,  because  they  likened  the  nature  of  the 
universe  principally  to  that;  which  Plato  also  in  his  Com- 
monwealth seems  to  have  made  use  of  to  the  same  purpose, 
when  he  forms  his  nuptial  diagram.  Now  in  that  triangle 
the  perpendicular  consists  of  three  parts,  the  base  of  four, 
and  the  subtense  of  five,  its  square  being  equal  in  value 

* If  we  adopt  Bentley’s  emendation  aven r/puae  for  avenXr/puae,  we  must  translate, 
“ did  not  abolish,  but  merely  maimed,  the  corruptible  faculty.”  (G.) 


116 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


with  the  squares  of  the  two  that  contain  it.  We  are 
therefore  to  take  the  perpendicular  to  represent  the  male 
property,  the  base  the  female,  and  the  subtense  that  which 
is  produced  by  them  both.  We  are  likewise  to  look  upon 
Osiris  as  the  first  cause,  Isis  as  the  faculty  of  reception, 
and  Ilorus  as  the  effect.  For  the  number  three  is  the  first 
odd  and  perfect  number,  and  the  number  four  is  a square, 
having  for  its  side  the  even  number  two.  The  number 
five  also  in  some  respects  resembles  the  father  and  in  some 
again  the  mother,  being  made  up  of  three  and  two  ; be- 
sides, Ttavta  ( all  things ) seems  to  be  derived  from  Ttsvre  {five), 
and  they  use  munuaaadai  (which  is  telling  five ) for  count- 
ing.* Moreover,  the  number  five  makes  a square  equal  to 
the  number  of  letters  used  among  the  Egyptians,  as  also 
to  the  number  of  years  which  Apis  lived.  They  are  also 
used  to  call  Horus  Min,  which  signifieth  as  much  as  seen  ; 
for  the  world  is  perceptible  to  sense  and  visible.  And  Isis 
they  sometimes  call  Muth,  and  sometimes  again  Athyri, 
and  sometimes  Methyer.  And  by  the  first  of  these  names 
they  mean  mother,  by  the  second  Homs’s  mundane  house 
(as  Plato  calls  it,  the  place  and  receptacle  of  generation) ; 
but  the  third  is  compounded  of  two  words,  the  one  where- 
of signifies  full,  and  the  other  the  cause  ; for  the  matter 
of  the  world  is  full,  and  it  is  closely  joined  with  the  good 
and  pure  and  well  ordered  principle. 

57.  And  it  may  be,  Hesiod  also,  when  he  makes  the  first 
things  of  all  to  be  chaos,  earth,  hell,  and  love,  may  be 
thought  to  take  up  no  other  principles  than  these,  if  we 
apply  these  names  as  we  have  already  disposed  them,  to 
wit,  that  of  earth  to  Isis,  that  of  love  to  Osiris,  and  that 
of  hell  to  Typhon ; for  he  seems  to  lay  the  chaos  under 
all,  as  a kind  of  room  or  place  for  the  world  to  lie  in. 
And  the  subject  we  are  now  upon  seems  in  a manner  to 
call  for  Plato’s  tale,  which  Socrates  tells  us  in  the  Sympo- 


* See  the  preceding  essay,  § 36. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


117 


sium  about  tlie  production  of  Eros  (or  Love),  where  he  saith, 
that  once  on  a time  Poverty,  having  a mighty  desire  of 
children,  laid  her  down  by  Plenty’s  side  as  he  was  asleep, 
and  that  she  thereupon  conceiving  by  him  brought  forth 
Eros,  who  was  of  a nature  botli  mixed  and  various,  as 
coming  of  a father  that  was  good  and  wise  and  had 
sufficiency  of  all  things,  but  of  a mother  that  was  very 
needy  and  poor ; and  that  by  reason  of  her  indigence  she 
still  hankered  after  another,  and  was  eagerly  importunate 
for  another.  For  this  same  Plenty  is  no  other  than  the 
first  amiable,  desirable,  complete,  and  sufficient  being  ; and 
matter  is  that  which  he  called  Poverty,  she  being  of  her- 
self alone  destitute  of  the  property  of  good,  but  when  she 
is  impregnated  by  it,  she  still  desires  and  craves  for  more. 
Moreover,  the  world  (or  Horus)  that  is  produced  out  of 
these  two,  being  not  eternal,  nor  impassible,  nor  incorrupt- 
ible, but  ever  a making,  does  therefore  machinate,  partly 
by  shifting  of  accidents  and  partly  by  circular  motions,  to 
remain  still  young  and  never  to  die. 

58.  But  we  must  remember  that  we  are  not  to  make  use 
of  fables  as  if  they  were  doctrinal  throughout,  but  only  to 
take  that  in  each  of  them  which  we  shall  judge  to  make  a 
pertinent  resemblance.  And  therefore,  when  we  treat  of 
matter,  we  need  not  (with  respect  to  the  sentiments  of  some 
philosophers)  to  conceit  in  our  minds  a certain  body  void 
of  soul  and  of  all  quality,  and  of  itself  wholly  idle  and 
unactive.  For  we  use  to  call  oil  the  matter  of  an  unguent, 
and  gold  the  matter  of  a statue,  though  they  are  not  desti- 
tute of  all  quality.  And  we  render  the  very  soul  and  mind 
of  a man  as  matter  to  reason,  to  be  dressed  up  and  com- 
posed into  science  and  virtue.  There  have  been  some  also 
that  have  made  the  mind  to  be  a receptacle  of  forms  and  a 
kind  of  imprimary  for  things  intelligible  ; and  some  are  of 
opinion  again  that  the  genital  humidity  in  the  female  sex 
is  no  active  property  nor  efficient  principle,  but  only  the 


118 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


matter  and  nutriment  of  the  production.  Which  when  we 
retain  in  our  memories,  Ave  ought  to  conceive  likewise  that 
this  Goddess,  which  always  participates  of  the  first  God 
and  is  ever  taken  up  with  the  love  of  those  excellencies 
and  charms  that  are  about  him,  is  not  by  nature  opposite 
to  him ; but  that,  as  we  are  used  to  say  of  a good  na- 
tured  woman,  that,  though  she  be  married  to  a man  and 
constantly  enjoys  his  embraces,  yet  she  hath  a fond  kind 
of  longing  after  him,  so  hath  she  always  a strong  incli- 
nation to  the  God,  though  she  be  present  and  round  about 
him,  and  though  she  be  impregnated  with  his  most  prime 
and  pure  particles. 

59.  But  where  Typhon  falls  in  and  touches  upon  her 
extreme  parts,  it  is  there  she  appears  melancholy,  and  is 
said  to  mourn,  and  to  look  for  certain  relics  and  pieces  of 
Osiris,  and  to  array  them  with  all  diligence  ; she  receiving 
all  things  that  die  and  laying  them  up  within  herself,  as 
she  again  brings  forth  and  sends  up  out  of  herself  all  such 
things  as  are  produced.  And  those  proportions,  forms, 
and  effluxes  of  the  God  that  are  in  the  heaven  and  stars 
do  indeed  continue  always  the  same  ; but  those  that  are 
sown  abroad  into  mutable  things,  as  into  land,  sea,  plants, 
and  animals,  are  resolved,  destroyed,  and  buried,  and  after- 
wards show  themselves  again  very  often,  and  come  up  anew 
in  several  different  productions.  For  which  reason  the 
fable  makes  Typhon  to  be  married  to  Nephthys,  and  Osiris 
to  have  accompanied  with  her  by  stealth.  For  the  utmost 
and  most  extreme  parts  of  matter,  which  they  call  Neph- 
thys and  the  end,  is  mostly  under  the  power  of  the  destruc- 
tive faculty ; but  the  fecund  and  salutary  power  dispenses 
but  a feeble  and  languid  seed  into  those  parts,  which  is  all 
destroyed  by  Typhon,  except  only  what  Isis  taking  up  doth 
preserve,  cherish,  and  improve. 

60.  And  in  general,  Typhon  is  the  prevailing  power,  as 
both  Plato  and  Aristotle  insinuate.  Moreover,  the  genera- 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


119 


tive  and  salutary  part  of  nature  liatli  its  motion  towards 
him,  in  order  to  procure  being ; but  the  destroying  and 
corruptive  part  hath  its  motion  from  him,  in  order  to  pro- 
cure not-being.  For  which  reason  they  call  the  former 
part  Isis,  from  going  ( i'eaOcu ) and  being  borne-along  with 
knowledge,  she  being  a kind  of  a living  and  prudent  mo- 
tion. For  her  name  is  not  of  a barbarous  original;  but, 
as  all  the  Gods  have  one  name  (deog)  in  common,  and  that 
is  derived  from  the  two  words,  dmv  ( running ) and  dearog 
{ visible ) ; so  also  this  very  Goddess  is  both  from  motioji 
and  science  at  once  called  Isis  by  us  and  Isis  also  by  the 
Egyptians.  So  likewise  Plato  tells  us,  that  the  ancients 
called  ova  la  (being)  iota  { knowledge ),  as  also  that  vorjaig  (’intel- 
ligence) and  cpQoi’ijctg ( prudence)  had  their  names  given  them 
for  being  a cpogd  ( agitation ) and  motion  of  vovg  {mind),  which 
was  then,  as  it  were,  Upevog  and  qisgopEvog  {set  in  motion  and 
borne-cdong) ; and  the  like  he  affirmeth  of  awdvcu  {to  under- 
stand),  that  it  was  as  much  as  to  say  “ to  be  in  commotion.”* 
Nay  he  saith,  moreover,  that  they  attribute  the  very  names 
of  dyadov  {good)  and  dgnij  {virtue)  to  the  ideas  of  running 
(dta)  and  of  ever-flowing  (del  gm)f  which  they  imply ; as  like- 
wise, on  the  other  hand  again,  they  used  terms  opposite  to 
motion  by  way  of  reproach  ; for  they  called  what  clogged, 
tied  up,  locked  up,  and  confined  nature  from  agitation  and 
motion  xav.ia  {baseness  or  ill  motion ),  dnoglu  {difficulty  or  dif- 
ficult motion ),  Seilia  {fearfulness  or  fearful  motion)  and  dvia 
{sorrow  or  want  of  motion). 

61.  But  Osiris  had  his  name  from  omog  and  legog  {pious 
and  sacred)  compounded ; for  he  is  the  common  idea  of 
things  in  heaven  and  things  in  the  lower  wTorld,  the  former 

* Most  of  the  absurd  etymologies  proposed  in  this  chapter  are  actually  to  be 
found  in  Plato’s  Cratylus,  from  p.  401  C to  p.  415  E.  (G.) 

t The  usual  emendation  for  evpovoi  (which  the  MSS.  give)  is  evpoovoi.  But  Plato 
(Crat.  415  D)  derives  aperr/  from  ro  dcr^eruf  ml  to  anulvTut;  del  fieov,  from  which  he 
supposes  a form  uupdrri  to  come,  afterwards  contracted  into  dper^.  I have  therefore 
adopted  the  reading  del  jjiovoi,  and  translated  accordingly.  (G.) 


120 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


of  which  the  ancients  thought  fit  to  style  Iequ,  and  the  latter 
oo m.  But  the  principle  which  discloses  things  heavenly, 
and  which  appertains  to  things  whose  motion  tends  up- 
wards (<m»),is  called  Anubis,  and  sometimes  he  is  also  named 
Hermanubis,  the  former  name  referring  to  things  above, 
and  the  latter  to  things  beneath.  For  which  reason  they 
also  sacrifice  to  him  two  cocks,  the  one  whereof  is  white 
and  the  other  of  a saffron  color,  as  esteeming  the  things 
above  to  be  entire  and  clear,  and  the  things  beneath  to  be 
mixed  and  various.  Nor  need  any  one  to  wonder  at  the 
formation  of  these  words  from  the  Grecian  tongue  ; for 
there  are  many  thousand  more  of  this  kind,  which,  accom- 
panying those  who  at  several  times  removed  out  of  Greece, 
do  to  this  very  day  sojourn  and  remain  among  foreigners ; 
some  whereof  when  poetry  would  bring  back  into  use,  it 
hath  been  falsely  accused  of  barbarism  by  those  men,  who 
love  to  call  such  words  strange  and  outlandish.  They  say, 
moreover,  that  in  the  so-called  books  of  Hermes  there  is 
an  account  given  of  the  sacred  names ; and  that  power 
which  presides  over  the  circulation  of  the  sun  is  called 
Horus,  and  by  the  Greeks  Apollo ; and  that  which  is  over 
the  winds  is  by  some  called  Osiris,  and  by  others  Serapis, 
and  by  others  again  in  the  Egyptian  tongue  Sothi.  Now 
the  word  Sothi  signifies  in  Greek  to  breed  (xm v)  and  breed- 
ing ; and  therefore,  by  an  obliquation  of  the  word  y.vnv,  the 
star  which  they  account  proper  to  the  Goddess  Isis  is  called 
in  Greek  xvm,  which  is  as  well  dog  as  breeder.  And  al- 
though it  be  but  a fond  thing  to  be  over  contentious  about 
words,  yet  I had  rather  yield  to  the  Egyptians  the  name  of 
Serapis  than  that  of  Osiris,  since  I account  the  former  to 
be  foreign,  and  the  latter  to  be  Greekish,  but  believe  both 
to  appertain  to  one  God  and  to  one  power. 

62.  And  the  Egyptian  theology  seems  to  favor  this  opin- 
ion. For  they  oftentimes  call  Isis  by  the  name  of  Miner- 
va, which  in  their  language  expresseth  this  sentence,  “ I 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


121 


came  from  myself,”  and  is  significative  of  a motion  proceed- 
ing from  herself.  But  Typhon  is  called  (as  hath  been  said 
before)  Seth,  Bebon,  and  Smu,  which  names  would  insinu- 
ate a kind  of  a forcible  restraint,  and  an  opposition  or 
subversion.  Moreover,  they  call  the  loadstone  Horus’s 
bone,  and  iron  Typhon’s  bone,  as  Manetho  relates.  For  as 
iron  is  oftentimes  like  a thing  that  is  drawn  to  and  follows 
the  loadstone,  and  oftentimes  again  flies  off  and  recoils  to 
the  opposite  part ; so  the  salutary,  good,  and  intelligent 
motion  of  the  universe  doth,  as  by  a gentle  persuasion,  in- 
vert, reduce,  and  make  softer  the  rugged  and  Typhonian 
one  ; and  when  again  it  is  restrained  and  forced  back,  it 
returns  into  itself,  and  sinks  into  its  former  interminate- 
ness.  Eudoxus  also  saitli  that  the  Egyptian  fable  of  Jupi- 
ter is  this,  that  being  once  unable  to  go  because  his  legs 
grew  together,  he  for  very  shame  spent  all  his  time  in  the 
wilderness ; but  that  Isis  dividing  and  separating  these 
parts  of  his  body,  he  came  to  have  the  right  use  of  his 
feet.  This  fable  also  hints  to  us  by  these  words,  that  the 
intelligence  and  reason  of  the  God,  which  walked  before  in 
the  unseen  and  inconspicuous  state,  came  into  generation 
by  means  of  motion. 

63.  The  sistrum  likewise  (or  rattle)  doth  intimate  unto 
us,  that  all  things  ought  to  be  agitated  and  shook  ( ozUoOcu ), 
and  not  to  be  suffered  to  rest  from  their  motion,  but  be  as  it 
were  roused  up  and  awakened  when  they  begin  to  grow 
drowsy  and  to  droop.  For  they  tell  us  that  the  sistrum 
averts  and  frights  away  Typhon,  insinuating  hereby  that, 
as  corruption  locks  up  and  fixes  Nature’s  course,  so  gener- 
ation again  resolves  and  excites  it  by  means  of  motion. 
Moreover,  as  the  sistrum  hath  its  upper  part  convex,  so  its 
circumference  contains  the  four  things  that  are  shaken ; 
for  that  part  of  the  world  also  which  is  liable  to  genera- 
tion and  corruption  is  contained  by  the  sphere  of  the  moon, 
but  all  things  are  moved  and  changed  in  it  by  means  of 


122 


OE  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


the  four  elements,  fire,  earth,  water,  and  air.  And  upon 
the  upper  part  of  the  circumference  of  the  sistrum,  on  the 
outside,  they  set  the  effigies  of  a cat  carved  with  a human 
face ; and  again,  on  the  under  part,  below  the  four  jingling 
things,  they  set  on  one  side  the  face  of  Isis,  and  on  the 
other  the  face  of  Nephthys ; symbolically  representing 
by  these  two  faces  generation  and  death  (for  these  are 
changes  and  alterations  of  the  elements),  and  by  the  cat 
representing  the  moon,  because  of  the  different  colors,  the 
night-motion  and  the  great  fecundity  of  this  animal.  For 
they  say  that  she  brings  forth  first  one,  then  two,  and 
three,  and  four,  and  five,  and  so  adds  one  until  she  comes 
to  seven ; so  that  she  brings  eight  and  twenty  in  all,  which 
are  as  many  as  there  are  days  in  each  moon ; but  this 
looks  more  like  a romance.  This  is  certain,  that  the  pu- 
pils of  her  eyes  are  observed  to  fill  up  and  grow  large  upon 
the  full  of  the  moon,  and  again,  to  grow  less  upon  its  de- 
crease. And  the  human  face  of  the  cat  shows  how  the 
changes  of  the  moon  are  governed  by  mind  and  reason. 

64.  To  sum  up  all  then  in  one  word,  it  is  not  reasonable 
to  believe  that  either  the  water  or  the  sun  or  the  earth  or 
the  heaven  is  Osiris  or  Isis  ; nor,  again,  that  the  fire  or  the 
drought  or  the  sea  is  Typhon  ; but  if  we  simply  ascribe  to 
Typhon  whatever  in  all  these  is  through  excesses  or  defects 
intemperate  or  disorderly,  and  if  on  the  other  hand  we  rev- 
erence and  honor  what  in  them  all  is  orderly,  good,  and 
beneficial,  esteeming  them  the  operations  of  Isis,  and  as 
the  image,  imitation,  and  discourse  of  Osiris,  we  shall  not 
err.  And  we  shall  besides  take  off  the  incredulity  of 
Eudoxus,  who  makes  a great  question  how  it  comes  to 
pass  that  neither  Ceres  hath  any  part  in  the  care  of  love 
affairs  (but  only  Isis),  nor  Bacchus  any  power  either  to 
increase  the  Nile  or  to  preside  over  the  dead.  For  we 
hold  that  these  Gods  are  set  over  the  whole  share  of  good 
in  common,  and  that  whatever  is  either  good  or  amiable 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


123 


in  Nature  is  all  owing  to  these,  the  one  yielding  the  prin- 
ciples, and  the  other  receiving  and  dispensing  them. 

65.  By  this  means  we  shall  be  able  to  deal  with  the 
vulgar  and  more  importunate  sort  also,  whether  their  fancy 
be  to  accommodate  the  things  that  refer  to  these  Gods  to 
those  changes  which  happen  to  the  ambient  air  at  the  sev- 
eral seasons  of  the  year,  or  to  production  of  fruit  and  to 
the  times  of  sowing  and  earing,  affirming  that  Osiris  is 
then  buried  when  the  sown  corn  is  covered  over  by  the 
earth,  and  that  he  revives  again  and  re-appears  when  it  be- 
gins to  sprout.  Which  they  say  is. the  reason  that  Isis  is 
reported,  upon  her  finding  herself  to  be  with  child,  to  have 
hung  a certain  amulet  or  charm  about  her  upon  the  sixth 
day  of  the  month  Phaophi,  and  to  have  been  delivered  of 
Harpocrates  about  the  winter  solstice,  he  being  in  the 
first  shootings  and  sprouts  very  imperfect  and  tender.  And 
this  is  the  reason  (say  they)  that,  when  the  lentils  begin  to 
spring  up,  they  offer  him  their  tops  for  first-fruits.  They 
also  observe  the  festival  of  her  child-birth  after  the  vernal 
equinox.  For  they  that  hear  these  things  are  much  taken 
with  them  and  readily  give  assent  to  them,  and  presently 
infer  their  credibility  from  the  obviousness  and  familiarness 
of  the  matter. 

66.  Nor  would  this  be  any  great  harm  either,  would 
they  save  us  these  Gods  in  common,  and  not  make  them 
to  be  peculiar  to  the  Egyptians,  nor  confine  these  names  to 
the  river  Nile,  and  only  to  that  one  piece  of  ground  which 
the  river  Nile  waters ; nor  affirm  their  fens  and  their  lo- 
tuses to  be  the  subject  of  this  mythology,  and  so  deprive 
the  rest  of  mankind  of  great  and  mighty  Gods,  who  have 
neither  a Nile  nor  a Buto  nor  a Memphis.  As  for  Isis,  all 
mankind  have  her,  and  are  well  acquainted  with  her  and 
the  other  Gods  about  her ; and  although  they  had  not  an- 
ciently learned  to  call  some  of  them  by  their  Egyptian 
names,  yet  they  from  the  very  first  both  knew  and  honored 
the  power  which  belongs  to  every  one  of  them.  In  the 


124 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


second  place,  what  is  yet  of  greater  consequence  is,  that 
they  take  a mighty  care  and  fear  lest,  before  they  are 
aware,  they  change  and  dissolve  the  divine  beings  into  blasts 
of  winds,  streams  of  water,  sowings  of  corn,  earings  of 
land,  accidents  of  the  earth,  and  changes  of  seasons  ; as 
those  who  make  Bacchhs  to  be  wine  and  Vulcan  to  be 
flame.  Cleanthes  also  somewhere  saith  that  Proserpine  (or 
Persephone)  is  the  breath  of  air  which  is  carried  (cpenofiavov) 
through  the  corn  and  then  dies  ( yovavopiavov ) ; and  again,  a 
certain  poet  saith  of  reapers, 

Then  when  the  youth  the  legs  of  Ceres  cut. 


For  these  men  seem  to  me  to  be  nothing  wiser  than  such 
as  would  take  the  sails,  the  cables,  and  the  anchor  of  a 
ship  for  the  pilot ; the  yarn  and  the  web  for  the  weaver ; 
and  the  bowl  or  the  mead  or  the  ptisan  for  the  doctor. 
And  they  over  and  above  produce  in  men  most  dangerous 
and  atheistical  opinions,  while  they  give  the  names  of  Gods 
to  those  natures  and  things  that  have  in  them  neither  soul 


nor  sense,  and  that  are  necessarily  destroyed  by  men  who 
need  them  and  use  them. 

67.  No  man  can  imagine  these  things  can  be  Gods  in 
themselves.  And  therefore  nothing  can  be  a God  to  men 
that  is  either  without  soul  or  under  their  power.  But  yet 
by  means  of  these  things  we  come  to  think  them  Gods  that 
use  them  themselves  and  bestow  them  upon  us,  and  that 
render  them  perpetual  and  continual.  And  those  are  not 
some  in  one  country  and  others  in  another,  nor  some  Gre- 
cians and  others  barbarians,  nor  some  southern  and  others 
northern ; but  as  the  sun,  moon,  land,  and  sea  are  common 
to  all  men,  but  yet  have  different  names  in  different  nations, 
so  that  one  discourse  that  orders  these  things,  and  that  one 
forecast  that  administers  them,  and  those  subordinate 
powers  that  are  set  over  every  nation  in  particular,  have 
assigned  them  by  the  laws  of  several  countries  several 
kinds  of  honors  and  appellations.  And  those  that  have 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


125 


been  consecrated  to  tbeir  service  make  use,  some  of  them 
of  darker,  and  others  again  of  clearer  symbols,  thereby 
guiding  the  understanding  to  the  knowledge  of  things  di- 
vine, not  without  much  danger  and  hazard.  For  some  not 
being  able  to  reach  their  true  meaning,  have  slid  into  down- 
right superstition ; and  others  again,  while  they  would  fly 
the  quagmire  of  superstition,  have  fallen  unwittingly  upon 
the  precipice  of  atheism. 

68.  And  for  this  reason  we  should  here  make  most  use 
of  the  reasonings  from  philosophy,  which  introduce  us 
into  the  knowledge  of  things  sacred,  that  so  we  may  think 
piously  of  whatever  is  said  or  acted  in  religion;  lest  — as 
Theodorus  once  said  that,  as  he  reached  forth  his  discourses 
in  liis  right  hand,  some  of  his  auditors  received  them  in 
their  left  — so  what  things  the  laws  have  wisely  constituted 
about  the  sacrifices  and  festivals  we  should  take  otherwise 
than  as  they  are  meant,  and  thereby  fall  into  most  danger- 
ous errors  and  mistakes.  That  therefore  we  are  to  con- 
strue all  these  things  by  reference  to  reason,  we  may  easily 
perceive  by  the  Egyptians  themselves.  For  upon  the  nine- 
teenth day  of  the  first  month  they  keep  a solemn  festival 
to  Hermes,  wherein  they  eat  honey  aiqd  figs,  and  withal 
say  these  words,  “ Truth  is  a sweet  thing.”  And  that  am- 
ulet or  charm  which  they  fable  Isis  to  hang  about  her  is, 
when  interpreted  into  our  language,  “ A true  voice.”  Nor 
are  we  to  understand  Harpocrates  to  be  either  some  imper- 
fect or  infant  God,  or  a God  of  pulse  (as  some  will  have 
him),  but  to  be  the  governor  and  reducer  of  the  tender, 
imperfect,  and  inarticulate  discourse  which  men  have  about 
the  Gods.  For  which  reason,  he  hath  always  his  finger 
upon  his  mouth,  as  a symbol  of  talking  little  and  keeping 
silence.  Likewise,  upon  the  month  of  Mesore,  they  pre- 
sent him  with  certain  pulse,  and  pronounce  these  words : 
“ The  tongue  is  Fortune,  the  tongue  is  God.”  And  of  all 
the  plants  that  Egypt  produces,  tliev  say  the  Persea  is  the 


126 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


most  sacred  to  the  Goddess,  because  its  fruit  resembles 
the  heart,  and  its  leaf  the  tongue.  For  there  is  nothing 
that  man  possesses  that  is  either  more  divine,  or  that  hath 
a greater  tendency  upon  happiness,  than  discourse,  and 
especially  that  which  relates  to  the  Gods.  For  which  rea- 
son they  lay  a strict  charge  upon  such  as  go  down  to  the 
oracle  there,  to  have  pious  thoughts  in  their  hearts  and 
words  of  good  omen  in  their  mouths.  But  the  greater 
part  act  ludicrous  things  in  their  processions  and  festivals, 
first  proclaiming  good  expressions,  and  then  both  speak- 
ing and  thinking  words  of  most  wicked  and  lewd  mean- 
ing, and  that  even  of  the  Gods  themselves. 

69.  How  then  must  we  manage  ourselves  at  these  tet- 
rical,  morose,  and  mournful  sacrifices,  if  we  are  neither  to 
omit  what  the  laws  prescribe  us,  nor  yet  to  confound  and 
distract  our  thoughts  about  the  Gods  with  vain  and  un- 
couth surmises  1 There  are  among  the  Greeks  also  many 
things  done  that  are  like  to  those  which  the  Egyptians  do 
at  their  solemnities,  and  much  about  the  same  time  too. 
For  at  the  Thesmophoria  at  Athens  the  women  fast  sitting 
upon  the  bare  ground.  The  Boeotians  also  remove  the 
shrines  of  Achaea^or  Ceres),  terming  that  day  the  afflic- 
tive holiday,  because  Ceres  was  then  in  great  affliction  for 
her  daughter’s  descent  into  hell.  Now  upon  this  month, 
about  the  rising  of  the  Pleiades,  is  the  sowing  time  ; and 
the  Egyptians  call  it  Athyr,  the  Athenians  Pyanepsion ; 
and  the  Boeotians  Damatrios  (or  the  month  of  Ceres). 
Moreover  Theopompus  relates,  that  those  that  live  tow- 
ards the  sun-setting  (or  the  Hesperii)  believe  the  winter  to 
be  Saturn,  the  summer  Venus,  and  the  spring  time  Proser- 
pine ; and  that  they  call  them  by  those  names,  and  main- 
tain all  to  be  produced  by  Saturn  and  Venus.  But  the 
Phrygians,  being  of  opinion  that  the  Deity  sleeps  in  the 
winter  and  wakes  in  the  summer,  do,  in  the  manner  of 
ecstatics,  in  the  winter  time  sing  lullabies  in  honor  of  his 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


127 


sleeping,  and  in  the  summer  time  certain  rousing  carols 
in  honor  of  his  waking.  In  like  manner  the  Paphlago- 
nians  say,  he  is  bound  and  imprisoned  in  the  winter,  and 
walks  abroad  again  in  the  spring  and  is  at  liberty. 

70.  And  the  nature  of  the  season  gives  us  suspicion 
that  this  tetrical  sort  of  service  was  occasioned  by  the 
absenting  of  the  several  sorts  of  fruits  at  that  time  of  the 
year ; which  yet  the  ancients  did  not  believe  to  be  Gods, 
but  such  gifts  of  the  Gods  as  were  both  great  and  neces- 
sary in  order  to  preserve  them  from  a savage  and  bestial 
life.  And  at  what  time  they  saw  both  the  fruits  that  came 
from  trees  wholly  to  disappear  and  fail,  and  those  also 
which  themselves  had  sown  to  be  yet  but  starved  and  poor, 
they  taking  up  fresh  mould  in  their  hands  and  laying  it 
about  their  roots,  and  committing  them  a second  time  to 
the  ground  with  uncertain  hopes  of  their  ever  coming  to 
perfection  or  arriving  to  maturity,  did  herein  many  things 
that  might  well  resemble  people  at  funerals  and  mourning 
for  the  dead.  Moreover,  as  we  use  to  say  of  one  that  hath 
bought  the  books  of  Plato,  that  he  hath  bought  Plato,  and 
of  one  that  hath  taken  upon  him  to  act  the  compositions 
of  Menander,  that  he  hath  acted  Menander ; in  like  man- 
ner they  did  not  stick  to  call  the  gifts  and  creatures  of  the 
Gods  by  the  names  of  the  Gods  themselves,  paying  this 
honor  and  veneration  to  them  for  their  necessary  use. 
But  those  of  after  times  receiving  this  practice  unskilfully 
and  ignorantly,  applying  the  accidents  of  fruits,  and  the 
accesses  and  recesses  of  things  necessary  to  human  life, 
unto  the  Gods,  did  not  only  call  them  the  generations  and 
deaths  of  the  Gods,  but  also  believed  them  such,  and  so 
filled  themselves  with  abundance  of  absurd,  wicked,  and 
distempered  notions  ; and  this,  although  they  had  the  ab- 
surdity of  such  a monstrous  opinion  before  their  very  eyes. 
And  therefore  Xenophanes  the  Colophonian  might  not 
only  put  the  Egyptians  in  mind,  if  they  believed  those 


128 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


they  worshipped  to  be  Gods,  not  to  lament  for  them,  and 
if  they  lamented  for  them,  not  to  believe  them  to  be  Gods  ; 
but  also  that  it  would  be  extremely  ridiculous  at  one  and 
the  same  time  to  lament  for  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  and  to 
pray  them  to  appear  again  and  make  themselves  ripe, 
that  so  they  may  be  over  again  consumed  and  lamented 
for. 

71.  But  now  this  in  its  true  intention  is  no  such  thing. 
But  they  make  their  lamentation  for  the  fruits ; and  their 
prayers  to  the  Gods,  who  are  the  authors  and  bestowers 
of  those  fruits,  that  they  would  be  pleased  to  produce  and 
bring  up  again  other  new  ones  in  the  place  of  them  that 
are  gone.  Wherefore  it  is  an  excellent  saying  among 
philosophers,  that  they  that  have  not  learned  the  true 
sense  of  words  will  mistake  also  in  the  things ; as  we  see 
those  among  the  Greeks  who  have  not  learned  nor  accus- 
tomed themselves  to  call  the  brazen  and  stone  statues  and 
the  painted  representations  of  the  Gods  their  images  or 
their  honors,  but  the  Gods  themselves,  are  so  adventurous 
as  to  say  that  Lachares  stripped  Minerva,  that  Dionysius 
cropped  off  Apollo’s  golden  locks,  and  that  Jupiter  Capi- 
tolinus  was  burned  and  destroyed  in  the  civil  wars  of 
Borne.  They  therefore,  before  they  are  aware,  suck  in 
and  receive  bad  opinions  with  these  improper  words.  And 
the  Egyptians  are  not  the  least  guilty  herein,  with  respect 
to  the  animals  which  they  worship.  For  the  Grecians 
both  speak  and  think  aright  in  these  matters,  when  they 
tell  us  that  the  pigeon  is  sacred  to  Venus,  the  serpent  to 
Minerva,  the  raven  to  Apollo,  and  the  dog  to  Diana,  as 
Euripides  somewhere  speaks : 

Into  a bitch  transformed  you  shall  be, 

And  be  the  image  of  bright  Hecate. 

But  the  greater  part  of  the  Egyptians  worshipping  the 
very  animals  themselves,  and  courting  them  as  Gods,  have 
not  only  filled  their  religious  worship  with  matter  of  scorn 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


129 


and  derision  (for  that  would  be  the  least  harm  that  could 
come  of  their  blockish  ignorance);  but  a dire  conception 
also  arises  therefrom,  which  blows  up  the  feeble  and  simple 
minded  into  an  extravagance  of  superstition,  and  when  it 
lights  upon  the  more  subtle  and  daring  tempers,  outrages 
them  into  atheistical  and  brutish  cogitations.  Wherefore 
it  seems  not  inconsonant  here  to  recount  what  is  probable 
upon  this  subject. 

72.  For  that  the  Gods,  being  afraid  of  Typhon,  changed 
themselves  into  these  animals,  and  did  as  it  were  hide 
themselves  in  the  bodies  of  ibises,  dogs,  and  hawks,  is  a 
foolery  beyond  all  prodigiousness  and  legend.  And  that 
such  souls  of  men  departed  this  life  as  remain  undissolved 
after  death  have  leave  to  be  reborn  into  this  life  by  these 
bodies  only,  is  equally  incredible.  And  of  those  who 
would  assign  some  political  reason  for  these  things,  there 
are  some  that  affirm  that  Osiris  in  his  great  army,  dividing 
his  forces  into  many  parts  (which  we  in  Greek  call  lo^oi 
and  rahig),  at  the  same  time  gave  every  of  them  certain 
ensigns  or  colors  with  the  shapes  of  several  animals  upon 
them,  which  in  process  of  time  came  to  be  looked  upon  as 
sacred,  and  to  be  worshipped  by  the  several  kindred  and 
clans  in  that  distribution.  Others  say  again,  that  the  kings 
of  after  times  did,  for  the  greater  terror  of  their  enemies, 
wear  about  them  in  their  battles  the  golden  and  silver 
heads  and  upper  parts  of  fierce  animals.  But  there  are 
others  that  relate  that  one  of  these  subtle  and  crafty 
princes,  observing  the  Egyptians  to  be  of  a light  and  vain 
disposition  and  very  inclinable  to  change  and  innovation, 
and  withal,  when  sober  and  unanimous,  of  an  inexpug- 
nable and  irrestrainable  strength  by  reason  of  their  mighty 
numbers,  therefore  taught  them,  in  their  several  quarters, 
a perpetual  kind  of  superstition,  to  be  the  ground  of  end- 
less quarrels  and  disputes  among  them.  For  the  various 
animals  which  he  commanded  different  cities  to  observe 


VOL.  IV. 


9 


130 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


and  reverence  being  at  enmity  and  war  with  one  another, 
and  desiring  one  another  for  food,  each  party  among  them 
being  upon  the  perpetual  defence  of  their  proper  animals, 
and  highly  resenting  the  wrongs  that  were  offered  them, 
it  happened  that,  being  thus  drawn  into  the  quarrels  of 
their  beasts,  they  were,  before  they  were  aware,  engaged 
in  hostilities  with  one  another.  For  at  this  very  day,  the 
Lycopolitans  (or  Wolf-town-men)  are  the  only  people  among 
the  Egyptians  that  eat  the  sheep,  because  the  wolf,  which 
they  esteem  to  be  a God,  doth  so  too.  And  in  our  own 
times,  the  Oxyrynchites  (or  those  of  Pike-town),  because 
the  Cynopolitans  (or  those  of  Dog-town)  did  eat  a pike, 
catched  the  dogs  and  slew  them,  and  ate  of  them  as  they 
would  do  of  a sacrifice  ; and  there  arising  a civil  war  upon 
it,  in  which  they  did  much  mischief  fo  one  another,  they 
were  all  at  last  chastised  by  the  Romans. 

73.  And  whereas  there  are  many  that  say  that  the  soul 
of  Typhon  himself  took  its  flight  into  these  animals,  this 
tale  may  be  looked  upon  to  signify  that  every  irrational  and 
brutal  nature  appertains  to  the  share  of  the  evil  Daemon. 
And  therefore,  when  they  would  pacify  him  and  speak  him 
fair,  they  make  their  court  and  addresses  to  these  animals. 
But  if  there  chance  to  happen  a great  and  excessive 
drought  which,  above  what  is  ordinary  at  other  times, 
brings  along  with  it  either  wasting  diseases  or  other 
monstrous  and  prodigious  calamities,  the  priests  then  con- 
duct into  a dark  place,  with  great  silence  and  stillness, 
some  of  the  animals  which  are  honored  by  them  ; and  they 
first  of  all  menace  and  terrify  them,  and  if  the  mischief 
still  continues,  they  then  consecrate  and  offer  them  up, 
looking  upon  this  as  a way  of  punishing  the  evil  God,  or 
at  least  as  some  grand  purgation  in  time  of  greatest  disas- 
ters. For,  as  Manetlio  relateth,  they  were  used  in  ancient 
times  to  burn  live  men  in  the  city  of  Ilithyia,  entitling  them 
Typhonian;  and  then  they  made  wind,  and  dispersed  and 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


131 


scattered  tlieir  ashes  into  the  air.  And  this  was  done 
publicly,  and  at  one  only  season  of  the  year,  which  was 
the  doff-davs.  But  those  consecrations  of  the  animals 

o v 

worshipped  by  them  which  are  made  in  secret,  and  at 
irregular  and  uncertain  times  of  the  year  as  occasions  re- 
quire, are  wholly  unknown  to  the  vulgar  sort,  except  only 
at  the  time  of  their  burials,  at  which  they  produce  certain 
other  animals,  and  in  the  presence  of  all  spectators  throw 
them  into  the  grave  with  them,  thinking  by  this  means  to 
vex  Typhon  and  to  abate  the  satisfaction  he  received  by 
their  deaths.  For  it  is  the  Apis,  with  a few  more,  that  is 
thought  sacred  to  Osiris ; but  the  far  greater  part  are  as- 
signed to  Typhon.  And  if  this  account  of  theirs  be  true, 
I believe  it  explains  the  subject  of  our  enquiry  as  to  such 
animals  as  are  universally  received  and  have  their  honors 
in  common  amongst  them  all;  and  of  this  kind  is  the  ibis, 
the  haivk,  the  cynocephalos,  and  the  Apis  himself ; . . . 
for  so  they  call  the  goat  which  is  kept  at  Mendes. 

74.  It  remains  yet  behind,  that  1 treat  of  their  bene- 
ficialness to  man,  and  of  their  symbolical  use ; and  some 
of  them  participate  of  some  one  of  these,  and  others  of 
both.  It  is  most  manifest  therefore  that  they  worship  the 
ox,  the  sheep,  and  the  ichneumon  for  their  benefit  and 
use ; as  the  Lemniotes  did  the  lark,  for  finding  out  the 
locusts’  eggs  and  breaking  them,  and  the  Thessalians  the 
storks,  because  that,  as  their  soil  bred  abundance  of  ser- 
pents, they  at  their  appearance  destroyed  them  all,  for 
which  reason  they  enacted  a law  that  whoever  killed  a 
stork  should  be  banished  the  country.  Moreover  the 
Egyptians  honored  the  asp,  the  weasel,  and  the  beetle, 
observing  in  them  certain  dark  resemblances  of  the  power 
of  the  Gods,  like  those  of  the  sun  in  drops  of  water.  For 
there  are  many  that  to  this  day  believe  that  the  weasel 
engenders  by  the  ear,  and  brings  forth  by  the  mouth,  and 
is  therein  a resemblance  of  the  production  of  speech ; and 


132 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


that  the  beetle  kind  also  hath  no  female,  but  that  the  males 
cast  out  their  sperm  into  a round  pellet  of  earth,  which 
they  roll  about  by  thrusting  it  backwards  with  their  hinder 
feet,  — and  this  in  imitation  of  the  sun,  which,  while  itself 
moves  from  west  to  east,  turns  the  heaven  the  contrary 
way.  They  also  compared  the  asp  to  a star,  for  being 
always  young,  and  for  performing  its  motions  with  great 
ease  and  glibness,  and  that  without  the  help  of  organs. 

75.  Nor  had  the  crocodile  his  honor  given  him  without 
a show  of  probable  reason  for  it ; but  it  is  reported  to 
have  been  produced  by  a representation  of  God,  it  being 
the  only  animal  that  is  without  tongue.  For  the  divine 
discourse  hath  no  need  of  voice,  but  “ marching  by  still 
and  silent  ways,  it  guides  mortal  affairs  by  equal  justice.”* 
Besides,  they  say  he  is  the  only  animal  that  lives  in  water 
that  hath  his  eye-sight  covered  over  with  a thin  and  trans- 
parent film,  descending  down  from  his  forehead,  so  that  he 
sees  without  being  seen  himself  by  others,  in  which  he 
agrees  with  the  first  God.  Moreover,  in  what  place  soever 
in  the  country  the  female  crocodile  lays  her  eggs,  that  may 
be  certainly  concluded  to  be  the  utmost  extent  of  the  rise 
of  the  river  Nile  for  that  year.  For  not  being  able  to  lay 
in  the  water,  and  being  afraid  to  lay  far  from  it,  they  have 
so  exact  a knowledge  of  futurity,  that  though  they  enjoy 
the  benefit  of  the  approaching  stream  at  their  laying  and 
hatching,  they  yet  preserve  their  eggs  dry  and  untouched 
by  the  water.  And  they  lay  sixty  in  all,  and  are  just  as 
many  days  a hatching  them,  and  the  longest  lived  of  them 
live  as  many  years  ; that  being  the  first  measure  which 
those  that  are  employed  about  the  heavens  make  use  of. 
But  of  those  animals  that  were  honored  for  both  reasons, 
we  have  already  treated  of  the  dog ; but  now  the  ibis, 
besides  that  he  killeth  all  deadly  and  poisonous  vermin, 
was  also  the  first  that  taught  men  the  evacuation  of  the 

* Euripides,  Troad.  887. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


133 


belly  by  clysters,  she  being  observed  to  be  after  this  man- 
ner washed  and  purged  by  herself.  Those  also  of  the 
priests  that  are  the  strictest  observers  of  their  sacred  rites, 
when  they  consecrate  water  for  lustration,  use  to  fetch  it 
from  some  place  where  the  ibis  has  been  drinking ; for  she 
will  neither  taste  nor  come  near  any  unwholesome  or  in- 
fectious water.  Besides,  with  her  two  legs  standing  at 
large  and  her  bill,  she  maketh  an  equilateral  triangle  ; and 
the  speckledness  and  mixture  of  her  feathers,  where  there 
are  black  ones  about  the  white,  signify  the  gibbousness  of 
the  moon  on  either  side. 

76.  Nor  ought  we  to  think  it  strange  that  the  Egyptians 
should  affect  such  poor  and  slender  comparisons,  when  we 
find  the  Grecians  themselves,  both  in  their  pictures  and 
statues,  make  use  of  many  such  resemblances  of  the  Gods 
as  these  are.  For  example,  there  was  in  Crete  an  image 
of  Jupiter  having  no  ears,  for  he  that  is  commander  and 
chief  over  all  should  hear  no  one.  Phidias  also  set  a ser- 
pent by  the  image  of  Minerva,  and  a tortoise  by  that  of 
Venus  at  Elis,  to  show  that  maids  needed  a guard  upon 
them,  and  that  silence  and  keeping  at  home  became  mar- 
ried women.  In  like  manner  the  trident  of  Neptune  is  a 
symbol  of  the  third  region  of  the  world,  which  the  sea 
possesses,  situated  below  that  of  the  heaven  and  air.  For 
which  reason  they  also  gave  their  names  to  Amphitrite  and 
the  Tritons.  The  Pythagoreans  also  honored  numbers  and 
geometric  figures  with  the  names  of  Gods.  For  they  called 
an  equilateral  triangle  Minerva  Coryphagenes  (or  crown- 
born)  and  Tritogeneia,  because  it  is  equally  divided  by  per- 
pendiculars drawn  from  the  three  angles.  They  likewise 
called  the  unit  Apollo  ; the  number  two,  contention  and  also 
audaciousness  ; and  the  number  three,  justice  ; for,  wronging 
and  being  wronged  being  two  extremes  caused  by  deficien- 
cy and  excess,  justice  came  by  equality  in  the  middle. 
But  that  which  is  called  the  sacred  quaternion,  being  the 


134 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


number  thirty-six,  was  (according  to  common  fame)  the 
greatest  oath  among  them,  and  was  called  by  them  the  world, 
because  it  is  made  up  of  the  first  four  even  numbers  and 
the  first  four  odd  numbers  summed  up  together. 

77.  If  therefore  the  most  approved  of  the  philosophers 
did  not  think  meet  to  pass  over  or  disesteem  any  signifi- 
cant symbol  of  the  Divinity  which  they  observed  even  in 
things  that  had  neither  soul  nor  body,  I believe  they  re- 
garded yet  more  those  properties  of  government  and  con- 
duct which  they  saw  in  such  natures  as  had  sense,  and 
were  endued  with  soul,  with  passion,  and  with  moral  tem- 
per. We  are  not  therefore  to  content  ourselves  with  wor- 
shipping these  things,  but  we  must  worship  God  through 
them,  — as  being  the  more  clear  mirrors  of  him,  and  pro- 
duced by  Nature,  — so  as  ever  worthily  to  conceive  of  them 
as  the  instruments  or  artifices  of  that  God  which  orders 
all  things.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  believe  that  no  inani- 
mate being  can  be  more  excellent  than  an  animate  one,  nor 
an  insensible  than  a sensible ; no,  though  one  should  heap 
together  all  the  gold  and  emeralds  in  the  universe.  For 
the  property  of  the  Divinity  consists  not  in  fine  colors, 
shapes,  and  slicknesses  ; but,  on  the  contrary,  those  natures 
are  of  a rank  below  the  very  dead,  that  neither  did  nor 
ever  can  partake  of  life.  But  now  that  Nature  which  hath 
life  and  sees,  and  which  hath  the  source  of  her  motion 
from  her  own  self,  as  also  the  knowledge  of  things  proper 
and  alien  to  her,  hath  certainly  derived  an  efflux  and  a 
portion  of  that  prudence  which  (as  Heraclitus  speaks) 
considers  how  the  whole  universe  is  governed.  Therefore 
the  Deity  is  no  worse  represented  in  these  animals,  than  in 
the  workmanships  of  copper  and  stone,  which  suffer  cor- 
ruptions and  decays  as  well  as  they,  and  are  besides  natu- 
rally void  of  sense  and  perception.  This  then  is  what  I 
esteem  the  best  account  that  is  given  of  their  adoration  of 
animals. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


135 


78.  As  to  the  sacred  vestments,  that  of  Isis  is  party- 
colored  and  of  different  hues  ; for  her  power  is  about  mat- 
ter, which  becomes  every  thing  and  receives  every  thing, 
as  light  and  darkness,  day  and  night,  fire  and  water,  life 
and  death,  beginning  and  ending.  But  that  of  Osiris  has 
no  shade,  no  variety  of  colors,  but  one  only  simple  one, 
resembling  light.  For  the  first  principle  is  untempered, 
and  that  which  is  first  and  of  an  intelligible  nature  is 
unmixed ; which  is  the  reason  why,  after  they  have  once 
made  use  of  this  garment,  they  lay  it  up  and  keep  it  close, 
invisible  and  not  to  be  touched.  But  those  of  Isis  are 
used  often.  For  sensible  things,  when  they  are  of  daily 
use  and  familiar  to  us,  afford  us  many  opportunities  to  dis- 
play them  and  to  see  them  in  their  various  mutations ; but 
the  apprehension  of  what  is  intelligible,  sincere,  and  holy, 
darting  through  the  soul  like  a flash  of  lightning,  attends 
but  to  some  one  single  glance  or  glimpse  of  its  object. 
For  which  reason  both  Plato  and  Aristotle  call  this  part 
of  philosophy  by  the  name  of  the  epoptic  or  mysterious 
part,  intimating  that  those  who  by  help  of  reason  have  got 
beyond  these  fanciful,  mixed,  and  various  things  mount  up 
to  that  first,  simple,  and  immaterial  being ; and  when  they 
have  certainly  reached  the  pure  truth  about  it,  they  believe 
they  have  at  last  attained  to  complete  philosophy. 

79.  And  that  which  the  present  priests  do  darkly  hint 
out  and  insinuate  to  us,  though  with  much  obscurity,  great 
shyness,  and  precaution,  — that  this  God  is  the  governor 
and  prince  of  those  that  are  dead,  and  that  he  is  no  other 
than  he  who  is  called  by  the  Greeks  Hades  and  Pluto,  — 
being  not  taken  in  its  true  sense,  disturbs  the  minds  of  the 
greater  part,  while  they  suspect  that  the  truly  holy  and 
good  God  Osiris  lives  within  and  beneath  the  earth,  where 
the  bodies  of  those  who  are  supposed  to  have  an  end  lie 
hid  and  buried.  But  he  himself  is  at  the  remotest  distance 
from  the  earth  imaginable,  being  unstained  and  unpolluted, 


136 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


and  clean  from  every  substance  that  is  liable  to  corruption 
and  death.  But  men’s  souls  encompassed  here  with  bod- 
ies and  passions,  have  no  communication  with  God,  ex- 
cept what  they  can  reach  to  in  conception  only,  by  means 
of  philosophy,  as  by  a kind  of  an  obscure  dream.  But 
when  they  are  loosed  from  the  body,  and  removed  into  the 
unseen,  invisible,  impassible,  and  pure  region,  this  God  is 
then  their  leader  and  king ; they  there  as  it  were  hanging 
on  him  wholly,  and  beholding  without  weariness  and  pas- 
sionately affecting  that  beauty  which  cannot  be  expressed 
or  uttered  by  men.  This  the  Goddess  Isis  is  always  ca- 
ressing, affecting,  and  enjoying,  according  to  the  old  tales, 
and  by  that  means  she  fills  this  lower  world  with  all  those 
goodly  and  excellent  things  which  partake  of  generation. 

80.  This  then  is  that  account  of  these  things  which 
best  suits  the  nature  of  the  Gods.  And  if  I now  must, 
according  to  my  promise,  say  something  concerning  those 
things  they  daily  offer  by  way  of  incense,  you  are  in  the 
first  place  to  understand  this,  that  these  people  make  the 
greatest  account  imaginable  of  all  endeavors  that  relate  to 
health  ; and  more  especially  in  their  sacrifices,  purgations, 
and  diets,  health  is  no  less  respected  than  devotion.  For 
they  think  it  would  be  an  unseemly  thing  to  wait  upon 
that  nature  that  is  pure  and  every  way  unblemished  and 
untouched,  with  crazy  and  diseased  minds  or  bodies. 
Whereas,  therefore,  the  air  that  we  most  use  and  live  in 
hath  not  always  the  same  disposition  and  temperament, 
but  in  the  night-time  grows  condense,  compresses  the  body, 
and  contracts  the  mind  into  a kind  of  melancholy  and 
thoughtful  habit,  it  becoming  then  as  it  were  foggy  and 
dozed,  they  therefore,  as  soon  as  they  are  up  in  the  morn- 
ing, burn  rosin  about  them,  refreshing  and  clearing  the  air 
by  its  scattered  particles,  and  fanning  up  the  native  spirit 
of  the  body,  which  is  now  grown  languid  and  dull ; this 
sort  of  scent  having  something  in  it  that  is  very  impetuous 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


137 


and  striking.  And  perceiving  again  at  noon-time  that  the 
sun  hath  drawn  up  by  violence  a copious  and  gross  ex- 
halation out  of  the  earth,  they  by  censing  mix  myrrh  also 
with  the  air  ; for  heat  dissolves  and  dissipates  that  puddled 
and  slimy  vapor  which  at  that  time  gathers  together  in 
the  ambient  air.  And  physicians  are  also  found  to  help 
pestilential  diseases  by  making  great  blazes  to  rarefy  the 
air  ; but  it  would  be  much  better  rarefied,  if  they  would 
burn  sweet-scented  woods,  such  as  cypress,  juniper,  and 
pine.  And  therefore  Acron  the  physician  is  said  to  have 
gained  a mighty  reputation  at  Athens,  in  the  time  of  the 
great  plague,  by  ordering  people  to  make  fires  near  to  the 
sick  ; for  not  a few  were  benefited  by  it.  Aristotle  like- 
wise saith  that  the  odoriferous  exhalations  of  perfumes, 
flowers,  and  sweet  meadows  are  no  less  conducing  to  health 
than  to  pleasure  ; for  that  their  warmth  and  delicacy  of 
motion  gently  relax  the  brain,  which  is  of  its  own  nature 
cold  and  clammy.  And  if  it  be  true  that  the  Egyptians  in 
their  language  call  myrrh  bal,  and  that  the  most  proper 
signification  of  that  word  is  scattering  away  idle  talk , this 
also  adds  some  testimony  to  our  account  of  the  reason  why 
they  burn  it. 

81.  Moreover,  that  they  call  Kyplii  is  a kind  of  a com- 
position made  up  of  sixteen  ingredients,  that  is,  of  honey, 
wine,  raisins,  cyperus,  rosin,  myrrh,  aspalathus,  seseli,  mas- 
tich,  bitumen,  nightshade,  and  dock ; to  which  they  add 
the  berries  of  both  the  junipers  (the  one  whereof  they 
call  the  greater,  and  the  other  the  lesser  sort),  as  also  cala- 
mus and  cardamom.  Neither  do  they  put  them  together 
slightly  or  at  a random  rate ; but  the  sacred  books  are 
read  to  the  perfumers  all  the  while  they  are  compounding 
them.  As  for  the  number  of  the  ingredients  (sixteen), 
— although  it  may  appear  important,  being  the  square  of 
a square,  and  making  the  only  square  surface  which  has  a 
periphery  equal  to  its  area,  — yet  I must  needs  say  that 


138 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


this  contributes  but  very  little  here.  But  it  is  the  con- 
tained species  (most  of  which  are  of  aromatic  properties) 
that  send  up  a sweet  fume  and  an  agreeable  exhalation,  by 
which  the  air  is  changed  ; and  the  body,  being  moved  by 
the  breath,  sinks  into  a calm  and  gentle  sleep,  and  retains 
a temperament  conducive  to  sleep  ; and  without  the  dis- 
orders of  drunkenness,  as  it  were,  it  loosens  and  unties, 
like  a sort  of  knots,  the  doziness  and  intenseness  of  the 
thoughts  by  day-time ; and  the  fantastic  part  and  that 
which  is  receptive  of  dreams  it  wipes  like  a mirror  and 
renders  clearer,  with  no  less  efficacy  than  those  strokes  of 
the  harp  which  the  Pythagoreans  made  use  of  before  they 
went  to  sleep,  to  charm  and  allay  the  distempered  and 
irrational  part  of  the  soul.  For  we  find  that  strong  scents 
many  times  call  back  the  failing  sense,  but  sometimes  dull 
and  obstruct  it,  their  wasted  parts  diffusing  themselves  by 
their  great  fineness  and  subtilty  through  the  whole  body ; 
like  as  some  physicians  tell  us  that  sleep  is  produced  when 
the  fumes  of  meat,  by  creeping  gently  about  the  inwards, 
and  as  it  were  groping  every  part,  cause  a certain  soft 
titillation. 

They  also  use  this  Kyphi  both  for  a drink  and  for  a 
medicinal  potion ; for  when  drunk  it  is  found  to  cleanse 
the  inwards,  it  being  a loosener  of  the  belly.  Besides  all 
this,  rosin  is  the  creature  of  the  sun,  and  they  gather 
myrrh  as  the  trees  weep  it  out  by  moonlight ; but  now  of 
those  ingredients  that  make  up  Kyphi,  there  are  some  that 
delight  more  in  the  night,  as  those  whose  nature  it  is  to  be 
nourished  by  cool  blasts,  shades,  dews,  and  humidities. 
For  the  light  of  day  is  one  thing  and  simple  ; and  Pindar 
saith,  the  sun  is  then  seen 

Through  solitary  air.* 

But  the  air  of  night  is  a kind  of  composition  ; for  it  is 
made  up  of  many  lights  and  powers,  which,  like  so  many 

* Pindar,  Olymp.  I.  10. 


OF  ISIS  AND  OSIRIS. 


139 


several  seeds,  flow  down  from  every  star  into  one  place. 
They  therefore  very  pertinently  cense  the  former  things  by 
daytime,  as  being  simples  and  deriving  their  original  from 
the  sun ; and  the  latter  at  the  entrance  of  the  night,  they 
being  mixed  and  of  many  and  different  qualities. 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM  GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


PATROCLEAS,  PLUTARCH,  TIMON,  OLYMPICUS. 

1.  These  and  such  like  things,  O Quintus!  when  Epi- 
curus had  spoken,  before  any  person  could  return  an 
answer,  while  we  were  busy  at  the  farther  end  of  the  por- 
tico,* he  flung  away  in  great  haste.  However,  we  could 
not  but  in  some  measure  admire  at  the  odd  behavior  of  the 
man,  though  without  taking  any  farther  notice  of  it  in 
words  ; and  therefore,  after  we  had  gazed  a while  one  upon 
another,  we  returned  to  Avalk  as  we  were  singled  out  in  com- 
pany before.  At  this  time  Patrocleas  first  breaking  silence, 
How  say  ye,  gentlemen?  said  he:  if  you  think  fitting,  why 
may  not  we  discuss  this  question  of  the  last  proposer  as 
well  in  his  absence  as  if  he  were  present?  To  whom 
Timon  replying,  Surely,  said  he,  it  would  hut  ill  become 
us,  if  at  us  he  aimed  upon  his  departure,  to  neglect  the 
arrow  sticking  in  our  sides.  For  Brasidas,  as  history  re- 
ports, drawing  forth  the  javelin  out  of  his  own  body,  with 
the  same  javelin  not  only  wounded  him  that  threw  it,  but 
slew  him  outright.  But  as  for  ourselves,  we  surely  have  no 
need  to  revenge  ourselves  on  them  that  pelt  us  Avith  absurd 
and  fallacious  reasonings  ; but  it  Avill  be  sufficient  that  avc 
shake  them  off  before  our  opinion  has  taken  hold  of  them. 
Then,  said  I,  Avhich  of  his  sayings  is  it  that  has  given  you 
the  greatest  cause  to  be  moved?  For  the  man  dragged 
into  his  discourse  many  things  confusedly,  and  nothing  in 

— i — . * The  scene  of  the  dialogue  is  laid  in  the  temple  of  Delphi.  (G.) 


OF  THOSE  WHOM  GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  FUNISH. 


141 


order ; but  gleaning  up  and  down  from  this  and  the  other 
place,  as  it  were  in  the  transports  of  his  wrath  and  scur- 
rility, he  then  poured  the  whole  in  one  torrent  of  abuse 
upon  the  providence  of  God. 

2.  To  which  Patrocleas : The  slowness  of  the  Supreme 
Deity  and  his  procrastination  in  reference  to  the  punish- 
ment of  the  wicked  have  long  perplexed  my  thoughts  ; but 
now,  puzzled  by  these  arguments  which  he  produces,  I 
find  myself  as  it  were  a stranger  to  the  opinion,  and  newly 
beginning  again  to  learn.  For  a long  time  I could  not  with 
patience  hear  that  expression  of  Euripides, 

Does  he  delay  and  slowly  move  ; 

’Tis  but  the  nature  of  the  Gods  above.* 

For  indeed  it  becomes  not  the  Supreme  Deity  to  be  remiss 
in  any  thing,  but  more  especially  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
wicked,  since  they  themselves  are  no  way  negligent  or 
dilatory  in  doing  mischief,  but  are  always  driven  on  by  the 
most  rapid  impetuosities  of  their  passions  to  acts  of  injus- 
tice. For  certainly,  according  to  the  saying  of  Thucydides, 
that  revenge  which  follows  injury  closest  at  the  heels  pres- 
ently puts  a stop  to  the  progress  of  such  as  make  advantage 
of  successful  wickedness. f Therefore  there  is  no  debt 
with  so  much  prejudice  put  off,  as  that  of  justice.  For  it 
weakens  the  hopes  of  the  person  wronged  and  renders  him 
comfortless  and  pensive,  but  heightens  the  boldness  and 
daring  insolence  of  the  oppressor ; whereas,  on  the  other 
side,  those  punishments  and  chastisements  that  immediately 
withstand  presuming  violence  not  only  restrain  the  com- 
mitting of  future  outrages,  but  more  especially  bring  along 
with  them  a particular  comfort  and  satisfaction  to  the  suf- 
ferers. Which  makes  me  no  less  troubled  at  the  saying 
of  Bias,  which  frequently  comes  into  my  mind.  For  thus 
he  spake  once  to  a notorious  reprobate:  It  is  not  that  I 
doubt  thou  wilt  suffer  the  just  reward  of  thy  wickedness, 

* Eurip.  Orestes,  420.  t See  the  speech  of  Cleon,  Thuc.  III.  38. 


142 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


but  I fear  that  I myself  shall  not  live  to  see  it.  For  what 
did  the  punishment  of  Aristocrates  avail  the  Messenians 
who  were  killed  before  it  came  to  pass?  He,  having  be- 
trayed them  at  the  battle  of  Taphrus  yet  remained  unde- 
tected for  above  twenty  years  together,  and  all  that  while 
reigned  king  of  the  Arcadians,  till  at  length,  discovered  and 
apprehended,  he  received  the  merited  recompense  of  his 
treachery.  But  alas  ! they  whom  he  had  betrayed  were  all 
dead  at  the  same  time.  Or  when  the  Orchomenians  had 
lost  their  children,  their  friends,  and  familiar  acquaintance 
through  the  treachery  of  Lyciscus,  what  consolation  was  it 
to  them,  that  many  years  after  a foul  distemper  seized  the 
traitor,  and  fed  upon  his  body  till  it  had  consumed  his 
putrefied  flesh?  — who,  as  often  as  he  dipped  and  bathed 
his  feet  in  the  river,  with  horrid  oaths  and  execrations 
prayed  that  his  members  might  rot  if  he  had  been  guilty 
of  treachery  or  any  other  villany.  Nor  was  it  possible 
even  for  the  children’s  children  of  the  Athenians  who  had 
been  murdered  long  before,  to  behold  the  bodies  of  those 
sacrilegious  caitiffs  torn  out  of  their  graves  and  transported 
beyond  the  confines  of  their  native  soil.  Whence,  in  my 
opinion,  Euripides  absurdly  makes  use  of  these  expres- 
sions, to  divert  a man  from  wickedness  : 

If  thou  fear’st  heav’n,  thou  fearest  it  in  vain  ; 

Justice  is  not  so  hasty,  foolish  man, 

To  pierce  thy  heart,  or  with  contagious  wound 
Or  thee  or  weaker  mortals  to  confound ; 

But  with  slow  pace  and  silent  feet  his  doom 
O’ertakes  the  sinner,  when  his  time  is  come. 

And  I am  apt  to  persuade  myself  that  upon  these  and  no 
other  considerations  it  is,  that  wicked  men  encourage  and 
give  themselves  the  liberty  to  attempt  and  commit  all  man- 
ner of  impieties,  seeing  that  the  fruit  which  injustice  yields 
is  soon  ripe,  and  offers  itself  early  to  the  gatherer’s  hand, 
whereas  punishment  comes  late,  and  lagging  long  behind 
the  pleasure  of  enjoyment. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


143 


3.  After  Patrocleas  had  thus  discoursed,  Olympicus 
taking  him  up,  There  is  this  farther,  said  he,  O Patrocleas ! 
which  thou  shouldst  have  taken  notice  of ; for  how  great 
an  inconveniency  and  absurdity  arises  besides  from  these 
delays  and  procrastinations  of  divine  justice ! For  the 
slowness  of  its  execution  takes  away  the  belief  of  provi- 
dence ; and  the  wicked,  perceiving  that  calamity  does  not 
presently  follow  at  the  heels  of  every  enormous  crime,  but 
a long  time  after,  look  upon  their  calamity  as  a misfortune, 
and  calling  it  chance,  not  punishment,  are  nothing  at  all 
thereby  reformed  ; troubled  indeed  they  well  may  be  at  the 
dire  accident  befallen  them,  but  they  never  repent  of  the 
villanies  they  have  committed.  For  as,  in  the  case  of 
the  horse,  the  lashing  and  spurring  that  immediately  pursue 
the  transgression  correct  and  reduce  him  to  his  duty,  but 
all  the  tugging  at  the  bit  and  shouting  which  are  late  and 
out  of  time  seem  to  be  inflicted  for  some  other  reason  than 
to  teach  or  instruct,  the  animal  being  thereby  put  to  pain 
without  understanding  his  error ; in  like  manner,  were  the 
impieties  of  enormous  transgressors  and  heinous  offenders 
singly  scourged  and  repressed  by  immediate  severity,  it 
would  be  most  likely*  to  bring  them  to  a sense  of  their 
folly,  humble  them,  and  strike  them  with  an  awe  of  the 
Divine  Being,  whom  they  find  with  a watchful  eye  behold- 
ing the  actions  and  passions  of  men,  and  feel  to  be  no 
dilatory  but  a speedy  avenger  of  iniquity ; whereas  that 
remiss  and  slow-paced  justice  (as  Euripides  describes  it) 
that  falls  upon  the  wicked  by  accident,  by  reason  of  its 
uncertainty,  ill-timed  delay,  and  disorderly  motion,  seems 
rather  to  resemble  chance  than  providence.  So  that  I 
cannot  conceive  what  benefit  there  is  in  these  millstones 
of  the  Gods  which  are  said  to  grind  so  late^  as  thereby 

* I follow  Wyttenbach’s  emendation  gaKiar'  av  for  goltr  av.  (G.) 

t Referring  to  the  verse,  ’Oipe  deuv  iikcovoL  gv?ioi,  aXeovai  cie  Aerrra,  the  mills  of  the 
Gods  grind  late,  but  they  grind  fine.  (G.) 


144 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


celestial  punishment  is  obscured,  and  the  awe  of  evil  doing 
rendered  vain  and  despicable. 

4.  These  things  thus  uttered,  while  I was  in  a deep 
meditation  of  what  he  had  said,  Timon  interposed.  Is  it 
your  pleasure,  said  he,  that  I shall  give  the  finishing  stroke 
to  the  difficulties  of  this  knotty  question,  or  shall  1 first 
permit  him  to  argue  in  opposition  to  what  has  been  pro- 
pounded already  V Nay  then,  said  I,  to  what  purpose  is  it 
to  let  in  a third  wave  to  drown  the  argument,  if  one  be 
not  able  to  repel  or  avoid  the  objections  already  made  1 

To  begin  therefore,  as  from  the  Vestal  hearth,  from  that 
ancient  circumspection  and  reverence  which  our  ancestors, 
being  Academic  philosophers  also,  bare  to  the  Supreme 
Godhead,  we  shall  utterly  decline  to  speak  of  that  myste- 
rious Being  as  if  we  could  presume  to  utter  positively  any 
thing  concerning  it.  For  though  it  may  be  borne  withal, 
for  men  unskilled  in  music  to  talk  at  random  of  notes  and 
harmony,  or  for  such  as  never  experienced  warfare  to  dis- 
course of  arms  and  military  affairs  ; yet  it  would  be  a bold 
and  daring  arrogance  in  us,  that  are  but  mortal  men,  to 
dive  too  far  into  the  incomprehensible  mysteries  of  Deities 
and  Daemons,  — just  as  if  persons  void  of  knowledge 
should  undertake  to  judge  of  the  methods  and  reason  of 
cunning  artists  by  slight  opinions  and  probable  conjectures 
of  their  own.  And  while  one  that  understands  nothing  of 
science  finds  it  hard  to  give  a reason  why  the  physician  did 
not  let  blood  before  but  afterwards,  or  why  he  did  not  bathe 
his  patient  yesterday  but  to-day  ; it  cannot  be  that  it  is  safe 
or  easy  for  a mortal  to  speak  otherwise  of  the  Supreme 
Deity  than  only  this,  that  he  alone  it  is  who  knows  the 
most  convenient  time  to  apply  most  proper  corrosives  for 
the  cure  of  sin  and  impiety,  and  to  administer  punishments 
as  medicaments  to  every  transgressor,  yet  being  not  con- 
fined to  an  equal  quality  and  measure  common  to  all  dis- 
tempers, nor  to  one  and  the  same  time.  Now  that  the 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


145 


medicine  of  the  soul  which  is  called  justice  is  the  most 
transcendent  of  all  sciences,  besides  ten  thousand  other 
witnesses,  even  Pindar  himself  testifies,  where  he  gives  to 
God,  the  ruler  and  lord  of  all  things,  the  title  of  the  most 
perfect  artificer,  as  being  the  grand  author  and  distributer 
of  Justice,  to  whom  it  properly  belongs  to  determine  at 
what  time,  in  what  manner,  and  to  what  degree  to  punish 
every  particular  offender.  And  Plato  asserts  that  Minos, 
being  the  son  of  Jupiter,  was  the  disciple  of  his  father  to 
learn  this  science  ; intimating  thereby  that  it  is  impossible 
for  any  other  than  a scholar,  bred  up  in  the  school  of  equi- 
ty, rightly  to  behave  himself  in  the  administration  of  justice, 
or  to  make  a true  judgment  of  another  whether  he  does 
well  or  no.  For  the  laws  which  are  constituted  by  men  do 
not  always  prescribe  that  which  is  unquestionable  and  sim- 
ply decent,  or  of  which  the  reason  is  altogether  without 
exception  perspicuous,  in  regard  that  some  of  their  ordin- 
ances seem  to  be  on  purpose  ridiculously  contrived ; par- 
ticularly those  which  in  Lacedaemon  the  Ephori  ordain  at 
their  first  entering  into  the  magistracy,  that  no  man  suffer 
the  hair  of  his  upper  lip  to  grow,  and  that  they  shall  be 
obedient  to  the  laws  to  the  end  they  may  not  seem  grievous 
to  them.  So  the  Pomans,  when  they  asserted  the  freedom 
of  any  one,  cast  a slender  rod  upon  his  body ; and  when 
they  make  their  last  wills  and  testaments,  some  they  leave 
to  be  their  heirs,  while  to  others  they  sell  their  estates; 
which  seems  to  be  altogether  contrary  to  reason.  But  that 
of  Solon  is  most  absurd,  who,  when  a city  is  up  in  arms 
and  all  in  sedition,  brands  with  infamy  the  person  who 
stands  neuter  and  adheres  to  neither  party.  And  thus  a 
man  that  apprehends  not  the  reason  of  the  lawgiver,  or  the 
cause  why  such  and  such  things  are  so  prescribed,  might 
number  up  several  absurdities  of  many  laws.  What  won- 
der then,  since  the  actions  of  men  are  so  difficult  to  be  un- 
derstood, if  it  be  no  less  difficult  to  determine  concerning 

10 


VOL.  IV. 


146 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


the  Gods,  wherefore  they  inflict  their  punishments  upon 
sinners,  sometimes  later,  sometimes  sooner. 

5.  Nor  do  I allege  these  things  as  a pretence  to  avoid 
the  dispute,  but  to  secure  the  pardon  which  I beg,  to  the 
end  that  our  discourse,  having  a regard  (as  it  were)  to  some 
port  or  refuge,  may  proceed  the  more  boldly  in  producing 
probable  circumstances  to  clear  the  doubt.  But  first  con- 
sider this ; that  God,  according  to  Plato,  when  he  set  him- 
self before  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world  as  the  exemplar  of 
all  that  was  good  and  holy,  granted  human  virtue,  by  which 
man  is  in  some  measure  rendered  like  himself,  unto  those 
that  are  able  to  follow  the  Deity  by  imitation.  For  uni- 
versal Nature,  being  at  first  void  of  order,  received  its  first 
impulse  to  change  and  to  be  formed  into  a world,  by  being 
made  to  resemble  and  (as  it  were)  partake  of  that  idea  and 
virtue  which  is  in  God.  And  the  self-same  Plato  asserts, 
that  Nature  first  kindled  the  sense  of  seeing  within  us,  to 
the  end  that  the  soul,  by  the  sight  and  admiration  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  being  accustomed  to  love  and  embrace 
decency  and  order,  might  be  induced  to  hate  the  disorderly 
motions  of  wild  and  raving  passions,  and  avoid  levity  and 
rashness  and  dependence  upon  chance,  as  the  original  of 
all  improbity  and  vice.  For  there  is  no  greater  benefit  that 
men  can  enjoy  from  God,  than,  by  the  imitation  and  pursuit 
of  those  perfections  and  that  sanctity  which  is  in  him,  to 
be  excited  to  the  study  of  virtue.  Therefore  God,  with 
forbearance  and  at  leisure,  inflicts  his  punishment  upon  the 
wicked  ; not  that  he  is  afraid  of  committing  an  error  or  of 
repenting  should  he  accelerate  his  indignation ; but  to 
eradicate  that  brutish  and  eager  desire  of  revenge  that 
reigns  in  human  breasts,  and  to  teach  us  that  we  are  not 
in  the  heat  of  fury,  or  when  our  anger  heaving  and  palpi- 
tating boils  up  above  our  understanding,  to  fall  upon  those 
who  have  done  us  an  injury,  like  those  who  seek  to  gratify 
a vehement  thirst  or  craving  appetite,  but  that  we  should, 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


147 


in  imitation  of  this  mildness  and  forbearance,  wait  with 
due  composure  of  mind  before  we  proceed  to  chastisement 
or  correction,  till  such  sufficient  time  for  consideration  is 
taken  as  shall  allow  the  least  possible  room  for  repentance. 
For,  as  Socrates  observed,  it  is  far  the  lesser  mischief  for  a 
man  distempered  with  ebriety  and  gluttony  to  drink  puddle- 
water,  than,  when  the  mind  is  disturbed  and  over-charged 
with  anger  and  fury,  before  it  he  settled  and  become  limpid 
again,  for  a man  to  seek  the  satiating  his  revenge  upon 
the  body  of  his  friend  or  kinsman.  For  it  is  not  the  re- 
venge which  is  the  nearest  to  injury,  as  Thucydides  says, 
but  rather  that  which  is  the  most  remote  from  it,  that  ob- 
serves the  most  convenient  opportunity.  For  as  anger, 
according  to  that  of  Melanthius, 

Quite  from  the  brain  transplants  the  wit, 

Vile  acts  designing  to  commit ; 

so  reason  does  that  which  is  just  and  moderate,  laying  pas- 
sion and  fury  aside.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  men, 
giving  ear  to  human  examples,  become  more  mansuete  and 
gentle ; as  when  they  hear  how  Flato,  holding  his  cudgel 
over  his  page’s  shoulders,  as  himself  relates,  paused  a good 
while,  correcting  his  own  anger ; and  how  in  like  manner 
Archytas,  observing  the  sloth  and  wilful  negligence  of  his 
servants  in  the  field,  and  perceiving  his  passion  to  rise  at  a 
more  than  usual  rate,  did  nothing  at  all;  but  as  he  went 
away,  It  is  your  good  fortune,  said  he,  that  ye  have  angered 
me.  If  then  the  sayings  of  men  when  called  to  mind,  and 
their  actions  being  told,  have  such  a power  to  mitigate  the 
roughness  and  vehemency  of  wrath,  much  more  becomes  it 
us,  beholding  God,  with  whom  there  is  neither  dread  nor 
repentance  of  any  thing,  deferring  nevertheless  his  pun- 
ishments to  future  time  and  admitting  delay,  to  be  cautious 
and  circumspect  in  these  matters,  and  to  deem  as  a divine 
part  of  virtue  that  mildness  and  long-suffering  of  which 
God  affords'us  an  example,  while  by  punishing  he  reforms 


148 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


some  few,  but  by  slowly  punishing  he  helpeth  and  admon- 
isheth  many. 

6.  In  the  second  place,  therefore,  let  us  consider  this, 
that  human  punishments  of  injuries  regard  no  more  than 
that  the  party  suffer  in  his  turn,  and  are  satisfied  when 
the  offender  has  suffered  according  to  his  merit;  and 
farther  they  never  proceed.  Which  is  the  reason  that 
they  run  after  provocations,  like  dogs  that  bark  in  their 
fury,  and  immediately  pursue  the  injury  as  soon  as  com- 
mitted. But  probable  it  is  that  God,  whatever  distem- 
pered soul  it  be  which  he  prosecutes  with  his  divine  justice, 
observes  the  motions  and  inclinations  of  it,  whether  they 
be  such  as  tend  to  repentance,  and  allows  time  for  the 
reformation  of  those  whose  wickedness  is  neither  invin- 
cible nor  incorrigible.  For,  since  he  well  knows  what  a 
proportion  of  virtue  souls  carry  along  with  them  from  him- 
self when  they  come  into  the  world,  and  how  strong  and 
vigorous  their  innate  and  primitive  good  yet  continues,  — 
while  wickedness  buds  forth  only  preternaturally  upon  the 
corruption  of  bad  diet  and  evil  conversation,  and  even 
then  some  souls  recover  again  to  perfect  cure  or  an  indif- 
ferent habitude,  — therefore  he  doth  not  make  haste  to 
inflict  his  punishments  alike  upon  all.  But  those  that  are 
incurable  he  presently  lops  off  and  deprives  of  life,  deem- 
ing it  altogether  hurtful  to  others,  but  most  baneful  to 
themselves,  to  be  always  wallowing  in  wickedness.  But 
as  for  those  who  may  probably  be  thought  to  transgress 
rather  out  of  ignorance  of  what  is  virtuous  and  good,  than 
through  choice  of  what  is  foul  and  vicious,  he  grants  them 
time  to  turn ; but  if  they  remain  obdurate,  then  likewise 
he  inflicts  his  punishments  upon  them ; for  he  has  no  fear 
lest  they  should  escape. 

Now  let  us  consider  how  oft  the  characters  and  lives  of 
men  are  changed  ; for  which  reason,  the  character  is  called 
TQonog,  as  being  the  changeable  part,  and  also  rfiog,  since  cus- 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


149 


tom  (tOog)  chiefly  prevails  in  it  and  rules  with  the  greatest 
power  when  it  has  seized  upon  it.  Therefore  I am  of 
opinion,  that  the  ancients  reported  Cecrops  to  have  had 
two  bodies,  not,  as  some  believe,  because  of  a good  king 
he  became  a merciless  and  dragon-like  tyrant,  but  rather, 
on  the  contrary,  for  that  being  at  first  both  cruel  and 
formidable,  afterwards  he  became  a most  mild  and  gentle 
prince.  However,  if  this  be  uncertain,  yet  we  know  both 
Gelo  and  Hiero  the  Sicilians,  and  Pisistratus  the  son  of 
Hippocrates,  who,  having  obtained  the  sovereignty  by  vio- 
lence and  wickedness,  made  a virtuous  use  of  their  power, 
and  coming  unjustly  to  the  throne,  became  moderate  rulers 
and  beneficial  to  the  public.  For,  by  recommending  whole- 
some laws  and  the  exercise  of  useful  tillage  to  their  sub- 
jects, they  reduced  them  from  idle  scoffers  and  talkative 
romancers  to  be  modest  citizens  and  industrious  good  hus- 
bands. And  as  for  Gelo,  after  he  had  been  successful  in 
his  war  and  vanquished  the  Carthaginians,  he  refused  to 
grant  them  the  peace  which  they  sued  for,  unless  they 
would  consent  to  have  it  inserted  in  their  articles  that  they 
would  surcease  from  sacrificing  their  children  to  Saturn. 

Over  Megalopolis  Lydiadas  was  tyrant ; but  then,  even 
in  the  time  of  his  tyranny,  changing  his  manners  and 
maxims  of  government  and  growing  into  a hatred  of  in- 
justice, he  restored  to  the  citizens  their  laws,  and  fighting 
for  his  country  against  his  own  and  his  subjects’  enemies, 
fell  an  illustrious  victim  for  his  country’s  welfare.  Now  if 
any  one,  bearing  an  antipathy  to  Miltiades  or  Cimon,  had 
slain  the  one  tyrannizing  in  the  Chersonese  or  the  other 
committing  incest  with  his  own  sister,  or  had  expelled 
Themistocles  out  of  Athens  at  what  time  he  lay  rioting 
and  revelling  in  the  market-place  and  affronting  all  that 
came  near  him,  according  to  the  sentence  afterwards  pro- 
nounced against  Alcibiades,  had  we  not  lost  Marathon,  the 
Eurymedon,  and  lovely  Artemisium, 


150 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


Where  the  Athenian  youth 

The  famed  foundations  of  their  freedom  laid  t * 

For  great  and  lofty  geniuses  produce  nothing  that  is  mean 
and  little ; the  innate  smartness  of  their  parts  will  not 
endure  the  vigor  and  activity  of  their  spirits  to  grow  lazy ; 
but  they  are  tossed  to  and  again,  as  with  the  waves,  by  the 
rolling  motions  of  their  own  inordinate  desire,  till  at  length 
they  arrive  to  a stable  and  settled  constitution  of  manners. 
Therefore,  as  a person  that  is  unskilful  in  husbandry 
would  by  no  means  make  choice  of  a piece  of  ground 
quite  overrun  with  brakes  and  weeds,  abounding  with  wild 
beasts,  running  streams,  and  mud  ; while,  to  him  who  hath 
learnt  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  earth,  these  are  cer- 
tain symptoms  of  the  softness  and  fertility  of  the  soil ; thus 
great  geniuses  many  times  produce  many  absurd  and  vile 
enormities,  of  which  we  not  enduring  the  rugged  and 
uneasy  vexation,  are  presently  for  pruning  and  lopping  off 
the  lawless  transgressors.  But  the  more  prudent  judge, 
who  discerns  the  abounding  goodness  and  generosity 
covertly  residing  in  those  transcendent  geniuses,  waits  the 
co-operating  age  and  season  for  reason  and  virtue  to  exert 
themselves,  and  gathers  the  ripe  fruit  when  Nature  has 
matured  it.  And  thus  much  as  to  those  particulars. 

7.  Now  to  come  to  another  part  of  our  discourse,  do  you 
not  believe  that  some  of  the  Greeks  did  very  prudently  to 
register  that  law  in  Egypt  among  their  own,  whereby  it  is 
enacted  that,  if  a woman  with  child  be  sentenced  to  die, 
she  shall  be  reprieved  till  she  be  delivered  ? All  the  reason 
in  the  world,  you  will  say.  Then,  say  I,  though  a man 
cannot  bring  forth  children,  yet  if  he  be  able,  by  the  assist- 
ance of  Time,  to  reveal  any  hidden  action  or  conspiracy, 
or  to  discover  some  concealed  mischief,  or  to,  be  author  of 
some  wholesome  piece  of  advice,  — or  suppose  that  in  time 
he  may  produce  some  necessary  and  useful  invention,  — is 


* From  Findar. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


151 


it  not  better  to  delay  the  punishment  and  expect  the  benefit, 
than  hastily  to  rid  him  out  of  the  world  1 It  seems  so  to  me, 
said  I.  And  truly  you  are  in  the  right,  replied  Patrocleas  ; 
for  let  us  consider,  had  Dionysius  at  the  beginning  of  his 
tyranny  suffered  according  to  his  merits,  never  would  any 
of  the  Greeks  have  re-inhabited  Sicily,  laid  waste  by  the 
Carthaginians.  Nor  would  the  Greeks  have  repossessed 
Apollonia,  nor  Anactorium,  nor  the  peninsula  of  the 
Leucadians,  had  not  Periander’s  execution  been  delayed 
for  a long  time.  And  if  I mistake  not,  it  was  to  the  delay 
of  Cassander’s  punishment  that  the  city  of  Thebes  was 
beholden  for  her  recovery  from  desolation.  But  the  most 
of  those  barbarians  who  assisted  at  the  sacrilegious  plun- 
der of  this  temple,  * following  Timoleon  into  Sicily,  after 
they  had  vanquished  the  Carthaginians  and  dissolved  the 
tyrannical  government  of  that  island,  wicked  as  they  were, 
came  all  to  a wicked  end.  So  the  Deity  makes  use  of 
some  wicked  persons  as  common  executioners  to  punish 
the  wickedness  of  others,  and  then  destroys  those  instru- 
ments of  his  wrath,  — which  I believe  to  be  true  of  most 
tyrants.  For  as  the  gall  of  a hyena  and  the  rennet  of 
a sea-calf — both  filthy  monsters  — contain  something  in 
them  for  the  cure  of  diseases  ; so  when  some  people  de- 
serve a sharp  and  biting  punishment,  God,  subjecting  them 
to  the  implacable  severity  of  some  certain  tyrant  or  the 
cruel  oppression  of  some  ruler,  does  not  remove  either 
the  torment  or  the  trouble,  till  he  has  cured  and  purified 
the  distempered  nation.  Such  a sort  of  physic  was  Pha- 
laris  to  the  Agrigentines,  and  Marius  to  the  Homans.  And 
God  expressly  foretold  the  Sicyonians  how  much  their  city 
stood  in  need  of  most  severe  chastisement,  when,  after 
they  had  violently  ravished  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Cleo- 
naeans  Teletias,  a young  lad  who  had  been  crowned  at  the 
Pythian  games,  they  tore  him  limb  from  limb,  as  their  own 

* That  is,  in  the  Sacred  or  Phocian  war,  357-346  b.c.  (G.) 


152 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


fellow-citizen.  Therefore  Orthagoras  the  tyrant,  and  after 
him  Myro  and  Clisthenes,  put  an  end  to  the  luxury  and 
lasciviousness  of  the  Sicyonians  ; but  the  Cleonaeans,  not 
having  the  good  fortune  to  meet  with  the  same  cure,  went 
all  to  wreck.  To  this  purpose,  hear  what  Homer  says : 

From  parent  vile  by  far  the  better  son 

Did  spring,  whom  various  virtues  did  renown  * 

And  yet  we  do  not  find  that  ever  the  son  of  Copreus  per- 
formed any  famous  or  memorable  achievement ; but  the 
offspring  of  Sisyphus,  Autolycus,  and  Phlegyas  flourished 
among  the  number  of  the  most  famous  and  virtuous  princes. 
Pericles  at  Athens  descended  from  an  accursed  family  ; and 
Pompey  the  Great  at  Rome  was  the  son  of  Strabo,  whose 
dead  body  the  Roman  people,  in  the  height  of  their  hatred 
conceived  against  him  when  alive,  cast  forth  into  the  street 
and  trampled  in  the  dirt.  Where  is  the  absurdity  then, — 
as  the  husbandman  never  cuts  away  the  thorn  till  it  injures 
the  asparagus,  or  as  the  Libyans  never  burn  the  stalks  till 
they  have  gathered  all  the  ladanum,  — if  God  never  extir- 
pates the  evil  and  thorny  root  of  a renowned  and  royal 
race  before  he  has  gathered  from  it  the  mature  and  proper 
fruit?  For  it  would  have  been  far  better  for  the  Phocians 
to  have  lost  ten  thousand  of  Iphitus’s  horses  and  oxen,  or 
a far  greater  sum  in  gold  and  silver  from  the  temple  of 
Delphi,  than  that  Ulysses  and  Aesculapius  should  not  have 
been  born,  and  those  many  others  who,  of  wicked  and 
vicious  men,  became  highly  virtuous  and  beneficial  to  their 
country. 

8.  And  should  we  not  think  it  better  to  inflict  deserved 
punishments  in  due  season  and  by  convenient  means, 
than  hastily  and  rashly  when  a man  is  in  the  heat  and 
hurry  of  passion?  Witness  the  example  of  Callippus, 
who,  having  stabbed  Dio  under  the  pretence  of  being  his 
friend,  was  himself  soon  after  slain  by  Dio’s  intimates  with 


* II.  XV.  641. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISII. 


153 


the  same  dagger.  Thus  again,  when  Mitius  of  Argos  was 
slain  in  a city  tumult,  the  brazen  statue  which  stood  in  the 
market-place,  soon  after,  at  the  time  of  the  public  shows, 
fell  down  upon  the  murderer’s  head  and  killed  him.  What 
befell  Bessus  the  Paeonian,  and  Aristo  the  Oetaean,  chief 
commander  of  the  foreign  soldiers,  I suppose  you  under- 
stood full  well,  Patrocleas.  Not  I,  by  Jove,  said  he,  but  I 
desire  to  know.  Well  then,  I say,  this  Aristo,  having  with 
permission  of  the  tyrants  carried  away  the  jewels  and 
ornaments  belonging  to  Eriphyle,  which  lay  deposited  in 
this  temple,  made  a present  of  them  to  his  wife.  The 
punishment  of  this  was  that  the  son,  being  highly  incensed 
against  his  mother,  for  what  reason  it  matters  not,  set  tire 
to  his  father’s  house,  and  burned  it  to  the  ground,  with  all  4 
the  family  that  were  in  it. 

As  for  Bessus,  it  seems  he  killed  his  own  father,  and 
the  murder  lay  concealed  a long  time.  At  length  being 
invited  to  supper  among  strangers,  after  he  had  so  loosened 
a swallow’s  nest  with  his  spear  that  it  fell  down,  he  killed 
all  the  young  ones.  Upon  which,  being  asked  by  the 
guests  that  were  present,  what  injury  the  swallows  had 
done  him  that  he  should  commit  such  an  irregular  act ; 
Did  you  not  hear,  said  he,  these  cursed  swallows,  how  they 
clamored  and  made  a noise,  false  witnesses  as  they  were, 
that  I had  long  ago  killed  my  father  ? This  answer  struck 
the  rest  of  the  guests  with  so  much  wonder,  that,  after  a 
due  pondering  upon  his  words,  they  made  known  the 
whole  story  to  the  king.  Upon  which,  the  matter  being 
dived  into,  Bessus  was  brought  to  condign  punishment. 

9.  These  things  I have  alleged,  as  it  was  but  reason, 
upon  a supposition  that  there  is  a forbearance  of  inflict- 
ing punishment  upon  the  wicked.  As  for  what  remains, 
it  behooves  us  to  listen  to  Hesiod,  where  he  asserts, — not 
like  Plato,  that  punishment  is  a suffering  which  accom- 
panies injustice,  — but  that  it  is  of  the  same  age  with  it, 


154 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


and  arises  from  the  same  place  and  root.  For,  says  he, 

Bad  counsel,  so  the  Gods  ordain, 

Is  most  of  all  the  adviser’s  bane. 

And  in  another  place, 

He  that  his  neighbor’s  harm  contrives,  his  art 
Contrives  the  mischief  ’gainst  his  own  false  heart.* 

It  is  reported  that  the  cantharis  fly,  by  a certain  kind 
of  contrariety,  carries  within  itself  the  cure  of  the  wound 
which  it  inflicts.  On  the  other  side  wickedness,  at  the 
same  time  it  is  committed,  engendering  its  own  vexation 
and  torment,  not  at  last,  but  at  the  very  instant  of  the  in- 
jury offered,  suffers  the  reward  of  the  injustice  it  has  done. 
And  as  every  malefactor  who  suffers  in  his  body  bears  his 
own  cross  to  the  place  of  his  execution,  so  are  all  the 
various  torments  of  various  wicked  actions  prepared  by 
wickedness  herself.  Such  a diligent  architectress  of  a 
miserable  and  wretched  life  is  wickedness,  wherein  shame 
is  still  accompanied  with  a thousand  terrors  and  commo- 
tions of  the  mind,  incessant  repentance,  and  never-ceasing 
tumults  of  the  spirits.  However,  there  are  some  people 
that  differ  little  or  nothing  from  children,  who,  many  times 
beholding  malefactors  upon  the  stage,  in  their  gilded  vest- 
ments and  short  purple  cloaks,  dancing  with  crowns  upon 
their  heads,  admire  and  look  upon  them  as  the  most  happy 
persons  in  the  world,  till  they  see  them  gored  and  lashed, 
and  flames  of  fire  curling  from  underneath  their  sumptuous 
and  gaudy  garments.  Thus  there  are  many  wicked  men, 
surrounded  with  numerous  families,  splendid  in  the  pomp 
of  magistracy,  and  illustrious  for  the  greatness  of  their 
power,  whose  punishments  never  display  themselves  till 
those  glorious  persons  come  to  be  the  public  spectacles  of 
the  people,  either  slain  and  lying  weltering  in  their  blood, 
or  else  standing  on  the  top  of  the  rock,  ready  to  be  tum- 
bled headlong  down  the  precipice ; which  indeed  cannot 
* Hesiod,  Works  and  Days,  265. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  TUNIS!!. 


155 


so  well  be  said  to  be  a punishment,  as  the  consummation 
and  perfection  of  punishment. 

Moreover,  as  Ilerodicus  the  Selymbrian,  falling  into  a 
consumption,  the  most  incurable  of  all  diseases,  was  the 
first  who  intermixed  the  gymnastic  art  with  the  science  of 
physic  (as  Plato  relates),  and  in  so  doing  did  spin  out 
in  length  a tedious  time  of  dying,  as  well  for  himself  as 
for  others  laboring  under  the  same  distemper ; in  like 
manner  some  wicked  men  who  flatter  themselves  to  have 
escaped  the  present  punishment,  not  after  a longer  time,  but 
for  a longer  time,  endure  a more  lasting,  not  a slower 
punishment ; not  punished  with  old  age,  but  growing  old 
under  the  tribulation  of  tormenting  affliction.  When  I 
speak  of  a long  time  I speak  in  reference  to  ourselves. 
For  as  to  the  Gods,  every  distance  and  distinction  of  hu- 
man life  is  nothing  ; and  to  say  “ now,  and  not  thirty  years 
ago  ” is  the  same  thing  as  to  say  that  such  a malefactor 
should  be  tormented  or  hanged  in  the  afternoon  and  not  in 
the  morning  ; — more  especially  since  a man  is  but  shut  up 
in  this  life,  like  a close  prisoner  in  a gaol,  from  whence  it 
is  impossible  to  make  an  escape,  while  yet  we  feast  and 
banquet,  are  full  of  business,  receive  rewards  and  honors 
and  sport.  Though  certainly  these  are  but  like  the  sports 
of  those  that  play  at  dice  or  draughts  in  the  gaol,  while  the 
rope  all  the  while  hangs  over  their  heads. 

10.  So  that  what  should  hinder  me  from  asserting,  that 
they  who  are  condemned  to  die  and  shut  up  in  prison  are 
not  truly  punished  till  the  executioner  has  chopped  off 
their  heads,  or  that  he  who  has  drunk  hemlock,  and  then 
walks  about  and  stays  till  a heaviness  seizes  his  limbs,  has 
suffered  no  punishment  before  the  extinction  of  his  natural 
heat  and  the  coagulation  of  his  blood  deprive  him  of  his 
senses,  — that  is  to  say,  if  we  deem  the  last  moment  of  the 
punishment  only  to  be  the  punishment,  and  omit  the  com- 
motions, terrors,  apprehensions,  and  embitterments  of  re- 


156 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


pentance,  with  which  every  malefactor  and  all  wicked  men 
are  teased  upon  the  committing  of  any  heinous  crime? 
But  this  is  to  deny  the  fish  to  be  taken  that  has  swal- 
lowed the  hook,  before  we  see  it  boiled  and  cut  into  pieces 
by  the  cook  ; for  every  offender  is  within  the  gripes  of  the 
law,  so  soon  as  he  has  committed  the  crime  and  has  swal- 
lowed the  sweet  bait  of  injustice,  while  his  conscience 
within,  tearing  and  gnawing  upon  his  vitals,  allows  him  no 
rest : 

< Like  the  swift  tunny,  frighted  from  his  prey. 

Rolling  and  plunging  in  the  angered  sea. 

For  the  daring  rashness  and  precipitate  boldness  of  iniquity 
continue  violent  and  active  till  the  fact  be  perpetrated  ; 
but  then  the  passion,  like  a surceasing  tempest,  growing 
slack  and  weak,  surrenders  itself  to  superstitious  fears  and 
terrors.  So  that  Stesichorus  may  seem  to  have  composed 
the  dream  of  Clytemnestra,  to  set  forth  the  event  and  truth 
of  things  : 

Then  seemed  a dragon  to  draw  near, 

With  mattery  blood  all  on  his  head  besmeared  ; 

Therefrom  the  king  Plistlienides  appeared. 

For  visions  in  dreams,  noon-day  apparitions,  oracles,  de- 
scents into  hell,  and  whatever  objects  else  which  may  be 
thought  to  be  transmitted  from  heaven,  raise  continual 
tempests  and  horrors  in  the  very  souls  of  the  guilty.  Thus 
it  is  reported  that  Apollodorus  in  a dream  beheld  himself*’ 
flayed  by  the  Scythians  and  then  boiled,  and  that  his  heart, 
speaking  to  him  out  of  the  kettle,  uttered  these  words,  I 
am  the  cause  thou  sufferest  all  this.  And  another  time, 
that  he  saw  his  daughters  run  about  him,  their  bodies 
burning  and  all  in  a flame.  Hipparchus  also,  the  son  of 
Pisistratus,  had  a dream,  that  the  Goddess  Venus  out  of  a 
certain  phial  flung  blood  in  his  face.  The  favorites  of 
Ptolemy,  surnamed  the  Thunderer,  dreamed  that  they  saw 
their  master  cited  to  the  judgment-seat  by  Seleucus,  where 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


157 


wolves  and  vultures  were  liis  judges,  and  then  distributing 
great  quantities  of  flesh  among  his  enemies.  Pausanias, 
in  the  heat  of  his  lust,  sent  for  Cleonice,  a free-born  virgin 
of  Byzantium,  with  an  intention  to  have  enjoyed  her  all 
night ; but  when  she  came,  out  of  a strange  sort  of  jeal- 
ousy and  perturbation  for  which  he  could  give  no  reason, 
he  stabbed  her.  This  murder  was  attended  with  frightful 
visions ; insomuch  that  his  repose  in  the  night  was  not 
only  interrupted  with  the  appearance  of  her  shape,  but 
still  he  thought  he  heard  her  uttering  these  lines  : 

To  judgment-seat  approach  thou  near,  I say; 

Wrong  dealing  is  to  men  most  hurtful  aye. 

After  this  the  apparition  still  haunting  him,  he  sailed  to 
the  oracle  of  the  dead  in  Heraclea,  and  by  propitiations, 
charms,  and  dirges,  called  up  the  ghost  of  the  damsel ; 
which,  appearing  before  him,  told  him  in  few  words,  that 
he  should  be  free  from  all  his  affrights  and  molestations 
upon  his  return  to  Lacedaemon ; where  he  was  no  sooner 
arrived,  but  he  died. 

11.  Therefore,  if  nothing  befalls  the  soul  after  the  ex- 
piration of  this  life,  but  death  is  the  end  of  all  reward  and 
punishment,  I might  infer  from  thence  rather  that  the  Dei- 
ty is  remiss  and  indulgent  in  swiftly  punishing  the  wicked 
and  depriving  them  of  life.  For  if  a man  shall  assert 
that  in  the  space  of  this  life  the  wicked  are  no  otherwise 
affected  than  by  the  convincement  that  crime  is  a fruitless 
and  barren  thing,  that  produces  nothing  of  good,  nothing 
worthy  of  esteem,  from  the  many  great  and  terrible  com- 
bats and  agonies  of  the  mind,  the  consideration  of  these 
things  altogether  subverts  the  soul.  As  it  is  related  that 
Lysimachus,  being  under  the  violent  constraint  of  a parch- 
ing thirst,  surrendered  up  his  person  and  his  dominions  to 
the  Getae  for  a little  drink  ; but  after  he  had  quenched  his 
draught  and  found  himself  a captive,  Shame  of  this  wick- 
edness of  mine,  cried  he,  that  for  so  small  a pleasure  have 


158 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


lost  so  great  a kingdom.  But  it  is  a difficult  thing  for  a 
man  to  resist  the  natural  necessity  of  mortal  passions. 
Yet  when  a man,  either  out  of  avarice,  or  ambition  of 
civil  honor  and  power,  or  to  gratify  his  venereal  desires, 
commits  any  enormous  and  heinous  crime,  after  which,  the 
thirst  and  rage  of  his  passion  being  allayed,  he  comes  to 
set  before  his  eyes  the  ignominious  and  horrible  passions 
tending  to  injustice  still  remaining,  but  sees  nothing  useful, 
nothing  necessary,  nothing  conducible  to  make  his  life  hap- 
py ; may  it  not  be  probably  conjectured  that  such  a person 
is  frequently  solicited  by  these  reflections  to  consider  how 
rashly,  either  prompted  by  vain-glory,  or  for  the  sake  of  a 
lawless  and  barren  pleasure,  he  has  overthrown  the  noblest 
and  greatest  maxims  of  justice  among  men,  and  overflowed 
his  life  with  shame  and  trouble  1 As  Simonides  jesting  was 
! | wont  to  say,  that  the  chest  which  he  kept  for  money  he 
found  always  full,  but  that  which  he  kept  for  gratitude  he 
found  always  empty ; thus  wicked  men,  contemplating 
their  own  wickedness,  find  it  always  void  altogether  and 
destitute  of  hope  (since  pleasure  gives  but  a short  and  empty 
delight),  but  ever  weighed  down  with  fears  and  sorrows, 
ungrateful  remembrances,  suspicions  of  futurity,  and  dis- 
trusts of  present  accidents.  Thus  we  hear  Ino  complain- 
ing upon  the  theatre,  after  her  repentance  of  what  she 
had  done : 

Dear  women,  tell  me,  with  what  face 
Shall  I return  to  dwell  with  Athamas, 

As  if  it  ne’er  had  been  my  luckless  fate 
The  worst  of  foul  misdeeds  to  perpetrate  ? * 

Thus  is  it  not  reason  to  believe,  that  the  soul  of  every  wicked 
man  revolves  and  reasons  within  itself,  how  by  burying  in 
oblivion  former  transgressions,  and  casting  from  itself  the 
consciousness  and  the  guilt  of  hitherto  committed  crimes, 
to  fit  frail  mortality  under  her  conduct  for  a new  course  of 
life  1 Tor  there  is  nothing  for  a man  to  confide  in,  noth- 

* From  the  Ino  of  Euripides,  Frag.  403. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


159 


ing  but  what  vanishes  like  smoke,  nothing  durable  or  con- 
stant in  whatever  impiety  proposes  to  itself,  — unless,  by 
Jove,  we  will  allow  the  unjust  and  vicious  to  be  sage  phi- 
losophers, — but  wherever  eager  avarice  and  voluptuous- 
ness, inexorable  hatred,  enmity,  and  improbity  associate 
together,  there  you  shall  also  be  sure  to  find  superstition 
nestling  and  herding  with  effeminacy  and  terror  of  death, 
a swift  change  of  the  most  violent  passions,  and  an  arro- 
gant ambition  after  undeserved  honor.  Such  men  as  > 
these  stand  in  continual  dread  of  their  contemners  and 
backbiters,  they  fear  their  applauders,  believing  themselves 
injured  by  their  flatteries ; and  more  especially,  they  are 
at  enmity  with  bad  men,  because  they  are  so  free  to  extol 
those  that  seem  good.  However,  that  which  hardens  men 
to  mischief  soon  cankers,  grows  brittle,  and  shivers  in 
pieces  like  bad  iron.  So  that  in  process  of  time,  coming 
to  understand  themselves  better  and  to  be  more  sensible  of 
their  miscarriages,  they  disdain,  abhor,  and  utterly  disclaim 
their  former  course  of  life.  And  when  we  see  how  a 
wicked  man  who  restores  a trust  or  becomes  security  for 
his  friend,  or  ambitious  of  honor  contributes  more  largely 
to  the  benefits  of  his  country,  is  immediately  in  a condition 
of  repentance  and  sorry  for  what  he  has  just  done,  by 
reason  of  the  natural  inclination  of  his  mind  to  ramble 
and  change ; and  how  some  men,  being  clapped  and 
hummed  upon  the  theatre,  presently  fall  a weeping,  their 
desire  of  glory  relapsing  into  covetousness ; we  surely 
cannot  believe  that  those  which  sacrificed  the  lives  of  men 
to  the  success  of  their  tyrannies  and  conspiracies,  as  Apol- 
lodorus,  or  plundered  their  friends  of  their  treasure  and 
deprived  them  of  their  estates,  as  Glaucus  the  son  of 
Epicydes,  did  not  repent  and  abhor  themselves,  or  that  they 
were  not  sorry  for  the  perpetration  of  such  foul  enormi- 
ties. For  my  part,  if  it  may  be  lawful  for  me  to  deliver 
my  opinion,  I believe  there  is  no  occasion  either  for  the 


160 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


Gods  or  men  to  inflict  their  punishment  upon  the  most 
wicked  and  sacrilegious  offenders  ; seeing  that  the  course 
of  their  own  lives  is  sufficient  to  chastise  their  crimes, 
while  they  remain  under  the  consternations  and  torments 
attending  their  impiety. 

12.  And  now  consider  whether  my  discourse  have  not 
enlarged  itself  too  far.  To  which  Timon:  Perhaps  (said 
he)  it  may  seem  to  have  been  too  long,  if  we  consider 
what  remains  behind,  and  the  length  of  time  required  for 
the  discussion  of  our  other  doubts.  For  now  I am  going 
about  to  put  forward  the  last  question,  like  a new  cham- 
pion, since  we  have  contended  already  long  enough  upon 
the  former.  Now,  as  to  what  we  have  further  to  say,  Ave 
find  that  Euripides  delivers  his  mind  freely,  and  censures 
the  Gods  for  imputing  the  transgressions  of  forefathers 
unto  their  offspring.  And  I am  apt  to  belieAre  that  even 
they  who  are  most  silent  among  us  do  the  like.  For  if 
the  offenders  themselves  have  already  received  their  re- 
Avard,  then  there  is  no  reason  Avhy  the  innocent  should  be 
punished,  since  it  is  not  equal  to  punish  even  criminals 
tAvice  for  the  same  fact.  But  if  remiss  and  careless,  the 
Gods,  omitting  opportunely  to  inflict  their  penalties  upon 
the  Avicked,  send  down  their  tardy  rigor  on  the  blameless, 
they  do  not  Avell  to  repair  their  defective  sloAvness  by  in- 
justice. As  it  is  reported  of  Aesop,  that  he  came  upon  a 
time  to  Delphi,  having  brought  along  with  him  a great 
quantity  of  gold  which  Croesus  had  bestoAved  upon  him, 
on  purpose  to  offer  a most  magnificent  oblation  to  the 
Gods,  and  with  a design  moreover  to  distribute  among  the 
priests  and  the  people  of  Delphi  four  minas  apiece.  But 
there  happening  some  disgust  and  difference  betAveen  him 
and  the  Delphians,  he  performed  his  solemnity,  but  sent 
back  his  money  to  Sardis,  not  deeming  those  ungrateful 
people  worthy  of  his  bounty.  Upon  which  the  Delphians, 
laying  their  heads  together,  accused  him  of  sacrilege,  and 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


161 


then  threw  him  down  headlong  from  a steep  and  prodig- 
ious precipice,  which  is  there,  called  Hyampia.  Upon 
which  it  is  reported  that  the  Deity,  being  highly  incensed 
against  them  for  so  horrid  a murder,  brought  a famine 
upon  the  land,  and  infested  the  people  with  noisome  dis- 
eases of  all  sorts  ; insomuch  that  they  were  constrained  to 
make  it  their  business  to  travel  to  all  the  general  assem- 
blies and  places  of  public  concourse  in  Greece,  making 
public  proclamation  wherever  they  came,  that,  whoever 
they  were  that  would  demand  justice  for  the  death  of 
Aesop,  they  were  prepared  to  give  him  satisfaction  and 
to  undergo  whatever  penalty  he  should  require.  Three 
generations  afterwards  came  one  Idmon,  a Samian,  no  way 
of  kin  or  otherwise  related  to  Aesop,  but  only  descended 
from  those  who  had  purchased  Aesop  in  Samos  ; to  whom 
the  Delphians  paid  those  forfeitures  which  he  demanded, 
and  were  delivered  from  all  their  pressing  calamities.  And 
from  hence  (by  report)  it  was,  that  the  punishment  of  sac- 
rilegious persons  was  transferred  from  the  rock  Hyampia  to 
that  other  cliff  which  bears  the  name  of  Nauplia. 

Neither  is  Alexander  applauded  by  those  who  have  the 
greatest  esteem  for  his  memory  (of  which  number  are  we 
ourselves),  who  utterly  laid  waste  the  city  of  Branchidae, 
putting  men,  women,  and  children  to  the  sword,  for  that 
their  ancestors  had  long  before  delivered  up  the  temple  of 
Miletus.  In  like  manner  Agathocles,  tyrant  of  Syracuse, 
when  the  Corcyraeans  requested  to  know  the  reason  of 
him,  why  he  depopulated  their  island,  deriding  and  scoffing 
at  then'  demand,  replied : For  no  other  reason,  by  Jove, 
but  because  your  forefathers  entertained  Ulysses.  And 
when  the  islanders  of  Ithaca  expostulated  with  him,  ask- 
ing why  his  soldiers  carried  away  their  sheep ; because, 
said  he,  when  your  king  came  to  our  island,  he  put  out 
the  eyes  of  the  shepherd  himself.  And  therefore  do  you 
not  think  Apollo  more  extravagant  than  all  these,  for  pun- 

VOT..  IV.  11 


162 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


ishing  so  severely  the  Pheneatae  by  stopping  up  that  pro- 
found and  spacious  receptacle  of  all  those  floods  that  how 
cover  their  country,  upon  a bare  report  that  Hercules  a 
thousand  years  ago  took  away  the  prophetic  tripod  and 
carried  it  to  Pheneus  ? — or  when  he  foretold  to  the  Sybar- 
ites, that  all  their  calamities  should  cease,  upon  condition 
they  appeased  the  wrath  of  Leucadian  Juno  by  enduring 
three  ruinous  calamities  upon  their  country'?  Nor  is  it  so 
long  since,  that  the  Locrians  surceased  to  send  their  virgins 
to  Troy ; 

Who  like  the  meanest  slaves,  exposed  to  scorn, 

Barefoot,  with  limbs  unclad,  at  earliest  mom 
Minerva’s  temple  sweep  ; yet  all  the  while, 

No  privilege  has  age  from  weary  toil. 

Nor,  when  with  years  decrepit,  can  they  claim 
The  thinnest  veil  to  hide  their  aged  shame  ; 

and  all  this  to  punish  the  lasciviousness  of  Ajax. 

Now  where  is  the  reason  or  justice  of  all  this?  Nor  is 
the  custom  of  the  Thracians  to  be  approved,  who  to  this 
day  abuse  their  wives  in  revenge  of  their  cruelty  to  Or- 
pheus. And  with  as  little  reason  are  the  Barbarians  about 
the  river  Po  to  be  extolled,  who  once  a year  put  themselves 
into  mourning  for  the  misfortune  of  Phaethon.  And  still 
more  ridiculous  than  all  this  it  would  certainly  be,  when 
all  those  people  that  lived  at  the  time  took  no  notice  of 
Phaethon’s  mischance,  that  they,  who  happened  to  be  born 
five  or  ten  generations  after,  should  be  so  idle  as  to  take 
up  the  custom  of  going  into  black  and  bewailing  his  down- 
fall. However,  in  all  these  things  there  is  nothing  to  be 
observed  but  mere  folly  ; nothing  pernicious,  nor  any  thing 
dangerous.  But  as  for  the  anger  of  the  Gods,  what  reason 
can  be  given  why  their  wrath  should  stop  and  conceal 
itself  upon  a sudden,  like  some  certain  rivers,  and  when 
all  things  seem  to  be  forgot,  should  break  forth  upon 
others  with  so  much  fury,  as  not  to  be  atoned  but  with 
some  remarkable  calamities  ? 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


163 


13.  Upon  that,  so  soon  as  he  had  done  speaking,  not  a 
little  afraid  lest,  if  he  should  begin  again,  he  would  run 
himself  into  many  more  and  greater  absurdities,  I asked : 
Do  you  believe,  sir,  all  that  you  have  said  to  be  true! 
Then  he : Though  all  that  I have  alleged  may  not  be  true, 
yet  if  only  some  part  may  be  allowed  for  truth,  do  not  you 
think  there  is  the  same  difficulty  still  remaining  in  the 
question  1 It  may  be  so,  said  I.  And  thus  it  is  Avith  those 
who  labor  under  a vehement  burning  fever ; for,  whether 
coArered  Avith  one  blanket  or  many,  the  heat  is  still  the 
same  or  very  little  different ; yet  for  refreshment’s  sake  it 
may  be  convenient  sometimes  to  lighten  the  Aveight  of  the 
clothes ; and  if  the  patient  refuse  your  courtesy,  to  let  him 
alone.  Yet  I must  tell  you,  the  greatest  part  of  these 
examples  look  like  fables  and  fiction.  Call  to  v mind  there- 
fore the  feast  called  Theoxenia  lately  celebrated,  and  that 
most  noble  portion  which  the  public  criers  proclaim  to  be 
received  as  their  due  by  the  offspring  of  Pindar ; and  re- 
collect Avith  yourself,  Iioav  majestic  and  grateful  a mark  of 
grandeur  you  look  upon  that  to  be.  Truly,  said  he,  I 
judge  there  is  no  man  living  Avho  would  not  be  sensible  of 
the  curiosity  and  elegancy  of  such  an  honor,  displaying 
antiquity  void  of  tincture  and  false  glitter,  after  the  Greek 
manner,  unless  he  Avere  such  a brute  that  I may  use  the 
Avoids  of  Pindar  himself : 

Whose  coal-black  heart,  from  natural  dross  unpurged, 

Had  only  by  cold  flames  at  first  been  forged. 

Therefore  I forbear,  said  I,  to  mention  that  proclamation 
not  much  unlike  to  this,  usually  made  in  Sparta, — “ After 
the  Lesbian  singer,”  — in  honor  and  memory  of  the  an- 
cient Terpander.  But  you,  on  the  other  side,  deem  your- 
self worthy  to  be  preferred  above  all  the  rest  of  the 
Boeotians,  as  being  of  the  noble  race  of  the  Opheltiadae ; 
and  among  the  Phocians  you  claim  undoubted  pre-eminence, 
for  the  sake  of  your  ancestor  Daiphantus.  And,  for  my 


164 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


part,  I must  acknowledge  that  you  were  one  of  the  first 
who  assisted  me,  as  my  second,  against  the  Lycormaeans 
and  Satilaeans,  claiming  the  privilege  of  wearing  crowns 
and  the  honor  due  by  the  laws  of  Greece  to  the  descendants 
from  Hercules ; at  what  time  I affirmed,  that  those  honors 
and  guerdons  ought  more  especially  to  be  preserved  in- 
violable to  the  immediate  progeny  of  Hercules,  in  regard 
that,  though  he  were  so  great  a benefactor  to  the  Greeks, 
yet  in  his  lifetime  he  was  not  thought  worthy  of  any 
reward  or  return  of  gratitude.  You  recall  to  my  remem- 
brance, said  he,  a most  noble  contest,  and  worthy  the 
debate  of  philosophy  itself.  Dismiss  therefore,  said  I, 
that  vehement  humor  of  yours  that  excites  you  to  accuse 
the  Gods,  nor  take  it  ill,  if  many  times  celestial  punish- 
ment discharges  itself  upon  the  offspring  of  the  wicked 
and  vicious  ; or  else  be  not  too  much  overjoyed  or  too  for- 
ward to  applaud  those  honors  which  are  due  to  nobility  of 
birth.  For  it  becomes  us,  if  we  believe  that  the  reward 
of  virtue  ought  to  be  extended  to  posterity,  by  the  same 
reason  to  take  it  for  granted  that  punishment  for  impieties 
committed  ought  not  to  be  stayed  and  cease  any  sooner, 
but  that  it  should  run  forward  at  equal  pace  with  the 
reward,  which  will  in  turn  requite  every  man  with  what  is 
his  due.  And  therefore  they  that  with  pleasure  behold 
the  race  of  Cimon  highly  honored  in  Athens,  but  on  the 
other  side,  fret  and  fume  at  the  exilement  of  the  posterity 
of  Lachares  or  Ariston,  are  too  remiss  and  oscitant,  or 
rather  too  morose  and  over  quarrelsome  with  the  Deity 
itself,  one  Avliile  accusing  the  Divinity  if  the  posterity  of 
an  unjust  and  wicked  person  seem  to  prosper  in  the  world, 
another  time  no  less  moody  and  finding  fault  if  it  fall  out 
1 that  the  race  of  the  wicked  come  to  be  utterly  destroyed 
and  extirpated  from  the  earth.  And  thus,  whether  the 
children  of  the  wicked  or  the  children  of  the  just  fall 
under  affliction,  the  case  is  all  one  to  them ; the  Gods 
must  suffer  alike  in  their  bad  opinions. 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


165 


14.  These,  said  Iy  are  the  preliminaries,  which  I would 
have  you  make  use  of  against  those  choleric  accusers  and 
testy  snarlers  of  whom  I have  given  you  warning.  But 
now  to  take  in  hand  once  more,  as  it  were,  the  first  end  of 
the  bottom  of  thread,  in  this  same  dark  discourse  of  the 
Gods,  wherein  there  are  so  many  windings  and  turnings 
and  gloomy  labyrinths,  let  us  by  degrees  anti  with  caution 
direct  our  steps  to  what  is  most  likely  and  probable.  For, 
even  in  those  things  which  fall  under  our  daily  practice 
and  management,  we  are  many  times  at  a loss  to  determine 
the  undoubted  and  unquestioned  truth.  For  example, 
what  certain  reason  can  be  given  for  that  custom  amongst 
us,  of  ordering  the  children  of  parents  that  die  of  a con- 
sumption or  a dropsy  to  sit  with  both  their  feet  soaking  in 
the  water  till  the  dead  body  be  burnt?  For  people  believe, 
that  thereby  the  disease  is  prevented  from  becoming  heredi- 
tary, and  also  that  it  is  a charm  to  secure  those  children 
from  it  as  long  as  they  live.  Again,  what  should  be  the 
reason,  that  if  a goat  take  a piece  of  sea-holly  in  her 
mouth,  the  whole  herd  will  stand  still  till  the  goat-herd 
come  and  take  it  out?  Other  hidden  properties  there  are, 
which,  by  virtue  of  certain  touches  and  transitions,  pass 
from  some  bodies  into  others  with  incredible  swiftness  and 
often  to  incredible  distances.  But  we  are  more  apt  to 
Wonder  at  distances  of  time  than  those  of  space.  And  yet 
there  is  more  reason  to  wonder,  that  Athens  should  be 
infected  with  an  epidemic  contagion  taking  its  rise  in 
Ethiopia,  that  Pericles  should  die  and  Thucydides  be  smit- 
ten with  the  infection,  than  that,  upon  the  impiety  of  the 
Delphians  and  Sybarites,  delayed  vengeance  should  at 
length  overtake  their  posterity.  For  these  hidden  powers 
and  properties  have  their  sacred  connections  and  corre- 
spondences between  their  utmost  endings  and  their  first 
beginnings ; of  which  although  the  causes  he  concealed 
from  us,  yet  silently  they  bring  to  pass  their  proper  effects. 


166 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


15.  Not  but  that  there  is  a reason  ready  at  hand  for  the 
public  punishments  showered  down  from  heaven  upon 
particular  cities.  For  a city  is  a kind  of  entire  thing  and 
continued  body,  a certain  sort  of  creature,  never  subject  to 
the  changes  and  alterations  of  age,  nor  varying  through 
process  of  time  from  one  thing  to  another,  but  always 
sympathizing  and  in  unity  with  itself,  and  receiving  the 
punishment  or  reward  of  whatever  it  does  or  has  ever 
acted  in  common,  so  long  as  the  community,  which  makes 
it  a body  and  binds  it  together  with  the  mutual  bands  of 
human  benefit,  preserves  its  unity.  For  he  that  goes  about 
of  one  city  to  make  many,  and  perhaps  an  infinite  number, 
by  distinguishing  the  intervals  of  time,  seems  to  be  like  a 
person  who  would  make  several  of  one  single  man,  because 
he  is  now  grown  elderly  who  before  was  a young  man,  and 
before  that  a mere  stripling.  Or  rather,  it  resembles  the 
method  of  disputing  amongst  the  Epicharmians,  the  first 
authors  of  that  manner  of  arguing  called  the  increaser. 
For  example : he  that  formerly  ran  in  debt,  although  he 
never  paid  it,  owes  nothing  now,  as  being  become  another 
man  ; and  he  that  was  invited  yesterday  to  supper  comes 
the  next  night  an  unbidden  guest,  for  that  he  is  quite 
another  person.  And  indeed  the  distinctions  of  ages  cause 
greater  alterations  in  every  one  of  us  than  commonly  they 
do  in  cities.  For  he  that  has  seen  Athens  may  know  it 
again  thirty  years  after ; the  present  manners,  motions, 
pastimes,  serious  studies,  their  familiarities  and  marks  of 
their  displeasure,  little  or  nothing  differing  from  what  for- 
merly they  were.  But  after  a long  absence  there  is  many 
a man  who,  meeting  his  own  familiar  friend,  hardly  knows 
him  again,  by  reason  of  the  great  alteration  of  his  coun- 
tenance and  the  change  of  his  manners,  which  are  so  easily 
subject  to  the  alterations  of  language,  labor,  and  employ- 
ment, all  manner  of  accidents,  and  mutation  of  laws,  that 
even  they  who  are  most  usually  conversant  with  him  ad- 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


167 


mire  to  see  the  strangeness  and  novelty  of  the  change  ; and 
yet  the  man  is  reputed  still  to  be  the  same  from  his  birth 
to  his  decease.  In  the  same  manner  does  a city  still  re- 
main the  same  ; and  for  that  reason  we  think  it  but  justice, 
that  a city  should  as  well  be  obnoxious  to  the  blame  and 
reproach  of  its  ancient  inhabitants,  as  participate  the  glory 
of  their  former  puissance  and  renown  ; else  we  shall  throw 
every  thing  before  we  know  it  into  the  river  of  Heraclitus, 
into  which  (he  says)  no  one  can  step  twice,*  since  Nature 
by  her  changes  is  ever  altering  and  transforming  all  things. 

16.  Now  then,  if  a city  be  one  entire  and  continued 
body,  the  same  opinion  is  to  be  conceived  of  a race  of 
men,  depending  upon  one  and  the  same  beginning,  and 
carrying  along  with  it  a certain  power  and  communion  of 
qualities  ; in  regard  that  what  is  begotten  cannot  be  thought 
to  be  severed  from  that  which  begets  it,  like  a piece  of 
workmanship  from  the  artificer;  the  one  being  begotten 
of  the  person,  the  other  framed  by  him.  So  that  what  is 
engendered  is  a part  of  the  original  from  whence  it  sprung, 
whether  meriting  honor  or  deserving  punishment.  So  that, 
were  it  not  that  I might  be  thought  to  be  too  sportive  in  a 
serious  discourse,  I would  affirm,  that  the  Athenians  were 
more  unjust  to  the  statue  of  Cassander  when  they  caused 
it  to  be  melted  down  and  defaced,  and  that  the  Syracusans 
were  more  rigorous  to  the  dead  carcass  of  Dionysius  when 
they  cast  it  forth  of  their  own  confines,  than  if  they  had 
punished  their  posterity  ; for  that  the  statue  did  no  way 
partake  of  the  substance  of  Cassander,  and  the  soul  of 
Dionysius  was  absolutely  departed  from  the  body  deceased. 
Whereas  Nisaeus,  Apollocrates,  Antipatcr,  Philip,  and 
several  others  descended  from  wicked  parents,  still  retained 
the  most  principal  part  of  those  who  begot  them,  not  lazily 

I 

* Referring  to  the  doctrine  of  Heraclitus,  that  all  Nature  is  moving  onward,  and 
nothing  is  the  same  two  successive  moments.  “ You  cannot  step  twice  into  the 
same  river,”  he  says.  See  Plat.  Cratyl.  p.  402  A.  (G.) 


168 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


and  sluggishly  dormant,  but  that  very  part  by  which  they 
live,  are  nourished,  act  and  move,  and  become  rational  and 
sensible  creatures.  Neither  is  there  any  thing  of  absurdity, 
if,  being  the  offspring  of  such  parents,  they  should  retain 
.many  of  their  bad  qualities.  In  short,  therefore,  I affirm 
that,  as  it  is  in  the  practice  of  physic,  that  whatever  is 
wholesome  and  profitable  is  likewise  just,  and  as  he  would 
be  accounted  ridiculous  that  should  aver  it  to  be  an  act  of 
injustice  to  cauterize  the  thumb  for  the  cure  of  the  sciatica, 
or  when  the  liver  is  impostbumated,  to  scarify  the  belly,  or 
when  the  hoofs  of  laboring  oxen  are  over  tender,  to  anoint 
the  tips  of  their  horns  ; in  the  same  manner  is  he  to  be 
laughed  at  who  seeks  for  any  other  justice  in  the  punish- 
ment of  vice  than  the  cure  and  reformation  of  the  offender, 
and  who  is  angry  when  medicine  is  applied  to  some  parts 
for  the  cure  of  others,  as  when  a chirurgeon  opens  a vein 
to  give  his  patient  ease  upon  an  inflammation  of  the  eyes. 

, For  such  a one  seems  to  look  no  farther  than  what  he 
reaches  by  his  senses,  forgetting  that  a schoolmaster,  by 
chastising  one,  admonishes  all  the  rest  of  his  scholars,  and 
that  a general,  condemning  only  one  in  ten,  reduces  all  the 
rest  to  obedience.  And  thus  there  is  not  only  a cure  and 
amendment  of  one  part  of  the  body  by  another ; but  many 
times  the  very  soul  itself  is  inclined  to  vice  or  reformation, 
by  the  lewdness  or  virtue  of  another,  and  indeed  much 
more  readily  than  one  body  is  affected  by  another.  For,  in 
the  case  of  the  body,  as  it  seems  natural,  the  same  affec- 
tions and  the  same  changes  must  always  occur ; while  the 
soul,  being  agitated  by  fancy  and  imagination,  becomes 
better  or  worse,  as  it  is  either  daring  and  confident  or 
timorous  and  mistrustful. 

17.  While  I was  yet  speaking,  Olympicus  interrupting 
me  said : You  seem  by  this  discourse  of  yours  to  infer  as 
if  the  soul  were  immortal,  which  is  a supposition  of  great 
consequence.  It  is  very  true,  said  I,  nor  is  it  any  more 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


169 


than  what  yourselves  have  granted  already ; in  regard  the 
whole  dispute  has  tended  from  the  beginning  to  this,  that 
the  supreme  Deity  overlooks  us,  and  deals  to  every  one  of 
us  according  to  our  deserts.  To  which  the  other  : Do  you 
then  believe  (said  he)  it  follows  of  necessity  that,  because  * 
the  Deity  observes  our  actions  and  distributes  to  every  one 
of  us  according  to  our  merits,  therefore  our  souls  should 
exist  and  be  altogether  incorruptible,  or  else  for  a certain 
time  survive  the  body  after  death  ? Not  so  fast,  good  sir, 
said  I.  But  can  we  think  that  God  so  little  considers  his 
own  actions,  or  is  such  a waster  of  his  time  in  trifles,  that, 
if  we  had  nothing  of  divine  within  us,  nothing  that  in  the 
least  resembled  his  perfection,  nothing  permanent  and  sta- 
ble, but  were  only  poor  creatures,  that  (according  to  Ho- 
mer’s expression)  faded  and  dropped  like  withered  leaves, 
and  in  a short  time  too,  yet  he  should  make  so  great  ac- 
count of  us  — like  women  that  bestow  their  pains  in  mak- 
ing little  gardens,  no  less  delightful  to  them  than  the 
gardens  of  Adonis,  in  earthen  pans  and  pots  — as  to  create 
us  souls  to  blossom  and  flourish  only  for  a day,  in  a soft 
and  tender  body  of  flesh,  without  any  firm  and  solid  root 
of  life,  and  then  to  be  blasted  and  extinguished  in  a mo- 
ment upon  every  slight  occasion?  And  therefore,  if  you 
please,  not  concerning  ourselves  with  other  Deities,  let  us 
go  no  farther  than  the  God  Apollo,  whom  here  we  call 
our  own ; see  whether  it  is  likely  that  he,  knowing  that 
the  souls  of  the  deceased  vanish  away  like  clouds  and 
smoke,  exhaling  from  our  bodies  like  a vapor,  requires 
that  so  many  propitiations  and  such  great  honors  be  paid 
to  the  dead,  and  such  veneration  be  given  to  the  de-  | 
ceased,  merely  to  delude  and  cozen  his  believers.  And 
therefore,  for  my  part,  I will  never  deny  the  immortality  of 
the  soul,  till  somebody  or  other,  as  they  say  Hercules  did 
of  old,  shall  be  so  daring  as  to  come  and  take  away  the 
prophetical  tripod,  and  so  quite  ruin  and  destroy  the  oracle. 


170 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


For  as  long  as  many  oracles  are  uttered  even  in  these  our 
days  by  the  Delphic  soothsayer,  the  same  in  substance 
which  was  formerly  given  to  Corax  the  Naxian,  it  is  im- 
pious to  declare  that  the  human  soul  can  die. 

$ Then  Patrocleas : What  oracle  was  this  ? Who  was 
that  same  Corax  1 For  both  the  answer  itself  and  the 
person  whom  you  mention  are  strangers  to  my  remem- 
brance. Certainly,  said  I,  that  cannot  be ; only  it  was  my 
error  which  occasioned  your  ignorance,  in  making  use  of 
the  addition  to  the  name  instead  of  the  name  itself.  For 
it  was  Calondas,  who  slew  Archilochus  in  fight,  and  who 
was  surnamed  Corax.  He  was  thereupon  ejected  by  the 
Pythian  priestess,  as  one  who  had  slain  a person  devoted 
to  the  Muses  ; but  afterwards,  humbling  himself  in  prayers 
, and  supplications,  intermixed  with  undeniable  excuses  of 
the  fact,  was  enjoined  by  the  oracle  to  repair  to  the  habita- 
tion of  Tettix,  there  to  expiate  his  crime  by  appeasing  the 
ghost  of  Archilochus.  That  place  was  called  Taenarus ; 
for  there  it  was,  as  the  report  goes,  that  Tettix  the  Cretan, 
coming  with  a navy,  landed,  built  a city  not  far  from  the 
Psychopompaeum  (or  place  where  ghosts  are  conjured  up), 
and  stored  it  with  inhabitants.  In  like  manner,  when  the 
Spartans  were  commanded  by  the  oracle  to  atone  the  ghost 
of  Pausanias,  they  sent  for  several  exorcisers  and  conjur- 
ers out  of  Italy,  who  by  virtue  of  their  sacrifices  chased 
the  apparition  out  of  the  temple. 

18.  Therefore,  said  I,  there  is  one  and  the  same  reason 
to  confirm  the  providence  of  God  and  the  immortality  of 
the  soul ; neither  is  it  possible  to  admit  the  one,  if  you 
deny  the  other.  Now  then,  the  soul  surviving  after  the 

' decease  of  the  body,  the  inference  is  the  stronger  that  it 
partakes  of  punishment  and  reward.  For  during  this  mor- 
tal life  the  soul  is  in  continual  combat  like  a wrestler  ; but 
after  all  those  conflicts  are  at  an  end,  she  then  receives  ac- 
cording to  her  merits.  But  what  the  punishments  and  what 

1 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


171 


tlie  rewards  of  past  transgressions  or  just  and  laudable  ac- 
tions are  to  be  while  the  soul  is  thus  alone  by  itself,  is 
nothing  at  all  to  us  that  are  alive ; for  either  they  are  al- 
together concealed  from  our  knowledge,  or  else  we  give 
but  little  credit  to  them.  But  those  punishments  that 
reach  succeeding  posterity,  being  conspicuous  to  all  that 
are  living  at  the  same  time,  restrain  and  curb  the  inclina- 
tions of  many  wicked  persons.  Now  I have  a story  that  I 
lately  heard,  which  I might  relate  to  show  that  there  is  no 
punishment  more  grievous  or  that  touches  more  to  the  quick, 
than  for  a man  to  behold  his  children  born  of  his  body  suf- 
fering for  his  crimes ; and  that,  if  the  soul  of  a wicked 
and  lawless  criminal  were  to  look  back  to  earth  and  be- 
hold, not  his  statues  overturned  and  his  dignities  reversed, 
but  his  own  children,  his  friends,  or  his  nearest  kindred 
ruined  and  overwhelmed  with  calamity,  such  a person, 
were  he  to  return  to  life  again,  would  rather  choose  the  re- 
fusal of  all  Jupiter’s  honors  than  abandon  himself  a sec- 
ond time  to  his  wonted  injustice  and  extravagant  desires. 
This  story,  I say,  I could  relate,  but  that  I fear  lest  you  should 
censure  it  for  a fable.  And  therefore  I deem  it  much  the 
better  way  to  keep  close  to  what  is  probable  and  consen- 
taneous to  reason.  By  no  means,  replied  Olympicus  ; but 
proceed,  and  gratify  us  with  your  story  also,  since  it  was 
so  kindly  offered.  Thereupon,  when  the  rest  of  the  com- 
pany likewise  made  me  the  same  request,  Permit  me,  said 
I,  in  the  first  place,  to  pursue  the  rational  part  of  my  dis- 
course, and  then,  according  as  it  shall  seem  proper  and 
convenient,  if  it  be  a fable,  you  shall  have  it  as  cheap  as  I 
heard  it. 

19.  Bion  was  of  opinion  that  God,  in  punishing  the 
children  of  the  wicked  for  the  sins  of  their  fathers,  seems 
more  irregular  than  a physician  that  should  administer 
physic  to  a son  or  a grandchild,  to  cure  the  distemper  of 
a father  or  a grandfather.  But  this  comparison  does  not 


172 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


run  cleverly ; since  the  amplification  of  the  similitude 
agrees  only  in  some  things,  but  in  others  is  altogether  de- 
fective. For  if  one  man  be  cured  of  a disease  by  physic, 
the  same  medicine  will  not  cure  another ; nor  was  it  ever 
known  that  any  person  troubled  with  sore  eyes  or  laboring 
under  a fever  was  ever  restored  to  perfect  health  by  seeing 
another  in  the  same  condition  anointed  or  plastered.  But 
the  punishments  or  executions  of  malefactors  are  done 
publicly  in  the  face  of  the  world,  to  the  end  that,  justice 
appearing  to  be  the  effect  of  prudence  and  reason,  some 
may  be  restrained  by  the  correction  inflicted  upon  others. 
So  that  Bion  never  rightly  apprehended  where  the  com- 
parison answered  to  our  question.  For  oftentimes  it  hap- 
pens, that  a man  comes  to  be  haunted  with  a troublesome 
though  not  incurable  disease,  and  through  sloth  and  in- 
temperance increases  his  distemper,  and  weakens  his  body 
to  that  degree  that  he  occasions  his  own  death.  After 
this,  it  is  true,  the  son  does  not  fall  sick ; only  he  has  re- 
ceived from  his  father’s  seed  such  a habit  of  body  as  makes 
him  liable  to  the  same  disease ; which  a good  physician  or 
a tender  friend  or  a skilful  apothecary  or  a careful  master 
observing  confines  him  to  a strict  and  spare  diet,  restrains 
him  from  all  manner  of  superfluity,  keeps  him  from  all 
the  temptations  of  delicious  fare,  wine,  and  women,  and 
making  use  of  wholesome  and  proper  physic,  together  with 
convenient  exercise,  dissipates  and  extirpates  the  original 
cause  of  a distemper  at  the  beginning,  before  it  grows  to 
a head  and  gets  a masterless  dominion  over  the  body. 
And  is  it  not  our  usual  practice  thus  to  admonish  those 
that  are  born  of  diseased  parents,  to  take  timely  care  of 
themselves,  and  not  to  neglect  the  malady,  but  to  expel 
the  original  nourishment  of  the  inbred  evil,  as  being  then 
easily  movable  and  apt  for  expulsion  1 It  is  very  true,  cried 
they.  Therefore,  said  I,  we  cannot  be  said  to  do  an  ab- 
surd thing,  but  what  is  absolutely  necessary,  — nor  that 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


173 


which  is  ridiculous,  but  what  is  altogether  useful,  — while 
we  prescribe  to  the  children  of  the  epileptic,  the  hypo- 
chondriacal, and  those  that  are  subject  to  the  gout,  such 
exercises,  diet,  and  remedies  as  are  proper,  not  so  much 
because  they  are  at  that  time  troubled  with  the  distemper, 
as  to  prevent  the  malady.  For  a man  begotten  by  an  un- 
sound body  does  not  therefore  deserve  punishment,  but 
rather  the  preservation  of  proper  physic  and  good  regi- 
men ; which  if  any  one  call  the  punishment  of  fear  or 
effeminacy,  because  the  person  is  debarred  his  pleasures 
and  put  to  some  sort  of  pain  by  cupping  and  blistering, 
we  mind  not  what  he  says.  If  then  it  be  of  such  impor- 
tance to  preserve,  by  physic  and  other  proper  means,  the 
vitiated  offspring  of  another  body,  foul  and  corrupted ; 
ought  we  to  suffer  the  hereditary  resemblances  of  a wick- 
ed nature  to  sprout  up  and  bud  in  the  youthful  character, 
and  to  wait  till  they  are  diffused  into  all  the  affections  of 
the  mind,  and  bring  forth  and  ripen  the  malignant  fruit 
of  a mischievous  disposition'?  For  such  is  the  expression 
of  Pindar. 

20.  Or  can  you  believe  but  that  in  this  particular  God 
is  wiser  than  Hesiod,  admonishing  and  exhorting  us  in 
this  manner : * 

Nor  mind  the  pleasures  of  the  genial  bed, 

Returning  from  th’  interment  of  the  dead  ; 

But  propagate  the  race,  when  heavenly  food 

And  feasting  with  the  Gods  have  warmed  the  blood ; ' 

intimating  thereby,  that  a man  was  never  to  attempt  the 
work  of  generation  but  in  the  height  of  a jocund  and 
merry  humor,  and  when  he  found  himself  as  it  were  dis- 
solved into  jollity ; as  if  from  procreation  proceeded  the 
impressions  not  only  of  vice  or  virtue,  but  of  sorrow  and 
joy,  and  of  all  other  qualities  and  affections  whatever. 
However,  it  is  not  the  work  of  human  wisdom  (as  Flesiod 
supposes)  but  of  divine  providence,  to  foresee  the  sym- 

* Hesiod,  Works  and  Days,  735. 


174 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


pathies  and  differences  of  men’s  natures,  before  the  ma- 
lignant infection  of  their  unruly  passions  come  to  exert 
itself,  by  hurrying  their  unadvised  youth  into  a thousand 
villanous  miscarriages.  For  though  the  cubs  of  bears  and 
whelps  of  wolves  and  apes  immediately  discover  their 
several  inbred  qualities  and  natural  conditions  without  any 
disguise  or  artificial  concealment,  man  is  nevertheless  a 
creature  more  refined,  who,  many  times  curbed  by  the 
shame  of  transgressing  common  customs,  universal  opinion, 
or  the  law,  conceals  the  evil  that  is  within  him,  and  imi- 
tates only  what  is  laudable  and  honest.  So  that  he  may 
be  thought  to  have  altogether  cleansed  and  rinsed  away 
the  stains  and  imperfections  of  his  vicious  disposition,  and 
so  cunningly  for  a long  time  to  have  kept  his  natural  cor- 
ruption wrapped  up  under  the  covering  of  craft  and  dis- 
simulation, that  we  are  scarce  sensible  of  the  fallacy  till  we 
feel  the  stripes  or  sting  of  his  injustice ; believing  men  to 
be  only  then  unjust,  when  they  offer  wrong  to  ourselves ; 
lascivious,  when  we  see  them  abandoning  themselves  to 
their  lusts ; and  cowards,  when  we  see  them  turning  their 
backs  upon  the  enemy ; just  as  if  any  man  should  be  so 
idle  as  to  believe  a scorpion  had  no  sting  until  he  felt  it, 
or  that  a viper  had  no  venom  until  it  bit  him,  — which  is 
a silly  conceit.  For  there  is  no  man  that  only  then  be- 
comes wicked  when  he  appears  to  be  so ; but,  having  the 
seeds  and  principles  of  iniquity  within  him  long  before, 
the  thief  steals  when  he  meets  with  a fit  opportunity,  and 
the  tyrant  violates  the  law  when  he  finds  himself  sur- 
rounded with  sufficient  power.  But  neither  is  the  nature 
and  disposition  of  any  man  concealed  from  God,  as  taking 
upon  him  with  more  exactness  to  scrutinize  the  soul  than 
the  body  ; nor  does  he  tarry  till  actual  violence  or  lewdness 
be  committed,  to  punish  the  hands  of  the  wrong-doer,  the 
tongue  of  the  profane,  or  the  transgressing  members  of 
the  lascivious  and  obscene.  For  lie  does  not  exercise  his 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


175 


vengeance  on  the  unjust  for  any  wrong  that  he  has  received 
by  his  injustice,  nor  is  he  angry  with  the  highway  robber 
for  any  violence  done  to  himself,  nor  does  he  abominate 
the  adulterer  for  defiling  his  bed ; but  many  times,  by  way 
of  cure  and  reformation,  he  chastises  the  adulterer,  the 
covetous  miser,  and  the  wronger  of  his  neighbors,  as  phy- 
sicians endeavor  to  subdue  an  epilepsy  by  preventing  the 
coming  of  the  fits. 

21.  What  shall  I say?  But  even  a little  before  we 
were  offended  at  the  Gods  protracting  and  delaying  the 
punishments  of  the  wicked,  and  now  we  are  as  much  dis- 
pleased that  they  do  not  curb  and  chastise  the  depravities 
of  an  evil  disposition  before  the  fact  committed  ; not  con- 
sidering that  many  times  a mischief  contrived  for  future 
execution  may  prove  more  dreadful  than  a fact  already 
committed,  and  that  dormant  villany  may  be  more  dan- 
gerous than  open  and  apparent  iniquity ; not  being  able 
to  apprehend  the  reason  wherefore  it  is  better  to  bear  with 
the  unjust  actions  of  some  men,  and  to  prevent  the  medi- 
tating and  contrivance  of  mischief  in  others.  As,  in  truth, 
we  do  not  rightly  comprehend  why  some  remedies  and 
physical  drugs  are  no  way  convenient  for  those  that  labor 
under  a real  disease,  yet  wholesome  and  profitable  for 
those  that  are  seemingly  in  health,  but  yet  perhaps  in  a 
worse  condition  than  they  who  are  sick.  Whence  it  comes 
to  pass,  that  the  Gods  do  not  always  turn  the  transgres- 
sions of  parents  upon  their  children ; but  if  a virtuous  son 
happen  to  be  the  offspring  of  a wicked  father,  — as  often 
it  falls  out  that  a sane  child  is  born  of  one  that  is  unsound 
and  crazy,  — such  a one  is  exempted  from  the  punishment 
which  threatens  the  whole  descent,  as  having  been  adopted 
into  a virtuous  family.  But  for  a young  man  that  treads 
in  the  footsteps  of  a criminal  race,  it  is  but  just  that  he 
should  succeed  to  the  punishment  of  his  ancestor’s  ini- 
quity, as  one  of  the  debts  attached  to  his  inheritance. 


176 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


For  neither  was  Antigonus  punished  for  the  crimes  of 
Demetrius ; nor  (among  the  ancient  heroes)  Phyleus  for 
the  transgressions  of  Augeas,  nor  Nestor  for  the  impiety  of 
Neleus ; in  regard  that,  though  their  parents  were  wicked, 
yet  they  were  virtuous  themselves.  But  as  for  those  whose 
nature  has  embraced  and  espoused  the  vices  of  their  par- 
entage, them  holy  vengeance  prosecutes,  pursuing  the  like- 
ness and  resemblance  of  sin.  For  as  the  warts  and  moles 
and  freckles  of  parents,  not  seen  upon  the  children  of 
their  own  begetting,  many  times  afterwards  appear  again 
upon  the  children  of  their  sons  and  daughters ; and  as  the 
Grecian  woman  that  brought  forth  a blackamore  infant, 
for  which  she  was  accused  of  adultery,  proved  herself, 
upon  diligent  inquiry,  to  be  the  offspring  of  an  Ethiopian 
after  four  generations ; and  as  among  the  children  of 
Pytho  the  Nisibian,  — said  to  be  descended  from  the 
Sparti,  that  were  the  progeny  of  those  men  that  sprung 
from  the  teeth  of  Cadmus’s  dragon,  — the  youngest  of  his 
sons,  who  lately  died,  was  born  with  the  print  of  a spear 
upon  his  body,  the  usual  mark  of  that  ancient  line,  which, 
not  having  been  seen  for  many  revolutions  of  years  before, 
started  up  again,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  deep,  and  showed 
itself  the  renewed  testimonial  of  the  infant’s  race ; so 
many  times  it  happens  that  the  first  descents  and  eldest 
races  hide  and  drown  the  passions  and  affections  of  the 
mind  peculiar  to  the  family,  which  afterward  bud  forth 
again,  and  display  the  natural  propensity  of  the  succeeding 
progeny  to  vice  or  virtue. 

22.  Having  thus  concluded,  I held  my  peace  ; when 
Olympicus  smiling  said:  We  forbear  as  yet  to  give  you 
our  approbation,  that  we  may  not  seem  to  have  forgot  the 
fable ; not  but  that  we  believe  your  discourse  to  have  been 
sufficiently  made  out  by  demonstration,  only  we  reserve 
our  opinion  till  we  shall  have  heard  the  relation  of  that 
likewise.  Upon  which,  I began  again  after  this  manner : 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


177 


There  was  one  Thespesius  of  Soli,  the  friend  and  familiar 
acquaintance  of  that  Protogenes  who  for  some  time  con- 
versed among  us.  This  gentleman,  in  his  youth  leading  a 
debauched  and  intemperate  life,  in  a short  time  spent  his 
patrimony,  and  then  for  some  years  became  very  wicked ; 
but  afterwards  repenting  of  his  former  follies  and  extrava- 
gancies, and  pursuing  the  recovery  of  his  lost  estate  by  all 
manner  of  tricks  and  shifts,  did  as  is  usual  with  dissolute 
and  lascivious  youth,  who  when  they  have  wives  of  their 
own  never  mind  them  at  all,  but  when  they  have  dismissed 
them,  and  find  them  married  to  others  that  watch  them 
with  a more  vigilant  affection,  endeavor  to  corrupt  and 
vitiate  them  by  all  the  unjust  and  wicked  provocations 
imaginable.  In  this  humor,  abstaining  from  nothing  that 
was  lewd  and  illegal,  so  it  tended  to  his  gain  and  profit,  he 
got  no  great  matter  of  wealth,  but  procured  to  himself  a 
world  of  infamy  by  his  unjust  and  knavish  dealing  with  all 
sorts  of  people.  Yet  nothing  made  him  more  the  talk  of 
the  country,  than  the  answer  Avhich  was  brought  him  back 
from  the  oracle  of  Amphilochus.  For  thither  it  seems  he 
sent,  to  inquire  of  the  Deity  whether  he  should  live  any 
better  the  remaining  part  of  his  life.  To  which  the  oracle 
returned,  that  it  would  be  better  with  him  after  he  was 
dead.  And  indeed,  not  long  after,  in  some  measure  it  so 
fell  out ; for  he  happened  to  fall  from  a certain  precipice 
upon  his  neck,  and  though  he  received  no  wound  nor 
broke  any  limb,  yet  the  force  of  the  fall  beat  the  breath 
out  of  his  body.  Three  days  after,  being  carried  forth  to 
be  buried,  as  they  were  just  ready  to  let  him  down  into 
the  grave,  of  a sudden  he  came  to  himself,  and  recovering 
his  strength,  so  altered  the  whole  course  of  his  life,  that  it 
was  almost  incredible  to  all  that  knew  him.  For  by  the 
report  of  the  Cilicians,  there  never  was  in  that  age  a juster 
person  in  common  dealings  between  man  and  man,  more 
devout  and  religious  as  to  divine  worship,  more  an  enemy 

VOL.  IV.  12 


178 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


to  the  wicked,  nor  more  constant  and  faithful  to  his  friends  ; 
which  was  the  reason  that  they  who  were  more  conversant 
with  him  were  desirous  to  hear  from  himself  the  cause  of 
so  great  an  alteration,  not  believing  that  so  great  a ref- 
ormation could  proceed  from  bare  chance ; though  it  was 
true  that  it  did  so,  as  he  himself  related  to  Protogenes  and 
others  of  his  choicest  friends. 

For  when  his  sense  first  left  his  body,  it  seemed  to  him 
as  if  he  had  been  some  pilot  flung  from  the  helm  by  the 
force  of  a storm  into  the  midst  of  the  sea.  Afterwards, 
rising  up  again  above  water  by  degrees,  so  soon  as  he 
thought  he  had  fully  recovered  his  breath,  he  looked  about 
him  every  way,  as  if  one  eye  of  his  soul  had  been  open. 
But  he  beheld  nothing  of  those  things  which  he  was  wont 
formerly  to  see,  only  he  saw  stars  of  a vast  magnitude,  at 
an  immense  distance  one  from  the  other,  and  sending  forth 
a light  most  wonderful  for  the  brightness  of  its  color,  which 
shot  itself  out  in  length  with  an  incredible  force ; on  which 
the  soul  riding,  as  it  were  in  a chariot,  was  most  swiftly, 
yet  as  gently  and  smoothly,  dandled  from  one  place  to 
another.  But  omitting  the  greatest  part  of  the  sights 
which  he  beheld,  he  saw,  as  he  said,  the  souls  of  such  as 
were  newly  departed,  as  they  mounted  from  below,  re- 
sembling little  fiery  bubbles,  to  which  the  air  gave  way. 
Which  bubbles  afterwards  breaking  insensibly  and  by  de- 
grees, the  soul  came  forth  in  the  shapes  of  men  and  women, 
light  and  nimble,  as  being  discharged  of  all  their  earthly 
substance.  However,  they  differed  in  their  motion ; for 
some  of  them  leaped  forth  with  a wonderful  swiftness,  and 
mounted  up  in  a direct  line  ; others  like  so  many  spindles 
of  spinning-wheels  turned  round  and  round,  sometimes 
whisking  upwards,  sometimes  darting  downwards,  with  a 
confused  and  mixed  agitation,  that  could  hardly  be  stopped 
in  a very  long  time. 

Of  these  souls  he  knew  not  who  the  most  part  were ; 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


179 


only  perceiving  two  or  three  of  his  acquaintance,  he  en- 
deavored to  approach  and  discourse  them.  But  they 
neither  heard  him  speak,  neither  indeed  did  they  seem  to 
be  in  their  right  mind,  fluttering  and  out  of  their  senses, 
avoiding  either  to  be  seen  or  felt;  they  frisked  up  and 
down  at  first,  alone  and  apart  by  themselves,  till  meeting 
at  length  with  others  in  the  same  condition,  they  clung  to- 
gether ; but  still  their  motions  were  with  the  same  giddiness 
and  uncertainty  as  before,  without  steerage  or  purpose ; 
and  they  sent  forth  inarticulate  sounds,  like  the  cries  of 
soldiers  in  combat,  intermixed  with  the  doleful  yells  of  fear 
and  lamentation.  Others  there  were  that  towered  aloft  in 
the  upper  region  of  the  air,  and  these  looked  gay  and 
pleasant,  and  frequently  accosted  each  other  with  kindness 
and  respect ; but  they  shunned  those  troubled  souls,  and 
seemed  to  show  discontent  by  crowding  together,  and  joy 
and  pleasure  by  expanding  and  separating  from  each  other. 
One  of  these,  said  he,  being  the  soul  of  a certain  kinsman, 
— which,  because  the  person  died  when  he  was  but  very 
young,  he  did  not  very  well  know,  — drew  near  him,  and 
saluted  him  by  the  name  of  Thespesius ; at  which  being 
in  a kind  of  amazement,  and  saying  his  name  was  not 
Thespesius  but  Aridaeus,  the  spirit  replied,  ’twas  true  that 
formerly  he  was  so  called,  but  that  from  thenceforth  he 
must  be  Thespesius,  that  is  to  say  “divine.”  For  thou  art 
not  in  the  number  of  the  dead  as  yet,  it  said,  but  by  a cer- 
tain destiny  and  permission  of  the  Gods,  thou  art  come 
hither  only  with  thy  intellectual  faculty,  having  left  the 
rest  of  thy  soul,  like  an  anchor,  in  thy  body.  And  that 
thou  mayst  be  assured  of  this,  observe  it  for  a certain  rule, 
both  now  and  hereafter,  that  the  souls  of  the  deceased 
neither  cast  any  shadow,  neither  do  they  open  and  shut 
their  eyelids.  Thespesius  having  heard  this  discourse,  was 
so  much  the  more  encouraged  to  make  use  of  his  own  rea- 
son ; and  therefore  looking  round  about  to  prove  the  truth 


180 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


of  what  had  been  told  him,  he  could  perceive  that  there 
followed  him  a kind  of  obscure  and  shadowlike  line, 
whereas  those  other  souls  shone  like  a round  body  of  per- 
fect light,  and  were  transparent  within.  And  yet  there 
was  a very  great  difference  between  them  too ; for  that 
some  yielded  a smooth,  even,  and  contiguous  lustre,  all  of 
one  color,  like  the  full-moon  in  her  brightest  splendor ; 
others  were  marked  with  long  scales  or  slender  streaks  ; 
others  were  all  over  spotted  and  very  ugly  to  look  upon, 
as  being  covered  with  black  speckles  like  the  skins  of 
vipers ; and  others  were  marked  by  faint  scratches. 

Moreover,  this  kinsman  of  Thespesius  (for  nothing  hin- 
ders but  that  we  may  call  the  souls  by  the  names  of  the 
persons  which  they  enlivened),  proceeding  to  give  a rela- 
tion of  several  other  things,  informed  his  friend  how  that 
Adrastea,  the  daughter  of  Jupiter  and  Necessity,  was  seated 
in  the  highest  place  of  all,  to  punish  all  manner  of  crimes 
and  enormities ; and  that  in  the  whole  number  of  the 
wicked  and  ungodly,  there  never  was  any  one,  whether 
great  or  little,  high  or  low,  rich  or  poor,  that  ever  could 
by  force  or  cunning  escape  the  severe  lashes  of  her  rigor. 
But  as  there  are  three  sorts  of  punishments,  so  there  are 
three  several  Furies,  or  female  ministers  of  justice  ; and  to 
every  one  of  these  belongs  a peculiar  office  and  degree  of 
punishment.  The  first  of  these  was  called  Speedy  Punish- 
ment, who  takes  in  charge  those  that  are  presently  to  re- 
ceive bodily  punishment  in  this  life,  which  she  manages 
after  a more  gentle  manner,  omitting  the  correction  of 
many  offences  which  need  expiation.  But  if  the  cure  of 
impiety  require  a greater  labor,  the  Deity  delivers  them 
after  death  to  Justice.  But  when  Justice  has  given  them 
over  as  altogether  incurable,  then  the  third  and  most  severe 
of  all  Adrastea’s  ministers,  Erinnys  (the  Fury),  takes  them 
in  hand  ; and  after  she  has  chased  and  coursed  them  from 
one  place  to  another,  flying,  yet  not  knowing  where  to 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


181 


fly,  for  shelter  or  relief,  plagued  and  tormented  with  a 
thousand  miseries,  she  plunges  them  headlong  into  an 
invisible  abyss,  the  hideousness  of  which  no  tongue  can 
express. 

Now,  of  all  these  three  sorts,  that  which  is  inflicted  by 
punishment  in  this  life  resembles  the  practice  among  the 
barbarians.  For,  as  among  the  Persians,  they  take  off  the 
garments  and  turbans  of  those  that  are  to  be  punished,  and 
tear  and  whip  them  before  the  offender’s  faces,  while  the 
criminals,  with  tears  and  lamentations,  beseech  the  execu- 
tioners to  give  over ; so  corporal  punishments,  and  penal- 
ties by  mulcts  and  fines,  have  no  sharpness  or  severity,  nor 
do  they  take  hold  upon  the  vice  itself,  but  are  inflicted  for 
the  most  part  only  with  regard  to  appearance  and  to  the 
outward  sense.  But  if  any  one  comes  hither  that  has 
escaped  punishment  while  he  lived  upon  earth  and  before 
he  was  well  purged  from  his  crimes,  Justice  takes  him  to 
task,  naked  as  he  is,  with  his  soul  displayed,  as  having 
nothing  to  conceal  or  veil  his  impiety ; but  on  all  sides  and 
to  all  men’s  eyes  and  every  way  exposed,  she  shows  him 
first  to  his  honest  parents,  if  he  had  any  such,  to  let  them 
see  how  degenerate  he  was  and  unworthy  of  his  pro- 
genitors. But  if  they  were  wicked  likewise,  then  are 
their  sufferings  rendered  yet  more  terrible  by  the  mutual 
sight  of  each  other’s  miseries,  and  those  for  a long  time 
inflicted,  till  each  individual  crime  has  been  quite  effaced 
with  pains  and  torments  as  far  surmounting  in  sharpness 
and  severity  all  punishments  and  tortures  of  the  flesh,  as 
what  is  real  and  evident  surpasses  an  idle  dream.  But  the 
weals  and  stripes  that  remain  after  punishment  appear 
more  signal  in  some,  in  others  are  less  evident. 

View  there,  said  he,  those  various  colors  of  souls.  That 
same  black  and  sordid  hue  is  the  tincture  of  avarice  and 
fraud.  That  bloody  and  flame-like  dye  betokens  cruelty, 
and  an  imbittered  desire  of  revenge.  Where  you  perceive 


182 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


a bluish  color,  it  is  a sign  that  soul  will  hardly  be  cleansed 
from  the  impurities  of  lascivious  pleasure  and  voluptuous- 
ness. Lastly,  that  same  dark,  violet,  and  venomous  color, 
resembling  the  sordid  ink  which  the  cuttle  fish  spews  up, 
proceeds  from  envy.  For  as  during  life  the  wickedness  of 
the  soul,  being  governed  by  human  passions  and  itself 
governing  the  body,  occasions  this  variety  of  colors ; so 
here  it  is  the  end  of  expiation  and  punishment,  when  these 
are  cleansed  away,  and  the  soul  recovers  her  native  lustre 
and  becomes  clear  and  spotless.  But  so  long  as  these  re- 
main, there  will  be  some  certain  returns  of  the  passions, 
accompanied  with  little  pantings  and  beatings,  as  it  were 
of  the  pulse,  in  some  remiss  and  languid  and  quickly  ex- 
tinguished, in  others  more  quick  and  vehement.  Some  of 
these  souls,  bein^  again  and  again  chastised,  recover  a due 
habit  and  disposition ; while  others,  by  the  force  of  igno- 
rance and  the  enticing  show  of  pleasure,  are  carried  into 
the  bodies  of  brute  beasts.  For  while  some,  through  the 
feebleness  of  their  ratiocinating,  while  their  slothfulness 
will  not  permit  them  to  contemplate,  are  impelled  by  their 
active  principle  to  seek  a new  generation ; others  again, 
wanting  the  instrument  of  intemperance,  yet  desirous  to 
gratify  their  desires  with  the  full  swing  of  enjoyment,  en- 
deavor to  promote  their  designs  by  means  of  the  body. 
But  alas ! here  is  nothing  but  an  imperfect  shadow  and 
dream  of  pleasure,  that  never  attains  to  ability  of  perform- 
ance. 

Having  thus  said,  the  spirit  quickly  carried  Thespesius 
to  a certain  place,  as  it  appeared  to  him,  prodigiously 
spacious  ; yet  so  gently  and  without  the  least  deviation, 
that  he  seemed  to  be  borne  upon  the  rays  of  the  light  as 
upon  wings.  Thus  at  length  he  came  to  a certain  gaping 
chasm,  that  was  fathomless  downward,  where  he  found 
himself  deserted  by  that  extraordinary  force  which  brought 
him  thither,  and  perceived  other  souls  also  to  be  there  in 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


183 


the  same  condition.  For  hovering  upon  the  wing  in  flocks 
together  like  birds,  they  kept  flying  round  and  round  the 
yawning  rift,  but  durst  not  enter  into  it.  Now  this  same 
cleft  withinside  resembled  the  dens  of  Bacchus,  fringed 
about  with  the  pleasing  verdure  of  various  herbs  and 
plants,  that  yielded  a more  delightful  prospect  still  of  all 
sorts  of  flowers,  enamelling  the  green  so  with  a wonderful 
diversity  of  colors,  and  breathing  forth  at  the  same  time  a 
soft  and  gentle  breeze,  which  perfumed  all  the  ambient  air 
with  odors  most  surprising,  as  grateful  to  the  smell  as  the 
sweet  flavor  of  wine  to  those  that  love  it.  Insomuch  that 
the  souls  banqueting  upon  these  fragrancies  were  almost 
all  dissolved  in  raptures  of  mirth  and  caresses  one  among 
another,  there  being  nothing  to  be  heard  for  some  fair 
distance  round  about  the  place,  but  jollity  and  laughter, 
and  all  the  cheerful  sounds  of  joy  and  harmony,  which  are 
usual  among  people  that  pass  their  time  in  sport  and  merri- 
ment. 

The  spirit  said,  moreover,  that  Bacchus  ascended  through 
this  overture  to  heaven,  and  afterwards  returning  fetched 
up  Semele  the  same  way ; and  that  it  was  called  the  place 
of  oblivion.  Wherefore  his  kinsman  would  not  suffer 
Thespesius  to  tarry  there  any  longer,  though  very  unwill- 
ing to  depart,  but  took  him  away  by  force ; informing  and 
instructing  him  withal,  how  strangely  and  how  suddenly  the 
mind  was  subject  to  be  softened  and  melted  by  pleasure  ; 
that  the  irrational  and  corporeal  part,  being  watered  and 
incarnated  thereby,  revives  the  memory  of  the  body, 
and  that  from  this  remembrance  proceed  concupiscence 
and  desire,  exciting  an  appetite  for  a new  generation  and 
entrance  into  a body  — which  is  named  ysveaig  as  being  an 
inclination  towards  the  earth  (ml  yrjv  vewig)  — when  the  soul 
is  weighed  down  with  overmuch  moisture. 

At  length,  after  he  had  been  carried  as  far  another  way 
as  when  he  was  transported  to  the  yawning  overture,  he 


184 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


thought  he  beheld  a prodigious  standing  goblet,  into  which 
several  rivers  discharged  themselves ; among  which  there 
was  one  whiter  than  snow  or  the  foam  of  the  sea,  another 
resembled  the  purple  color  of  the  rainbow.  The  tinctures 
of  the  rest  were  various  ; besides  that,  they  had  their  sev- 
eral lustres  at  a distance.  But  when  he  drew  nearer,  the 
ambient  air  became  more  subtile  and  rarefied,  and  the  colors 
vanished,  so  the  goblet  retained  no  more  of  its  flourishing 
beauty  except  the  white.  At  the  same  time  he  saw  three 
Daemons  sitting  together  in  a triangular  aspect,  and  blend- 
ing and  mixing  the  rivers  together  with  certain  measures. 
Thus  far,  said  the  guide  of  Thespesius’s  soul,  did  Orpheus 
come,  when  he  sought  after  the  soul  of  his  wife ; and  not 
well  remembering  what  he  had  seen,  upon  his  return  he 
raised  a false  report  in  the  world,  that  the  oracle  at  Delphi 
was  in  common  to  Night  and  Apollo,  whereas  Apollo  never 
had  any  thing  in  common  with  Night.  But,  said  the  spirit, 
this  oracle  is  in  common  to  Night  and  to  the  Moon,  no  way 
included  within  earthly  bounds,  nor  having  any  fixed  or 
certain  seat,  but  always  wandering  among  men  in  dreams 
and  visions.  For  from  hence  it  is  that  all  dreams  are  dis- 
persed, compounded  as  they  are  of  truth  jumbled  with 
falsehood,  and  sincerity  with  the  various  mixtures  of  craft 
and  delusion.  But  as  for  the  oracle  of  Apollo,  said  the 
spirit,  you  neither  do  see  it,  neither  can  you  behold  it ; for 
the  earthly  part  of  the  soul  is  not  capable  to  release  or  let 
itself  loose,  nor  is  it  permitted  to  reach  sublimity,  but  it 
swags  downward,  as  being  fastened  to  the  body. 

And  with  that,  leading  Thespesius  nearer,  the  spirit  en- 
deavored to  show  him  the  light  of  the  Tripod,  which,  as  he 
said,  shooting  through  the  bosom  of  Themis,  fell  upon 
Parnassus ; which  Thespesius  was  desirous  to  see,  but 
could  not,  in  regard  the  extraordinary  brightness  of  the 
light  dazzled  his  eyes  ; only  passing  by,  he  heard  the  shrill 
voice  of  a woman  speaking  in  verse  and  measure,  and 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  TUNISII. 


185 


among  other  things,  as  he  thought,  foretelling  the  time  of 
his  death.  This  the  genius  told  him  was  the  voice  of  a 
Sibyl  who,  being  orbicularly  whirled  about  in  the  face  of 
the  moon,  continually  sang  of  future  events.  Thereupon 
being  desirous  to  hear  more,  he  was  tossed  the  quite  con- 
trary way  by  the  violent  motion  of  the  moon,  as  by  the 
force  of  rolling  waves  ; so  that  he  could  hear  but  very  little, 
and  that  very  concisely  too.  Among  other  things,  he  heard 
what  was  prophesied  concerning  the  mountain  Vesuvius, 
and  the  future  destruction  of  Dicaearchia  by  fire  ; together 
with  a piece  of  a verse  concerning  a certain  emperor  * or 
great  famous  chieftain  of  that  age, 

Who,  though  so  just  that  no  man  could  accuse, 

Howe’er  his  empire  should  by  sickness  lose. 

After  this,  they  passed  on  to  behold  the  torments  of  those 
that  were  punished.  And  indeed  at  first  they  met  with 
none  but  lamentable  and  dismal  sights.  For  Thespesius, 
when  he  least  suspected  any  such  thing,  and  before  he  was 
aware,  was  got  among  his  kindred,  his  acquaintance,  and 
companions,  who,  groaning  under  the  horrid  pains  of  their 
cruel  and  ignominious  punishments,  with  mournful  cries 
and  lamentations  called  him  by  his  name.  At  length  he 
saw  his  father  ascending  out  of  a certain  abyss,  all  full  of 
stripes,  gashes,  and  scars ; who  stretching  forth  his  hands 
— not  permitted  to  keep  silence,  but  constrained  to  confess 
by  his  tormentors  — acknowledged  that  he  had  most  im- 
piously poisoned  several  of  his  guests  for  the  sake  of  their 
gold ; of  which  not  being  detected  while  he  lived  upon 
earth,  but  being  convicted  after  his  decease,  he  had  endured 
part  of  his  torments  already,  and  now  they  were  haling 
him  where  he  should  suffer  more.  However,  he  durst  not 
either  entreat  or  intercede  for  his  father,  such  was  his  fear 
and  consternation ; and  therefore  being  desirous  to  retire 
and  be  gone,  he  looked  about  for  his  kind  and  courteous 

* The  Emperor  Vespasian. 


186 


CONCERNING  SUCH  WHOM 


guide ; but  he  had  quite  left  him,  so  that  he  saw  him  no 
more. 

Nevertheless,  being  pushed  forward  by  other  deformed 
and  grim-looked  goblins,  as  if  there  had  been  some  neces- 
sity for  him  to  pass  forward,  he  saw  how  that  the  shadows 
of  such  as  had  been  notorious  malefactors,  and  had  been 
punished  in  this  world,  were  not  tormented  so  grievously 
nor  alike  to  the  others,  in  regard  that  only  the  imperfect 
and  irrational  part  of  the  soul,  which  was  consequently 
most  subject  to  passions,  was  that  which  made  them  so 
industrious  in  vice.  Whereas  those  who  had  shrouded  a 
vicious  and  impious  life  under  the  outward  profession  and 
a gained  opinion  of  virtue,  their  tormentors  constrained  to 
turn  their  insides  outward  with  great  difficulty  and  dread- 
ful pain,  and  to  writhe  and  screw  themselves  contrary  to 
the  course  of  nature,  like  the  sea  scolopenders,  which, 
having  swallowed  the  hook,  throw  forth  their  bowels  and 
lick  it  out  again.  Others  they  flayed  and  scarified,  to 
display  their  occult  hypocrisies  and  latent  impieties,  which 
had  possessed  and  corrupted  the  principal  part  of  their 
souls.  Other  souls,  as  he  said,  he  also  saw,  which  being 
twisted  two  and  two,  three  and  three,  or  more  together 
gnawed  and  devoured  each  other,  either  upon  the  score  of 
old  grudges  and  former  malice  they  had  borne  one  another, 
or  else  in  revenge  of  the  injuries  and  losses  they  had  sus- 
tained upon  earth. 

Moreover,  he  said,  there  were  certain  lakes  that  lay 
parallel  and  equidistant  one  from  the  other,  the  one  of 
boiling  gold,  another  of  lead,  exceeding  cold,  and  the 
third  of  iron,  which  was  very  scaly  and  rugged.  By  the 
sides  of  these  lakes  stood  certain  Daemons,  that  with  their 
instruments,  like  smiths  or  founders,  put  in  or  drew  out 
the  souls  of  such  as  had  transgressed  either  through  avar- 
ice or  an  eager  desire  of  other  men’s  goods.  For  the  flame 
of  the  golden  furnace  having  rendered  these  souls  of  a fiery 


GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


187 


and  transparent  color,  they  plunged  them  into  that  of  lead ; 
where  after  they  were  congealed  and  hardened  into  a sub- 
stance like  hail,  they  were  then  thrown  into  the  lake  of 
iron,  where  they  became  black  and  deformed,  and  being 
broken  and  crumbled  by  the  roughness  of  the  iron,  changed 
their  form ; and  being  thus  transformed,  they  were  again 
thrown  into  the  lake  of  gold ; in  all  these  transmutations 
enduring  most  dreadful  and  horrid  torments.  But  they 
that  suffered  the  most  dire  and  dismal  torture  of  all  were 
those  who,  thinking  that  divine  vengeance  had  no  more  to 
say  to  them,  were  again  seized  and  dragged  to  repeated 
execution ; and  these  were  those  for  whose  transgression 
their  children  or  posterity  had  suffered.  For  when  any  of 
the  souls  of  those  children  come  hither  and  meet  with  any 
of  their  parents  or  ancestors,  they  fall  into  a passion,  ex- 
claim against  them,  and  show  them  the  marks  of  what  they 
have  endured.  On  the  other  side,  the  souls  of  the  parents 
endeavor  to  sneak  out  of  sight  and  hide  themselves ; but 
the  others  follow  them  so  close  at  the  heels,  and  load  them 
in  such  a manner  with  bitter  taunts  and  reproaches,  that 
not  being  able  to  escape,  their  tormentors  presently  lay 
hold  of  them,  and  hale  them  to  new  tortures,  howling  and 
yelling  at  the  very  thought  of  what  they  have  suffered 
already.  And  some  of  these  souls  of  suffering  posterity, 
he  said,  there  were,  that  swarmed  and  clung  together  like 
bees  or  bats,  and  in  that  posture  murmured  forth  their  an- 
gry complaints  of  the  miseries  and  calamities  which  they 
had  endured  for  their  sakes. 

The  last  things  that  he  saAV  were  the  souls  of  such  as 
were  designed  for  a second  life.  These  were  bowed,  bent, 
and  transformed  into  all  sorts  of  creatures  by  the  force  of 
tools  and  anvils  and  the  strength  of  workmen  appointed 
for  that  purpose,  that  laid  on  without  mercy,  bruising  the 
whole  limbs  of  some,  breaking  others,  disjointing  others, 
and  pounding  some  to  powder  and  annihilation,  on  purpose 


188  OF  THOSE  WHOM  GOD  IS  SLOW  TO  PUNISH. 


to  render  them  fit  for  other  lives  and  manners.  Among 
the  rest,  he  saw  the  soul  of  Nero  many  ways  most  griev- 
ously tortured,  but  more  especially  transfixed  with  iron 
nails.  This  soul  the  workmen  took  in  hand ; but  when 
they  had  forged  it  into  the  form  of  one  of  Pindar’s  vipers, 
which  eats  its  way  to  life  through  the  bowels  of  the  female, 
of  a sudden  a conspicuous  light  shone  out,  and  a voice 
was  heard  out  of  the  light,  which  gave  order  for  the  trans- 
figuring it  again  into  the  shape  of  some  more  mild  and 
gentle  creature ; and  so  they  made  it  to  resemble  one  of 
those  creatures  that  usually  sing  and  croak  about  the  sides 
of  ponds  and  marshes.  For  indeed  he  had  in  some  meas- 
ure been  punished  for  the  crimes  he  had  committed ; be- 
sides, there  was  some  compassion  due  to  him  from  the 
Gods,  for  that  he  had  restored  the  Grecians  to  their  liberty, 
a nation  the  most  noble  and  best  beloved  of  the  Gods 
among  all  his  subjects.  And  now  being  about  to  return, 
such  a terrible  dread  surprised  Thespesius  as  had  al- 
most frighted  him  out  of  his  wits.  For  a certain  woman, 
admirable  for  her  form  and  stature,  laying  hold  of  his  arm, 
said  to  him : Come  hither,  that  thou  mayst  the  better  be 
enabled  to  retain  the  remembrance  of  what  thou  hast  seen. 
With  that  she  was  about  to  strike  him  with  a small  fiery 
wand,  not  much  unlike  to  those  that  painters  use ; but 
another  woman  prevented  her.  After  this,  as  he  thought 
himself,  he  was  whirled  or  hurried  away  with  a strong  and 
violent  wind,  forced  as  it  were  through  a pipe  ; and  so 
lighting  again  into  his  own  body,  he  awoke  and  found 
himself  on  the  brink  of  his  own  grave. 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION  TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFF- 
SPRING. 


1.  Appeals  to  foreign  judicatures  first  came  in  request 
among  the  Grecians  out  of  their  distrust  of  one  another’s 
justice,  they  deeming  it  as  requisite  to  fetch  justice  from 
abroad,  as  any  other  necessary  commodity  which  was  not 
of  their  own  growth.  And  is  it  not  even  so  that  philoso- 
phers, by  reason  of  dissensions  amongst  themselves,  have 
in  the  decision  of  some  questions  appealed,  to  the  nature 
of  irrational  beings,  as  to  a strange  city,  and  have  submit- 
ted the  final  determination  of  such  questions  to  the  affec- 
tions or  to  the  dispositions  of  brutes,  as  being  unbiassed  and 
not  corrupted  by  bribes  \ Or  else  this  is  the  general  com- 
plaint of  human  frailty,  that  while  we  differ  about  the 
most  necessary  and  the  greatest  things,  we  consult  horses, 
dogs,  and  birds,  how  we  should  marry,  beget  children,  and 
bring  them  up ; and,  as  if  the  evidence  of  Nature  in  our- 
selves were  not  to  be  trusted,  we  appeal  to  the  dispositions 
and  affections  of  brute  beasts,  and  testify  against  the  mani- 
fold transgressions  of  our  own  lives,  intimating  how  at 
the  very  first  and  in  the  first  things  we  are  confounded  and 
disturbed.  For  Nature  conserves  the  propriety  in  them 
pure,  unmixed,  and  simple ; but  in  men,  the  mixture  of 
ascititious  opinions  and  judgments  (as  oil  is  served  by  the 
druggists)  alters  the  properties,  and  does  not  preserve  what 
is  their  peculiar.  Nor  need  we  wonder  if  irrational  ani- 


190 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION 


mals  follow  Nature  more  than  rational ; for  plants  do  it 
more  than  animals,  for  they  have  neither  imagination  nor 
passion  for  what  is  not  according  to  Nature,  but  are  bound 
in  chains,  and  ever  go  that  one  way  that  Nature  leads 
them.  Brutes  do  little  regard  gentleness,  wit,  or  liberty ; 
they  have  indeed  the  use  of  irrational  incitements  and  ap- 
petites, which  put  them  upon  wandering  and  running 
about,  — but  seldom  far,  for  they  seem  to  lie  at  the  anchor 
of  Nature,  who  guides  them  in  the  right  way  (as  it  were) 
by  bit  and  bridle.  But  reason,  the  lord  and  master  in  man, 
finds  sometimes  one  turning,  sometimes  another ; but  in  all 
its  wanderings  leaves  no  mark  or  footstep  of  Nature. 

2.  But  in  brutes  observe  how  all  things  are  accommo- 
dated to  Nature.  As  to  marriages,  they  tarry  not  till  laws 
are  passed  against  celibacy  and  late  marriages,  as  Lycurgus 
and  Solon’s  citizens  did ; they  matter  not  the  disgrace  of 
wanting  children ; nor  are  they  ambitious  of  the  honor  of 
having  three  children,  as  many  Romans,  who  marry  and 
get  children,  not  that  they  may  have  heirs,  but  that  they 
may  get  estates.  Again,  the  male  accompanies  with  the 
female  not  at  all  times,  because  not  pleasure  but  procrea- 
tion is  his  end.  Therefore  in  the  spring  time,  when  the 
fruitful  breezes  blow  and  the  air  is  of  a pregnant  temper, 
then  the  female  approaches  the  male,  gentle  and  desirable, 
wantoning  in  the  sweet  smell  and  peculiar  ornament  of 
her  body,  full  of  dew  and  pure  grass  ; and  when  she  per- 
ceives she  has  conceived,  she  modestly  departs,  and  pro- 
vides for  her  bringing  forth  and  for  the  safety  of  what  she 
shall  be  delivered  of.  What  brutes  do  cannot  be  sufficiently 
expressed ; in  all  of  them  their  affection  to  their  young  is 
evident  by  their  providence,  patience,  and  continence.  In- 
deed we  call  the  bee  wise,  and  we  celebrate  her  who  “ de- 
viseth  the  yellow  honey,”  flattering  her  for  glutting  us  with 
her  sweetness  ; but  the  wisdom  and  art  of  other  creatures, 
about  their  bringing  forth  and  the  rearing  their  young,  we 


TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFFSPRING. 


191 


wholly  neglect.  For  instance,  first,  the  king-fisher,  when 
she  has  conceived,  makes  her  nest  of  the  prickles  of  the 
sea-needle,  weaving  them  one  among  another,  in  form  of  a 
long  oval  fishing-net ; then  she  puts  it  under  the  dashing 
of  the  waters,  that  being  by  degrees  beaten  upon  and 
milled,  it  may  acquire  a smooth  surface,  and  become  so 
solid  that  it  cannot  easily  be  divided  by  either  stone  or  iron. 
And  what  is  more  wonderful,  the  mouth  of  the  nest  is  so 
exactly  fitted  to  the  king-fisher,  that  neither  a greater  nor 
a less  animal  can  enter  it ; and  when  she  is  in  (as  they 
say)  it  Avill  not  admit  the  sea-water.  The  sea-fish  called 
ycdeol  give  birth  to  their  young  within  themselves,  let  them 
go  abroad  to  feed,  and  then  take  them  into  their  bellies 
again  when  they  go  to  sleep.  The  bear,  a most  fierce  and 
ugly  beast,  brings  forth  her  young  shapeless  and  without 
limbs,  but  with  her  tongue,  as  with  a tool,  she  shapes  the 
members  ; so  that  she  seems  not  only  to  bring  forth  but  to 
work  out  her  young.  And  Homer’s  lioness,  — 

Thus  in  the  centre  of  some  gloomy  wood, 

With  many  a step  the  lioness  surrounds 
Her  tawny  young,  beset  by  men  and  hounds  ; 

Elate  her  heart,  and  rousing  all  her  powers, 

Dark  o’er  the  fiery  balls  each  hanging  eyebrow  lowers;* 

does  she  not,  I say,  look  as  if  she  were  contriving  how  to 
make  a bargain  with  the  huntsman  for  her  whelps  ? For 
generally  the  love  of  their  young  makes  bold  creatures 
timorous,  the  slothful  industrious,  and  the  voracious  par- 
simonious. So  Homer’s  bird  “ gives  to  her  young,  though 
with  herself  it  go  hard.”f  She  feeds  them  by  starving 
herself,  and  when  she  has  taken  up  her  food,  she  lays  it 
down  again,  and  keeps  it  down  with  her  bill,  lest  she 
should  swallow  it  unawares.  In  like  manner, 

For  tender  whelps,  when  strangers  come  in  sight, 

The  barking  bitch  prepares  herself  to  fight ; j: 


* II.  XVII.  134. 


t II.  IX.  324. 


t Odyss.  XX.  14. 


192 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION 


\ 


and  fear  for  her  young  turns  into  a second  passion.  When 
partridges  and  their  young  are  pursued,  the  old  suffer  the 
young  to  fiy  away  before,  so  contriving  it  that  the  fowler 
may  think  to  catch  them.  Thus  they  hover  about,  run 
forward  a little,  then  turn  again,  and  so  detain  the  fowler 
till  their  young  are  safe.  We  daily  behold  hens,  how  they 
cherish  their  chickens,  taking  some  of  them  under  their 
spread  wings,  suffering  others  of  them  to  run  upon  their 
backs,  and  taking  them  in  again,  with  a voice  expressing 
kindness  and  joy.  When  themselves  are  concerned,  they  fly 
from  dogs  and  serpents  ; but  to  defend  their  chickens,  they 
will  venture  beyond  their  strength  and  fight. 

And  shall  we  think  that  Nature  has  bred  such  affections 
in  these  creatures,  because  she  is  solicitous  for  the  propa- 
gation of  hens,  dogs,  and  bears,  and  not  that  she  may  by 
these  means  make  us  ashamed  1 Certainly  we  must  con- 
clude that  these  creatures,  following  the  duct  of  nature, 
are  for  our  example,  and  that  they  much  upbraid  the  re- 
morselessness of  humanity,  of  which  human  nature  alone 
is  culpable,  in  not  being  capable  of  gratuitous  love,  nor 
knowing  how  to  be  a friend  without  profit.  Well  there- 
fore might  the  comedian  be  admired  who  said,  For  reward 
only  man  loves  man.  Epicurus  thinks  that  after  this  man- 
ner children  are  beloved  of  their  parents,  and  parents  of 
their  children.  But  if  the  benefit  of  speech  were  allowed 
to  brutes,  and  if  horses,  cows,  dogs,  and  birds  were  brought 
upon  the  stage,  and  the  song  were  changed,  and  it  were 
said  that  neither  the  bitch  loved  her  whelps  for  gain,  nor 
the  mare  her  foal,  nor  fowls  their  chickens,  but  that  they 
were  all  beloved  gratis  and  by  impulse  of  nature,  then  by 
the  affection  of  all  brutes  this  assertion  would  be  approved 
as  just  and  true.  And  is  it  not  a shame,  that  the  procrea- 
tion of  beasts,  their  birth,  pains  in  birth,  and  their  educa- 
tion, should  be  by  nature  and  gratis,  and  yet  for  these 
things  that  man  should  require  usury,  rewards,  and  bribes  ? 


TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFFSPRING. 


193 


3.  This  assertion,  as  to  pure  Nature,  can  never  he  true, 
nor  ought  it  to  be  believed.  For,  as  in  wild  plants,  such 
as  wild  vines,  tigs,  and  olives,  Nature  has  implanted  the 
principles  of  cultivated  fruit,  though  crude  and  imperfect ; 
so  she  has  endowed  beasts  with  a love  of  their  young, 
though  imperfect  and  not  attaining  to  justice,  nor  proceed- 
ing further  than  utility.  But  in  man,  whom  she  produced 
a rational  and  political  being,  inclining  him  to  justice,  law, 
religion,  building  of  cities,  and  friendship,  she  hath  placed 
the  seed  of  those  things  that  are  generous,  fair,  and  fruitful, 
— that  is,  the  love  of  their  children,  — following  the  first 
principles  which  entered  into  the  very  constitution  of  their 
bodies.  For  terms  and  expressions  are  wanting  to  declare 
with  what  industry  Nature  — who  is  skilful,  unerring,  and 
not  to  be  surpassed,  and  (as  Erasistratus  says)  has  nothing 
idle  or  frivolous  — has  contrived  all  things  pertaining  to 
the  procreation  of  mankind ; and  modesty  will  not  permit 
it.  The  making  and  economy  of  milk  sufficiently  speak 
her  providence  and  care.  In  women  what  abundance  of 
blood  more  than  serves  for  necessary  uses,  which,  through 
languidness  and  want  of  spirit,  wanders  about  and  disturbs 
the  body  ; being  at  other  times  by  Nature  in  monthly  periods 
discharged  by  proper  canals  and  passages,  for  the  relief 
and  purgation  of  the  body,  and  to  render  the  womb  like  a 
field  fit  for  the  plough  and  seed,  and  desirous  of  it  at 
seasons.  But  when  the  womb  has  caught  the  seed,  and  it 
has  taken  root  (for  the  navel  as  Democritus  says,  grows 
first,  like  an  anchor  to  keep  the  foetus  from  fluctuating,  or 
as  a stay  or  footstalk  to  the  child),  then  Nature  stops  the 
passages  proper  for  monthly  purgations,  and  keeps  the 
superfluous  blood  after  that  for  nourishment  and  to  moisten 
the  birth,  which  now  begins  to  be  formed  and  fashioned, 
and  at  the  end  of  a set  number  of  days  increases  so  in  the 
womb,  that  it  must  seek  another  place  and  other  sort  of 
food.  Then  Nature,  more  diligent  than  any  husbandman, 

VOL.  IV.  13 


194 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION 


deriving  the  blood  to  other  uses,  has  as  it  were  some  sub- 
terranean fountains,  which  receive  the  affluent  liquors ; 
and  they  receive  them  not  negligently  nor  without  affection, 
but  with  a gentle  heat  and  womanish  softness  they  concoct, 
mollify,  and  alter  them  ; for  in  this  manner  are  the  breasts 
internally  affected  and  tempered.  And  milk  is  not  poured 
out  of  them  by  pipes  in  a full  stream  ; but  the  breasts, 
terminating  in  flesh  that  is  pervious  by  small  and  insen- 
sible passages,  do  afford  store  of  sweet  and  pleasant  suck- 
ing to  the  infant’s  mouth.  But  for  all  this,  such  and  so 
many  instruments  for  procreation,  such  preparation,  so 
great  industry  and  providence,  were  all  to  no  purpose, 
unless  Nature  had  inbred  in  the  mothers  a love  and  care 
of  their  offspring. 

Than  man  more  wretched  naught  takes  breath, 

Not  th’  vilest  thing  that  creeps  on  earth  ; * 

which  infallibly  holds  good  of  infants  new-born.  For 
nothing  can  be  beheld  so  imperfect,  helpless,  naked,  shape- 
less, and  nasty,  as  man  is  just  at  his  birth ; to  whom  alone 
almost  Nature  has  denied  a cleanly  passage  into  the  world  ; 
and  as  he  is  smeared  with  blood,  and  daubed  with  filth, 
more  like  to  one  killed  than  to  one  new-born,  he  could 
never  be  touched,  taken  in  arms,  kissed,  or  hugged  by  any 
one  to  whom  Nature  had  not  given  an  inbred  affection  for 
him.  Therefore  other  animals  have  their  dugs  below  their 
belly,  which  grow  on  woman  above  her  breast,  that  she 
may  the  more  conveniently  kiss,  embrace,  and  cherish  her 
infant ; because  the  end  of  bringing  forth  and  rearing  is 
not  necessity  but  love. 

4.  For  let  us  look  back  to  ancient  times,  to  those  who 
first  brought  forth  and  who  first  saw  a child  born.  Upon 
them  certainly  no  law  enjoined  any  necessity  of  rearing 
their  offspring,  nor  could  expectation  of  thanks  oblige 
them  to  feed  their  infants,  as  if  it  were  for  usury.  Nay, 


* II.  XVII.  446. 


TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFFSPRING. 


195 


rather,  they  were  angry  with  their  children,  and  long  re- 
membered the  injuries  they  had  received  from  them,  as 
authors  of  so  many  dangers  and  of  so  much  pain  and  travail 
to  them. 

As  when  keen  darts  the  fierce  Ilithyiae  send ; 

The  powers  that  cause  the  teeming  matron’s  throes, 

Sad  mothers  of  unutterable  woes  ! * 

These  verses,  some  say,  were  not  written  by  Homer,  but 
by  some  Homeress,  who  either  had  been  or  was  then  in 
travail,  and  felt  the  very  pangs  in  her  bowels.  Yet  the 
love  implanted  by  Nature  melts  and  sways  the  childbed 
woman.  While  she  is  still  in  a sweat  and  trembling  for 
pain,  she  is  not  averse  to  her  infant ; but  turns  it  to  her, 
smiles  on  it,  hugs^md  kisses  it.  Though  she  finds  no  true 
sweetness,  nor  yet  profit,  however,  “ she  sometimes  rocks  it 
in  a warm  cradle,  sometimes  she  dances  it  in  the  cool  air, 
turning  one  toil  into  another,  resting  neither  night  nor  day.” 
For  what  reward  or  gain  was  all  this  1 For  as  little 
then  as  now ; for  the  hopes  are  uncertain  and  far  off.  He 
that  plants  a vine  in  the  vernal  equinox  gathers  grapes 
upon  it  in  the  autumnal.  He  that  sows  wheat  at  the  set- 
ting of  the  Pleiades  reaps  it  at  their  rising.  Cows,  mares, 
and  birds  bring  forth  young  ready  for  use.  Man’s 
education  is  laborious,  his  increase  slow,  his  virtue  lies  at 
a distance ; so  that  most  parents  die  before  their  children 
show  their  virtue.  Neocles  never  saw  Themistocles’s  vic- 
tory at  Salamis,  nor  Miltiades  the  valor  of  Cimon  at  Eurym- 
edon  ; Xanthippus  never  heard  Pericles  pleading ; nor 
Aristo  Plato  philosophizing  ; nor  did  the  fathers  of  Eurip- 
ides and  Sophocles  know  the  victories  their  sons  won, 
though  they  heard  them  indeed  stammering  and  learning 
to  talk.  It  is  the  mishap  of  fathers  to  see  the  revelling, 
drinking,  and  love  intrigues  of  their  children  ; to  which 
purpose  that  of  Evenus  is  memorable, 


* II.  XI.  269. 


196 


OF  NATURAL  AFFECTION. 


Terror  or  grief  unto  his  father’s  heart 
A son  must  ever  be. 

And  yet  men  find  no  end  of  rearing  of  children  ; they  es- 
pecially who  have  no  need  of  them.  For  it  is  ridiculous 
to  think  that  rich  men,  when  they  have  children  born  to 
them,  sacrifice  and  rejoice  that  they  may  have  some  to 
maintain  and  to  bury  them.  Or  is  it  perhaps  that  they 
bring  up  children  for  want  of  heirs,  because,  forsooth,  men 
cannot  be  found  to  accept  of  another  man’s  estate  ? “ Sand, 
dust,  and  the  feathers  of  all  the  birds  in  the  world,  are  not 
so  numerous  ” as  heirs  are  to  other  men’s  estates.  Danaus 
was  the  father  of  fifty  daughters ; but  if  he  had  wanted 
issue,  he  might  have  had  many  more  heirs.  The  case  is 
far  otherwise  with  children ; they  make  not  acknowledg- 
ments nor  curry  favor  nor  pay  their  devotions,  as  expecting 
the  inheritance  of  due.  But  you  may  hear  strangers  who 
hang  about  them  that  have  no  heirs,  talking  like  the  co- 
median : 

O Demos,  having  after  judgment  bathed, 

Drink,  eat  a morsel,  take  three  oboli.* 

And  what  Euripides  said, 

’Tis  money  that  procures  us  friends  to  choose, 

And  mightiest  power  o’er  all  things  that  men  use, 

does  not  universally  hold  true,  but  of  such  only  as  have 
no  children.  To  such  the  rich  give  banquets,  such  great 
men  honor,  and  for  such  only  lawyers  plead  gratis.  “ A 
rich  man  who  has  no  known  heir  can  do  great  matters.” 
Many  a man  who  has  had  a great  number  of  friends  and 
followers,  as  soon  as  he  has  had  a child,  has  been  divested 
of  all  his  alliances  and  power.  So  that  children  do  not 
augment  a man’s  power  ; but  their  whole  power  over  their 
parents’  affection  is  due  to  Nature,  and  is  shown  no  less 
in  men  than  in  beasts. 

5.  But  this  natural  affection,  like  many  other  good  qual- 


* Aristoph.  Knights,  50. 


TOWARDS  ONE’S  OFFSPRING. 


197 


ities  in  men,  may  be  choked  and  obscured  by  vices ; as 
when  a wild  forest  is  sown  with  garden-seeds.  Can  we 
say  that  man  loves  not  himself,  because  some  hang  them- 
selves, others  break  their  own  necks,  Oedipus  put  out  his 
own  eyes,*  and  Hegcsias,  by  his  disputation,  persuaded 
many  of  his  auditors  to  pine  themselves  to  death  ? 

For  fatal  things  in  various  shapes  do  walk,  t 

But  all  these  things  are  disease  and  craziness  of  mind, 
transporting  a man  out  of  his  own  nature  ; and  in  this 
men  testify  against  themselves.  For  if  a sow  or  a bitch 
kill  the  young  they  have  brought  forth,  men  look  dejected, 
are  disturbed,  sacrifice  to  the  Gods  to  avert  the  mischief, 

and  do  account  it  a miracle  ; because  men  know  that  Na- 

$ 

ture  has  implanted  in  all  creatures  the  love  of  their  young, 
so  that  they  should  feed  them  and  not  kill  them.  For  as 
among  metals  gold,  though  mixed  with  much  rubbish,  will 
appear  ; so  Nature,  even  in  vicious  deeds  and  affection,  de- 
clares the  love  to  posterity.  For  poor  people  do  not  rear 
their  children,  fearing  that,  if  they  should  not  be  well  edu- 
cated, they  would  prove  slavish,  clownish,  and  destitute  of  all 
things  commendable ; since  they  cannot  endure  to  entail 
poverty,  which  they  look  upon  as  the  worst  of  all  evils  or 
diseases,  upon  their  posterity. 


* Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  1276. 


t Eurip.  Alcestis,  1159. 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE  OF  THE  ROMANS. 


1.  Among  the  many  warm  disputes  which  have  often 
happened  between  Virtue  and  Fortune,  this  concerning  the 
Roman  empire  is  none  of  the  least  considerable,  whether  of 
them  shall  have  the  honor  of  founding  that  empire  at  first, 
and  raising  it  afterwards  to  vast  power  and  glory.  The 
victory  in  this  cause  will  be  no  small  commendation  of  the 
conqueror,  and  will  sufficiently  vindicate  either  of  the  con- 
tending parties  from  the  allegations  that  are  usually  made 
against  it.  For  Virtue  is  accused  as  unprofitable,  though 
beautiful,  and  Fortune  as  unstable,  though  good  ; the  for- 
mer as  laboring  in  vain,  the  latter  as  deceitful  in  its  gifts. 
But  who  can  deny  but  Virtue  has  been  most  profitable,  if 
Rome  does  favor  her  cause  in  this  contention,  since  she 
procured  so  much  good  to  brave  and  gallant  men  ; or  that 
Fortune  is  most  constant,  if  she  be  victorious  in  this  con- 
test, since  she  continued  her  gifts  with  the  Romans  for  so 
long  a time  ? 

Ion  the  poet  has  written  somewhere  in  prose,  that  For- 
tune and  Wisdom,  though  they  be  very  much  different  from 
one  another,  are  nevertheless  the  causes  of  the  very  same 
effects.  Both  of  them  do  advance  and  adorn  men ; both 
do  raise  them  to  glory,  power,  and  empire.  It  were  need- 
less to  multiply  instances  by  a long  enumeration  of  par- 
ticulars, when  even  Nature  itself,  which  produces  all 
things,  is  by  some  reputed  Fortune,  and  by  others  Wis- 
dom. And  therefore  the  present  controversy  will  con- 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE  OE  THE  ROMANS.  199 


ciliate  great  honor  and  veneration  to  the  city  of  Rome, 
since  she  is  thought  worthy  of  the  same  enquiry  which 
uses  to  be  made  concerning  the  earth  and  seas,  the  heav- 
ens and  the  stars, — whether  she  owes  her  being  to  For- 
tune or  to  Providence. 

2.  In  which  question,  I think  it  may  be  truly  affirmed 
that,  notwithstanding  the  fierce  and  lasting  wars  which 
have  been  between  Virtue  and  Fortune,  they  did  both  ami- 
cably conspire  to  rear  up  the  structure  of  her  vast  empire 
and  power,  and  join  their  united  endeavors  to  finish  the 
most  beautiful  work  that  ever  was  of  human  production. 
It  was  the  opinion  of  Plato,  that  the  whole  world  was 
composed  of  fire  and  earth,  as  necessary  first  principles, 
which  being  mixed  together  did  render  it  visible  and  tangi- 
ble,— the  earth  contributing  weight  and  firmness,  while 
the  fire  gave  color,  form,  and  motion  to  the  several  parts 
of  matter ; but  for  the  tempering  and  union  of  these  ex- 
tremes, he  thought  it  necessary  that  the  water  and  air, 
being  of  a middle  nature,  should  mitigate  and  rebate  the 
contrary  force  by  composition.  After  the  same  manner 
did  God  and  Time,  who  laid  the  foundations  of  Rome,  con- 
join and  mingle  Virtue  and  Fortune  together,  that  by  the 
union  of  their  several  powers,  they  might  compose  a 
Vesta,  truly  sacred  and  beneficent  to  all  men,  which  should 
be  a firm  stay,  an  eternal  support,  and  a steady  anchor  (as 
Democritus  calls  it)  amidst  the  fluctuating  and  uncertain 
affairs  of  human  life.  For  as  naturalists  say,  that  the 
world  was  not  framed  at  first  into  that  beautiful  order  and 
structure  in  which  we  now  behold  it,  nor  would  these 
several  bodies  that  compose  it  unite  and  mix  so  that  Na- 
ture might  receive  a common  form  by  their  union,  but  that 
all  things  did  fluctuate  a long  while  in  confusion  and 
crashing,  — whilst  some  bodies  were  still  small  and  vari- 
ously moved,  and  slipped  and  avoided  all  seizure  and 
connections,  and  others  which  were  greater  and  already 


200 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


compacted,  being  of  contrary  natures,  did  frequently  justle 
and  jar  one  against  another,  — and  that  all  was  full  of  de- 
struction and  confusion  and  wreck,  until  such  time  as  the 
earth,  being  framed  of  them  both  in  its  due  magnitude, 
was  established  in  its  proper  place,  and  by  its  stability 
gave  occasion  to  all  the  other  bodies  of  the  universe  either 
to  settle  upon  it  or  round  about  it ; just  so  it  happened  to 
the  greatest  kingdoms  and  empires  of  men,  which  were 
long  tossed  with  various  changes  and  broken  in  pieces  by 
mutual  clashings.  And  for  want  of  one  supreme  ruler 
over  all,  while  all  aspired  to  rule,  the  world  was  filled  with 
unspeakable  violence,  confusion,  and  revolution  in  all 
things,  until  such  time  as  Rome  was  raised  to  its  just 
strength  and  greatness,  which,  comprehending  under  her 
power  many  strange  nations  and  even  transmarine  domin- 
ions, did  lay  the  foundation  of  firmness  and  stability  to 
the  greatest  of  human  affairs  ; for  by  this  vast  compass  of 
one  and  the  same  empire,  government  was  secured  as  in 
an  immovable  circle,  resting  upon  the  centre  of  peace. 
Whosoever  therefore  contrived  and  compassed  these  great 
designs  must  not  only  have  been  endowed  with  all  virtues, 
but  likewise  have  been  assisted  by  Fortune  in  many  things  ; 
as  will  plainly  appear  from  the  following  discourse. 

3.  And  now  methinks  I behold,  as  from  a turret,  Virtue 
and  Fortune  coming  to  this  conference.  As  to  Virtue,  her 
gait  is  modest,  her  countenance  grave,  the  blushing  color 
of  her  face  shows  her  earliest  desire  of  obtaining  victory 
and  honor  in  this  contest.  Fortune  in  her  hasty  pace, 
leaves  her  far  behind,  hut  she  is  led  and  accompanied  by 
many  brave  and  gallant  men, 

A martial  host,  ghastly  with  bloody  arms,  * 

all  wounded  in  the  fore  part  of  their  bodies,  distilling  blood 
mingled  with  sweat,  and  they  lean  upon  the  bending  spoils 


* Odyss.  XI.  41. 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


201 


of  their  enemies.  If  you  enquire  who  they  are,  they 
answer,  We  are  of  the  Fabricii,  Camilli,  and  Lucii,  and 
Cincinnati,  and  Fabii  Maximi,  and  Claudii  Marcelli,  and 
the  Scipios.  I perceive  also  in  the  train  of  Virtue  Caius 
Marius  angry  with  Fortune,  and  Mucins  Scaevola  holding 
out  his  burning  hand  and  crying  with  a loud  voice,  Will 
ye  attribute  this  to  Fortune  also  ? And  Marcus  Horatius, 
who  behaved  himself  gallantly  at  the  river  Tiber,  when  he 
cut  the  bridge  and  swam  over,  being  loaded  with  Tyr- 
rhenian darts,  showing  his  wounded  thigh,  thus  expostulates 
from  out  of  the  deep  whirlpit  of  the  river,  Was  I also 
thus  maimed  by  mere  chance  ? Such  is  the  company  of 
Virtue,  when  she  comes  to  the  dispute  ; “ a company 
powerful  in  arms,  terrible  to  their  foes.” 

4.  But  as  to  Fortune,  her  gait  is  hasty,  her  looks  bold, 
her  hope  arrogant;  andTeaving  Virtue  far  behind  her,  she 
enters  the  lists,  not,  as  she  is  described,  with  light  wings, 
balancing  herself  in  the  air,  or  lightly  tripping  with  her 
tiptoes  upon  the  convexity  of  the  globe,  as  if  she  were 
presently  to  vanish  away  out  of  sight.  No,  she  does  not 
appear  here  in  any  such  doubtful  and  uncertain  posture  ; 
but  as  the  Spartans  say  that  Venus,  when  she  passed  over 
the  Eurotas,  put  off  her  gewgaws  and  female  ornaments, 
and  armed  herself  with  spear  and  shield  for  the  sake  of 
Lvcurgus  ; so  Fortune,  having  deserted  the  Persians  and 
Assyrians,  did  swiftly  fly  over  Macedonia,  and  quickly 
threw  off  her  favorite  Alexander  the  Great,  and  after  that, 
having  passed  through  the  countries  of  Egypt  and  Syria, 
and  oftentimes  by  turns  supported  the  Carthaginians,  she 
did  at  last  fly  over  Tiber  to  the  Palatine  Mount,  and  there 
she  put  off  her  wings,  her  Mercurial  shoes,  and  left  her 
slippery  and  deceitful  globe.  Thus  she  entered  Pome,  as 
one  that  was  to  be  resident  there,  and  thus  she  comes  to 
the  bar  in  this  controversy.  She  is  no  more  uncertain,  as 
Pindar  describes  her ; she  does  not  henceforth  guide  a 


202 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


double  helm,  but  continues  constant  to  the  Romans,  and 
therefore  may  be  called  the  sister  of  Eunomia  and  Persua- 
sion, and  the  daughter  of  Providence,  as  Aleman  describes 
her  pedigree.  This  is  certain  in  the  opinion  of  all  men, 
that  she  holds  in  her  hand  the  Horn  of  Plenty,  not  that 
which  is  filled  with  verdant  fruits,  but  that  which  pours 
forth  abundance  of  all  things  which  the  earth  or  the  sea, 
the  rivers  or  the  metals,  or  the  harbors  afford.  Several 
illustrious  and  famous  men  are  seen  to  accompany  her, 
Numa  Pompilius  from  the  Sabines,  and  Priscus  from  Tar- 
quinii,  whom,  being  foreigners  and  strangers,  Fortune 
seated  on  the  throne  of  Romulus.  Aemilius  Paulus  also, 
bringing  back  his  army  from  Perseus  and  the  Macedonians, 
and  triumphing  in  an  unbloody  and  entire  victory,  does 
greatly  magnify  and  extol  Fortune.  The  same  does  Cae- 
cilius  Metellus,  that  brave  old  gentleman  surnamed  Mace- 
donicus,  whose  corpse  was  carried  forth  to  its  funeral  by 
his  four  sons,  Quintus  Balearicus,  Lucius  Diadematus, 
Marcus  Metellus,  and  Caius  Caprarius,  and  his  two  sons- 
in-law,  — who  were  all  six  honorable  men,  and  of  consu- 
lar dignity,  — and  also  by  his  two  grandsons,  who  were 
famous  for  the  good  offices  they  did  to  the  commonwealth, 
both  abroad  by  their  heroical  actions  and  at  home  by  the 
administration  of  justice.  Aemilius  Scaurus,  from  a mean 
estate  and  a meaner  family,  was  raised  by  Fortune  to  that 
height  of  dignity  that  he  was  chosen  Prince  of  the  Senate. 
It  was  Fortune  that  took  Cornelius  Sylla  out  of  the  bosom 
of  Nicopolis  the  whore,  and  exalted  him  above  the  Cim- 
brian  triumphs  of  Marius  and  the  dignity  of  his  seven 
consulships,  giving  him  at  once  the  powers  of  a monarch 
and  a dictator ; upon  which  account  he  adopted  himself 
and  all  his  memorable  actions  to  Fortune,  crying  out  with 
Oedipus  in  Sophocles,  I think  myself  the  son  of  For- 
tune.* In  the  Roman  tongue  he  was  called  Felix,  the 

* Soph.  Oed.  Tyr.  1080. 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


203 


happy  ; but  he  writ  himself  to  the  Greeks  Lucius  Cor- 
nelius Sylla  Venustus,  i.  e.  Beloved  of  Venus,  — which  is 
also  the  inscription  on  all  his  trophies,  both  those  at  Chae- 
ronea  with  us,  and  those  in  honor  of  his  victories  over 
Mithridates  ; and  that  not  without  reason,  since  it  is  not 
the  Night,  as  Menander  thought,  but  Fortune,  that  enjoys 
the  greatest  part  of  Venus. 

5.  And  thus,  having  made  a seasonable  beginning  in 
defence  of  Fortune,  we  may  now  call  in,  for  witnesses  in 
this  cause,  the  Iiomans  themselves,  who  attributed  more 
to  Fortune  than  to  Virtue.  For  the  temple  of  Virtue  was 
but  lately  built  by  Scipio  Numantinus,  a long  time  after 
the  building  of  the  city.  And  after  that,  Marcellus  dedi- 
cated a temple  to  Virtue  and  Honor  ; and  Aemilius  Scau- 
rus,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  the  Cimbrian  war,  founded 
another  to  the  Mind,  when  now,  by  the  subtilties  of  sophis- 
ters  and  encomiastics  of  orators,  these  things  began  to  be 
mightily  extolled.  And  to  this  very  day  there  is  no  temple 
built  to  Wisdom,  nor  to  Temperance,  Patience,  Magna- 
nimity, or  Continence.  On  the  contrary,  the  temples  dedi- 
cated to  Fortune  are  splendid  and  ancient,  almost  as  old  as 
the  first  foundations  of  Pome  itself.  The  first  that  built 
her  a temple  was  Ancus  Marcius,  born  of  the  sister  of 
Numa,  being  the  third  king  from  Pomulus  ; and  he  seems 
to  have  made  Fortune  surname  to  Fortitude,  to  which  she 
contributes  very  much  for  obtaining  victory.  The  Romans 
built  the  temple  of  Feminine  Fortune  before  the  time  of 
Camillus,  when  by  the  help  of  the  women  they  turned 
back  Marcius  Coriolanus,  leading  up  the  Volsci  against  the 
city  of  Pome  ; for  the  women  being  sent  ambassadors  to 
him.  together  with  his  mother  and  wife,  prevailed  with  the 
man  to  spare  the  city  at  that  time  and  to  draw  off  the 
army  of  the  barbarians.  It  is  said  that  this  statue  of  For- 
tune, when  it  was  consecrated,  uttered  these  words  : It  was 
piously  done,  O ye  city  matrons,  to  dedicate  me  by  the  law 


204 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


of  your  state.  But  (which  is  more  remarkable)  Furius 
Camillus,  having  quenched  the  flame  of  the  Gallic  war, 
and  rescued  Borne  from  the  balance  and  scales  in  which 
her  price  was  weighed  to  them  in  gold,  did  not  upon  this 
occasion  found  a temple  to  Prudence  and  Fortitude,  but  to 
Fame  and  Presage ; which  he  built  hard  by  the  New  Way, 
in  that  very  place  where  (it  is  said)  Marcus  Caedicius  walk- 
ing in  the  night-time  heard  a prophetical  voice,  command- 
ing him  shortly  to  expect  a war  from  the  Gauls.  And  the 
Fortune  whose  temple  is  near  the  river  they  call  Fortis 
(that  is,  stout,  or  valiant , or  manly),  as  having  the  power 
of  conquering  all  things.*  And  her  temple  is  built  in 
those  very  gardens  which  were  left  by  Caesar  as  a legacy 
to  the  people,  because  they  thought  that  he  also  was  raised 
to  the  height  of  power  by  the  favor  of  Fortune. 

6.  And  so  Caesar  himself  testified,  otherwise  I should 
be  ashamed  to  say  such  a thing  of  so  great  a person.  For 
when  he  loosed  from  Brundisium,  and  embarked  in  pur- 
suit of  Pompey,  on  the  fourth  day  of  January,  though  it 
was  then  the  latter  end  of  winter,  he  passed  over  the  sea 
in  safety  by  the  good  conduct  of  Fortune,  which  was 
stronger  than  the  rigor  of  the  season.  And  when  he 
found  Pompey  powerful  by  sea  and  land,  with  all  his 
forces  lying  together,  and  himself  with  his  small  party 
altogether  unable  to  give  him  battle,  while  the  army  of 
Antonius  and  Sabinus  lagged  behind,  he  ventured  to  set 
forth  again  in  a little  bark,  unknown  either  to  the  master 
of  the  vessel  or  the  pilot,  who  took  him  for  some  servant. 
But  when  he  saw  the  pilot  began  to  change  his  purpose 
of  putting  out  to  sea,  because  of  the  violence  of  the  waves, 


* The  temple  built  in  Caesar’s  gardens  was  a temple  of  Fors  Fortuna;  and  as 
this  name  appeared  most  frequently  in  the  genitive,  Fortis  Fortunae,  Plutarch  prob- 
ably mistook  the  title  for  Fortis,  which  he  translates  by  uvdpria.  As  the  gardens 
of  Caesar  were  trans  Tiberim,  Plutarch  cannot  refer  to  the  temple  still  standing  in  the 
Forum  Boarium,  generally  called  that  of  Fortuna  Virilis(?).  See  Becker's  Rbm- 
ische  Alterthiimer,  I.  pp.  478-480,  note.  (G.) 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


• 205 


which  hindered  the  sailing  out  at  the  mouth  of  the  river, 
he  presently  plucked  off  the  disguise  from  his  head  and 
showed  himself,  encouraging  the  pilot  in  these  words  : Put 
on,  brave  fellow,  and  fear  nothing,  but  commit  the  sails  to 
Fortune,  and  expose  all  boldly  to  the  winds ; for  thou  ear- 
liest Caesar  and  Caesar’s  fortune.  So  resolute  was  Caesar 
upon  this  assurance,  that  Fortune  did  favor  him  in  his 
voyages  and  journeys,  his  armies  and  battles ; and  that  it 
was  her  province  to  give  calmness  to  the  sea  and  warmth 
to  a winter  season,  to  give  swiftness  to  the  slowest,  and 
vigor  to  the  most  sluggish  creatures ; and  (which  is  more 
incredible  than  all  this)  he  believed  that  Fortune  put  Pom- 
pey  to  flight,  and  gave  Ptolemy  the  opportunity  of  mur- 
dering his  guest,  so  that  Pompey  should  fall  and  Caesar 
be  innocent. 

7.  What  shall  I say  of  his  son,  the  first  that  had  the 
honor  to  be  surnamed  Augustus,  who  was  emperor  four 
and  fifty  years  ? Did  not  he  pray  the  Gods  for  his  grand- 
son, when  he  sent  him  forth  to  battle,  to  grant  him  the 
courage  of  Scipio,  and  the  wisdom  of  Pompey,  but  his 
own  Fortune,  as  counting  her  the  chief  artificer  of  his 
wonderful  self?  It  was  she  that  imposed  him  upon  Cicero, 
Lepidus,  Pansa,  Hirtius,  and  Mark  Antony,  and  by  their 
victories  and  famous  exploits,  by  their  navies,  battles,  and 
armies,  raised  him  to  the  greatest  height  of  power  and 
honor,  degrading  them  by  whose  means  he  was  thus  ad- 
vanced. For  it  was  for  him  that  Cicero  governed  the 
state,  Lepidus  conducted  the  armies,  and  Pansa  gained  the 
victories.  It  was  for  him  that  Hirtius  fell,  and  Mark  An- 
tony committed  licentious  outrages.  Nay,  even  Cleopatra 
herself  is  to  be  reckoned  as  part  of  his  good  fortune ; for 
on  her,  as  on  a dangerous  rock,  Antony  was  shipwrecked, 
although  he  was  so  mighty  a commander,  that  Augustus 
alone  might  wear  the  title  of  Caesar.  It  is  reported  of 
Antony  and  Augustus,  when  they  lived  familiarly  together 


206 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


in  daily  conversation,  that  Antony  was  always  beaten  by 
Caesar  at  ball  or  dice,  and  in  quail  or  cock  fighting. 
Whereupon  a certain  friend,  who  pretended  to  the  art  of 
divination,  did  freely  admonish  Antony,  and  say : “ What 
have  you  to  do,  my  friend,  with  this  young  man  1 Why 
don’t  you  avoid  his  company?  You  excel  him  in  glory 
and  largeness  of  empire,  you  exceed  him  in  age  and  expe- 
rience, having  signalized  your  valor  in  the  wars.  But  your 
Genius  is  afraid  of  his  ; your  Fortune,  which  is  great  by 
itself,  does  fawn  upon  his,  and  will  undoubtedly  pass  over 
to  him,  unless  you  remove  yourself  to  a great  distance.” 

8.  By  these  testimonies  of  men  the  cause  of  Fortune  is 
supported  ; after  which  I proceed  now  to  other  arguments 
taken  from  the  things  themselves,  beginning  from  the  first 
foundations  of  the  city  of  Home.  And  first  of  all,  it  can- 
not be  denied  that,  by  the  birth  and  preservation  of  Ro- 
mulus, by  his  education  and  growth,  the  foundations  of 
Rome  were  first  laid  by  Fortune ; but  then  withal  it  must 
be  acknowledged  that  Virtue  finished  the  building.  As  to 
their  origin  and  birth  who  first  founded  and  built  the  city, 
it  looked  like  a wonderful  good  Fortune.  For  it  is  said 
that  their  mother  conceived  by  a God ; and  as  Hercules  is 
said  to  have  been  sown  in  a long  night,  the  natural  day 
being  preternaturally  prolonged  by  the  sun’s  standing  still ; 
so  it  is  reported  concerning  the  begetting  of  Romulus,  that 
the  sun  was  eclipsed  at  the  time,  being  in  conjunction  with 
the  moon,  as  the  immortal  God  Mars  was  with  the  mortal 
Sylvia.  The  same  is  said  to  have  happened  about  the  time 
of  his  death.  For  on  the  seventh  of  July,  called  Nonae 
Capratinae,  which  is  a feast  observed  to  this  day  with  great 
solemnity,  while  the  sun  was  under  an  eclipse,  he  suddenly 
vanished  out  of  the  sight  of  men.  After  their  nativity, 
when  the  tyrant  would  have  murdered  the  new-born  babes, 
by  the  conduct  of  Fortune,  who  Avas  concerned  for  the 
preservation  of  their  lives,  Romulus  and  Remus  fell  into 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


207 


the  hands  of  a servant  no  ways  barbarous  and  cruel,  but 
pitiful  and  tender-hearted,  who  laid  them  on  the  pleasant 
green  bank  of  a river,  in  a place  shaded  with  lowly  shrubs, 
near  to  that  wild  fig-tree,  to  which  the  name  of  Ruminalis 
was  afterwards  given.  There  it  was  that  a she-wolf,  hav- 
ing lost  her  young  whelps,  by  chance  lighted  on  them,  and 
being  burdened  with  her  swollen  dugs,  inflamed  for  want 
of  evacuation,  she  gladly  let  out  her  overheated  milk,  as 
if  it  had  been  a second  birth,  and  suckled  the  young 
children.  The  woodpecker  also,  a bird  sacred  to  Mars, 
came  often  unto  them,  and  supporting  herself  upon  one 
claw,  she  did  by  turns  open  both  their  mouths  with  the 
other,  and  distribute  unto  each  of  them  convenient  gobbets 
of  her  own  food.  This  fig-tree  was  therefore  called  Ru- 
minalis,  from  Ruma,  the  dug,  which  the  wolf  lying  down 
there  gave  to  the  infants.  And  from  a veneration  of  this 
strange  chance  of  Romulus  and  of  every  thing  resembling 
it,  the  inhabitants  thereabout  would  not  expose  any  of 
their  offspring ; but  they  carefully  reared  and  fostered  all 
neAV  births. 

Above  all  things,  the  hidden  craft  of  Fortune  appeared 
in  their  education  at  the  city  Gabii ; for  there  they  were 
secretly  nursed  and  brought  up,  and  the  people  knew 
nothing  of  their  pedigree,  that  they  were  the  sons  of  Sylvia 
and  the  grandchildren  of  king  Numitor ; which  seems  to 
be  so  ordered  on  purpose  to  prevent  that  untimely  death 
which  the  knowledge  of  their  royal  race  would  occasion, 
and  to  give  them  opportunity  of  showing  themselves  here- 
after by  their  famous  exploits,  and  discovering  the  nobility 
of  their  extraction  by  their  heroical  actions.  And  this 
brings  to  my  mind  the  saying  of  that  great  and  wise  com- 
mander Themistocles  to  some  of  the  Athenian  captains, 
who,  having  followed  him  in  the  Avars  Avith  good  success, 
were  groAvn  ambitious  to  be  preferred  above  him.  There 
Avas  an  eager  contest,  said  he,  betAveen  the  festival  day  and 


208 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


the  day  following,  for  precedency.  Thou,  says  the  follow- 
ing day,  art  full  of  tumult  and  business,  but  I give  men  the 
peaceful  opportunity  of  enjoying  themselves.  Ay,  says 
the  festival,  that’s  true ; but  then,  I pray  you,  tell  me,  if  I 
had  not  been,  where  had  you  been]  So,  says  Themistocles, 
if  I had  not  preserved  my  country  in  the  war  with  the 
Medes,  what  use  would  there  be  of  you  now]  And  after 
this  manner  Fortune  seems  to  accost  the  virtue  of  Romulus: 
it  is  true  indeed,  your  actions  are  great  and  famous,  by 
which  you  have  clearly  shown  that  you  are  descended  of 
the  race  of  the  Gods.  But  see  now  how  far  you  come 
behind  me.  For  if  I had  not  relieved  the  infants  in  their 
distress  by  my  bounty  and  humanity,  if  I had  deserted  and 
betrayed  them  when  they  lay  naked  and  exposed,  how 
could  you  have  appeared  with  such  lustre  and  splendor  as 
now  you  do]  If  a she-wolf  had  not  then  lighted  upon 
them,  inflamed  with  the  abundance  and  pressure  of  her 
milk,  which  wanted  one  to  give  food  unto  more  than  any 
food  for  herself ; if  some  wild  beast  had  happened  to  come 
in  her  stead,  hungry  and  ravaging  for  meat ; then  there 
had  been  no  such  beautiful  and  stately  palaces,  temples, 
theatres,  walks,  courts,  and  forum,  as  now  you  justly  glory 
of ; then  your  followers  had  still  been  shepherds,  and  your 
buildings  cottages  or  stables,  and  they  had  still  lived  in 
subjection  to  the  Albanian,  Tyrrhenian,  or  Latin  lords. 
Certainly  the  first  beginning  of  all  things  is  of  greatest 
importance,  and  more  especially  in  building  of  a city.  But 
it  was  Fortune  that  first  gave  a beginning  to  Rome,  by  pre- 
serving the  founder  of  it  in  so  many  dangers  to  which  he 
was  exposed.  For  as  Virtue  made  Romulus  great,  so  For- 
tune preserved  him  till  his  virtue  did  appear. 

9.  It  is  confessed  by  all,  that  the  reign  of  Numa,  which 
lasted  longest,  was  conducted  by  a wonderful  good  fortune. 
For  as  to  the  story  of  the  wise  goddess  Egeria,  one  of  the 
Lryades,  — that  she  being  in  love  conversed  familiarly  with 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


209 


him,  and  assisted  him  in  laying  the  platform  and  cementing 
the  frame  of  the  commonwealth,  — it  appears  to  be  rather 
fabulous  than  true,  since  there  were  others  that  had  God- 
desses for  their  wives  and  are  said  to  have  been  loved  by 
them,  such  as  Peleus,  Anchises,  Orion,  and  Emathion,  who, 
for  all  that,  did  not  live  so  pleasantly  and  free  from  trouble. 
But  Numa  seems  to  have  had  good  fortune  for  his  domestic 
companion  and  colleague  in  the  government,  which,  re- 
ceiving the  city  of  Borne  into  her  protection,  at  such  time 
as  she  was  tossed  like  a troublesome  sea  by  the  wars  of 
neighboring  states,  and  inflamed  with  intestine  feuds,  did 
quickly  heal  those  breaches  and  allay  those  storms  that 
threatened  her  ruin.  And  as  the  sea  is  said  to  receive  the 
halcyon  brood  in  a tempest,  which  it  preserves  and  nour- 
ishes ; so  the  people  of  Borne  being  lately  gathered  to- 
gether, after  various  commotions  and  tossings,  were  by 
Fortune  delivered  from  all  wars,  diseases,  dangers,  and 
terrors,  and  settled  in  such  a lasting  peace,  that  they  had 
time  and  leisure  to  take  root  in  their  new  soil  and  grow 
up  securely  into  a well-compacted  city.  For  as  a great 
ship  or  galley  is  not  made  without  many  blows,  and  much 
force  from  hammers,  nails,  wedges,  saws,  and  axes,  and 
being  once  built,  it  must  rest  for  some  time  upon  the  stocks, 
until  the  bands  of  its  structure  grow  strong  and  tenacious, 
and  the  nails  be  well  fastened  which  hold  its  parts  to- 
gether, lest,  being  launched  while  it  is  loose  and  unsettled, 
the  hulk  should  be  shattered  by  the  concussion  of  the 
waves  and  let  in  the  water,  — so  the  first  artificer  of  Rome, 
having  built  the  city  of  rustical  men  and  shepherds,  as  on 
strong  foundations,  was  forced  to  endure  hard  labor  and 
maintain  dangerous  wars  against  those  who  opposed  its 
first  origination  and  institution ; but  after  it  was  once 
framed  and  compacted  by  this  force,  the  second  artificer, 
by  the  benignity  of  Fortune,  gave  it  so  long  rest  and  peace, 
till  all  its  parts  were  consolidated  and  settled  in  a firm  and 

14 


VOL.  IV. 


210 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


lasting  posture.  But  if  at  that  time,  when  the  city  was 
newly  built,  some  Porsena  had  advanced  the  Etruscan 
camp  and  army  to  the  walls,  being  yet  moist  and  trembling, 
or  some  warlike  revolter  of  the  Marsian  grandees,  or  some 
envious  and  contentious  Lucanian,  such  as  in  latter  times 
were  Mutius  or  the  bold  Silo,  or  the  last  plague  of  Sylla’s 
faction,  Telesinus,  who  with  one  alarm  armed  all  Italy, — 
if  any  of  these,  I say,  had  encompassed  the  philosopher 
Numa  with  the  sound  of  trumpets,  while  he  was  sacrificing 
and  praying  to  the  Gods,  the  city  being  yet  unsettled  and 
unfinished,  he  could  never  have  resisted  so  great  a torrent 
and  tempest,  nor  increased  unto  so  great  numbers  of  stout 
and  valiant  men. 

That  long  time  of  peace  therefore  in  Numa’s  reign  did 
prepare  and  fortify  the  Romans  against  all  the  wars  which 
happened  afterwards ; for  by  its  continuance,  during  the 
space  of  forty-three  years,  the  body  of  the  people  was 
confirmed  in  that  athletic  habit  which  they  acquired  in  the 
war  under  Romulus,  and  which  generally  prevailed  hence- 
forward against  all  their  enemies.  For  in  these  years  they 
say  Rome  was  not  afflicted  with  famine  or  pestilence,  with 
barrenness  of  the  earth,  or  any  notable  calamity  by  winter 
or  summer ; all  which  must  be  attributed,  not  to  human 
prudence,  but  to  the  good  conduct  of  divine  Fortune  gov- 
erning for  that  time.  Then  the  double  gate  of  Janus  was 
shut,  which  they  call  the  gate  of  war,  because  it  is  always 
opened  in  time  of  war  and  shut  in  time  of  peace.  After 
Numa’s  death,  it  was  opened  again  when  the  war  with 
the  Albans  commenced,  which  was  followed  with  other 
wars  without  number  in  a continued  series  of  time  ; but 
after  four  hundred  and  eighty  years,  it  was  shut  again 
when  peace  was  concluded  at  the  end  of  the  first  Punic 
war,  in  the  consulship  of  Caius  Atilius  and  Titus  Manlius. 
The  next  year  it  was  opened  again,  and  the  wars  lasted 
until  the  victory  which  Augustus  obtained  at  Actium. 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


211 


Then  the  Roman  arms  rested  but  a little  while ; for  the 
tumults  from  Cantabria  and  the  wars  with  the  Gauls  and 
Germans  breaking  in  upon  them  quickly  disturbed  the 
peace.  These  things  I have  added  to  explain  this  argu- 
ment of  the  good  fortune  of  Numa. 

10.  Even  those  kings  which  followed  him  have  admired 
Fortune  as  the  governess  and  nurse  of  Rome,  and  the  city 
supporter,  as  Pindar  saith.  For  proof  of  this,  we  may 
consider  that  the  temple  of  Virtue  at  Rome  was  but  lately 
built,  many  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  city,  by  that 
Marcellus  who  took  Syracuse.*  There  is  also  a temple 
dedicated  to  the  Mind,  or  rather  to  good  counsel,  called 
Mens,  by  Scaurus  Aemilius,  who  lived  in  the  time  of  the 
Cimbrian  war,  when  the  arms  of  rhetoric  and  the  sophistry 
of  logic  had  crept  into  the  city.  And  even  to  this  day, 
there  are  no  temples  built  to  Wisdom,  Temperance, 
Patience,  and  Magnanimity;  but  the  temples  of  Fortune 
are  very  ancient  and  splendid,  adorned  with  all  sorts  of 
honors,  and  divided  amongst  the  most  famous  parts  and 
places  of  Rome.  The  temple  of  Manly  Fortune  was  built 
by  Ancus  Marcius,  the  fourth  king ; which  name  was 
therefore  given  it,  because  Fortune  does  contribute  very 
much  to  valor  in  obtaining  victory.  The  temple  of  Femi- 
nine Fortune  was  consecrated  by  the  matrons,  when  they 
drove  away  Marcius  Coriolanus  at  the  head  of  an  army 
marching  against  Rome,  as  everybody  knows.  Moreover, 
Servius  Tullius,  who  above  all  the  kings  did  most  enlarge 
the  power  of  the  people  and  adorn  the  commonwealth, 
who  first  established  a good  order  for  the  giving  of  suffrages 
and  for  the  good  discipline  of  the  militia,  who  was  the  first 
censor  and  overseer  of  men’s  lives  and  sobriety,  and  is 
esteemed  a most  wise  and  valiant  man,  — even  he  threw 
himself  upon  Fortune,  and  owned  his  kingdom  to  be  de- 
rived from  her.  So  great  was  her  kindness  to  him,  that 

* Much  that  follows  is  a repetition  of  Chapter  Fifth.  (G.) 


212 


CONCERNING  TIIE  FORTUNE 


she  is  thought  to  have  descended  into  his  house  by  a gateway 
(which  is  now  called  Fenestella)  and  there  to  have  con- 
versed familiarly  with  him.  Upon  which  account  he  built 
two  temples  to  Fortune,  one  to  that  which  is  called  Primo- 
genia  in  the  Capitol,  i.  e.  the  first  born,  as  one  may  expound 
it;  another  to  that  which  is  called  Obsequens,  which  some 
interpret  as  being  obsequious  to  his  desires,  and  others  as 
mild  and  gentle.  I will  henceforth  leave  the  Roman 
names,  and  endeavor  to  reckon  up  and  interpret  in  Greek 
the  meaning  of  these  temples.  There  is  the  temple  of 
Private  Fortune  on  the  Mount  Palatine,  and  that  of  Viscous 
Fortune  ; which  name,  though  it  seems  ridiculous,  does  by 
a metaphor  explain  to  us  the  nature  of  Fortune,  that  she 
attracts  things  at  a distance,  and  retains  them  when  they 
are  brought  to  contact.  At  the  fountain  which  is  called 
Mossy  the  temple  of  Virgin  Fortune  is  still  to  be  seen ; 
and  that  of  Regardful  Fortune  in  Abescymae.  There  is 
an  altar  also  to  Fortune  of  Good  Hope  in  the  long  narrow 
street;  and  near  to  the  altar  of  Venus  Epitalaria  (Foot- 
winged) there  is  a chapel  to  Male  Fortune. 

Infinite  are  the  honors  and  titles  of  Fortune,  the  greater 
part  of  which  were  instituted  by  Servius,  who  knew  that 
“ Fortune  is  of  great  weight  — nay,  is  every  thing  — in  all 
human  affairs,”  * and  more  especially  had  found  by  experi- 
ence that  by  her  favor  he  was  preferred  from  a captive  and 
hostile  nation  to  be  king  of  the  Romans.  For  when 
Corniculum  was  taken  by  the  Romans,  the  virgin  Ocresia 
being  taken  at  the  same  time,  she  for  her  illustrious  beauty 
and  virtue  (which  the  meanness  of  her  fortune  could  not 
hide  or  obscure)  was  presented  to  Tanaquil,  the  consort 
of  King  Tarquinius,  with  whom  she  served  till  she  was 
married  to  one  of  the  retainers  whom  the  Romans  call 
clients  ; and  of  them  wras  born  Servius.  Others  tell  the 
story  after  this  manner:  that  the  virgin  Ocresia  using 

* Demostli.  01.  II.  p.  24,  14. 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


213 


often  to  receive  the  first-fruits  and  libations  from  the  royal 
table,  which  were  to  be  offered  in  sacrifice,  it  happened  on 
a time  that  when,  according  to  the  custom,  she  had  thrown 
them  into  the  fire,  upon  the  sudden  expiration  of  the  flame, 
there  appeared  to  come  out  of  it  the  genital  member  of  a 
man.  The  virgin,  being  frighted  with  so  strange  a sight, 
told  the  whole  matter  to  Queen  Tanaquil ; who,  being  a 
wise  and  understanding  woman,  judged  the  vision  to  be 
divine,  and  therefore  dressed  up  the  virgin  in  all  her  bridal 
ornaments  and  attire,  and  then  shut  her  up  in  a room  to- 
gether with  this  apparition.  Some  attribute  this  amour  to 
Lar  the  household  God,  and  others  to  Vulcan  ; but  which- 
soever it  was,  Ocresia  was  with  child,  and  gave  birth  to 
Servius.  And  while  he  was  yet  an  infant,  his  head  was 
seen  to  send  forth  a wonderful  brightness,  like  lightning 
darted  from  the  skies.  But  Antias  tells  this  story  after 
a different  manner : that  when  Servius’s  wife  Getania  was 
dead,  he  fell  into  a sleep  through  grief  and  dejection  of 
mind,  in  the  presence  of  his  mother,  and  then  his  head 
was  seen  by  the  woman  encompassed  by  fire  ; which,  as  it 
was  a certain  token  that  he  was  born  of  fire,  so  was  a good 
omen  of  that  unexpected  kingdom  which  he  obtained  after 
the  death  of  Tarquin,  by  the  means  of  Tanaquil.  This 
is  so  much  the  more  to  be  wondered  at,  because  he  of  all 
kings  seems  to  have  been  least  fitted  by  Nature  and  most 
averse  by  inclination  to  monarchical  government ; since  he 
would  have  resigned  his  kingdom  and  divested  himself  of 
regal  authority,  if  he  had  not  been  hindered  by  the  oath 
which  it  appears  he  made  to  Tanaquil  when  she  was  dying, 
that  he  should  continue  during  his  life  in  kingly  power, 
and  never  change  that  form  of  government  which  he  had 
received  from  his  ancestors.  Thus  the  reign  of  Servius 
was  wholly  owing  to  Fortune,  because  he  both  received  it 
beside  his  expectation,  and  retained  it  against  his  will. 

11.  But  lest  we  should  seem  to  shun  the  light  of  bright 


214 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


and  evident  arguments,  and  retreat  to  ancient  stories,  as  to 
a place  of  darkness  and  obscurity,  let  us  now  pass  over  the 
time  of  the  kings,  and  go  on  in  our  discourse  to  the  most 
noted  actions  and  famous  wars  of  following  times.  And 
first  of  all  it  must  be  confessed  that  the  boldness  and 
courage  which  are  necessary  for  war  do  aid  and  improve 
military  virtue,  as  Timotheus  says;  and  yet  it  is  manifest 
to  him  that  will  reason  aright,  that  the  abundance  of  success 
which  advanced  the  Roman  Empire  to  such  vast  power 
and  greatness  is  not  to  be  attributed  to  human  strength  and 
counsels,  but  to  a certain  divine  impulse  and  a full  gale  of 
running  Fortune,  which  carried  all  before  it  that  hindered 
the  rising  glory  of  the  Romans.  For  now  trophies  were 
erected  upon  trophies,  and  triumphs  hastened  to  meet  one 
another;  before  the  blood  was  cold  upon  their  arms,  it  was 
washed  off  with  the  fresh  blood  of  their  falling  enemies. 
Henceforth  the  victories  were  not  reckoned  by  the  numbers 
of  the  slain  or  the  greatness  of  the  spoils,  but  by  the  king- 
doms that  were  taken,  by  the  nations  that  were  conquered, 
by  the  isles  and  continents  which  were  added  to  the  vast- 
ness of  their  empire.  At  one  battle  Philip  was  forced  to 
quit  all  Macedonia,  by  one  stroke  Antiochus  was  beaten 
out  of  Asia,  by  one  victory  the  Carthaginians  lost  Libya  ; 
but  which  is  yet  more  wonderful,  Armenia,  the  Euxine  sea, 
Syria,  Arabia,  the  Albanians,  Iberians,  with  all  the  regions 
as  far  as  Caucasus  and  the  Hyrcanians,  were  by  one  man 
and  the  success  of  one  expedition  reduced  under  the  power 
of  the  Roman  Empire.  The  Ocean,  which  environs  the 
whole  earth,  beheld  him  thrice  victorious;  for  he  subdued 
the  Numidians  in  Africa,  as  far  as  the  southern  shores ; he 
conquered  Spain,  which  joined  in  the  madness  of  Sertorius, 
as  far  as  the  Atlantic  Ocean  ; and  he  pursued  the  Albanian 
kings  as  far  as  the  Caspian  sea.  Pompeius  Magnus,  one 
and  the  same  man,  achieved  all  those  great  and  stupendous 
things,  by  the  assistance  of  that  public  Fortune  which 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


215 


waited  upon  the  Roman  arms  with  success ; and  after  all 
this,  he  sank  under  the  weight  of  his  own  fatal  greatness. 

The  great  Genius  of  the  Romans  was  not  propitious  for  a 
day  only,  or  for  a little  time,  like  that  of  the  Macedonians  ; 
it  was  not  powerful  by  land  only,  like  that  of  the  Laconi- 
ans, or  by  sea  only,  like  that  of  the  Athenians.  It  was 
not  too  slowly  sensible  of  injuries,  as  that  of  the  Persians  ? 
nor  too  easily  pacified,  like  that  of  the  Colophonians  ; but 
from  the  beginning  growing  up  with  the  city,  the  more  it 
increased,  the  more  it  enlarged  the  empire,  and  constantly 
aided  the  Romans  with  its  auspicious  influence  by  sea  and 
land,  in  peace  and  war,  against  all  their  enemies,  whether 
Greeks  or  barbarians.  It  was  this  Genius  which  dissipated 
Hannibal  the  Carthaginian,  when  he  broke  in  upon  Italy 
like  a torrent,  and  the  people  could  give  no  assistance, 
being  torn  in  pieces  by  intestine  jars.  It  was  this  Genius 
that  separated  the  two  armies  of  the  Cimbri  and  Teutones, 
that  they  should  not  meet  at  the  same  time  and  place  ; 
by  which  means  Marius  the  Roman  general  encountered 
each  army  by  itself,  and  overcame  them ; which,  if  they 
had  been  joined  together,  would  have  overflowed  all  Italy 
like  a deluge,  with  three  hundred  thousand  valiant  men, 
invincible  in  arms.  It  was  the  same  Genius  that  hindered 
Antiochus  by  other  occasions  from  assisting  Philip  while 
he  was  engaged  in  war  with  the  Romans ; so  that  Philip 
was  first  vanquished  while  Antiochus  was  still  in  danger. 
It  was  by  the  conduct  of  the  same  Genius  that  Mithridates 
was  taken  up  with  the  Sarmatic  and  Bastarnic  wars  while 
the  Marsians  attacked  Rome ; that  jealousy  and  envy 
divided  Tigranes  from  Mithridates  while  the  latter  was 
flushed  with  success ; but  both  of  them  were  joined  to- 
gether in  the  defeat,  that  they  might  perish  in  the  same 
common  ruin. 

12.  What  shall  I say  more?  Has  not  Fortune  relieved 
the  city,  when  it  was  reduced  to  the  greatest  extremity  of 


216 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


danger  \ When  the  Gauls  encamped  about  the  Capitol  and 
besieged  the  castle, 

And  heaped  the  camp  with  mountains  of  the  dead,* 

did  not  Fortune  and  chance  discover  their  secret  attack  in 
the  night-time,  which  otherwise  had  surprised  all  men  \ 
Of  which  wonderful  accident  it  will  not  be  unseasonable 
to  discourse  here  a little  more  largely. 

After  the  great  overthrow  and  slaughter  of  the  Romans 
at  the  river  Allia,  some  of  those  that  remained  fled  hastily 
to  Rome,  and  communicated  their  terror  and  consternation 
to  the  people  there.  Some  trussed  up  their  bag  and  bag- 
gage and  conveyed  themselves  into  the  Capitol,  resolving 
there  to  wait  the  event  of  so  dismal  a calamity ; others 
flocked  in  great  multitudes  to  Veii,  and  there  proclaimed 
Furius  Camillus  dictator,  giving  him  now  in  their  distress 
an  absolute  and  unaccountable  power,  whom  before  in  their 
pride  and  prosperity  they  had  condemned  and  banished,  as 
guilty  of  robbing  the  public  treasure.  But  Camillus,  to 
strengthen  his  title  to  this  authority,  which  might  seem  to 
be  given  him  only  for  the  present  necessity,  contrary  to  the 
law  of  the  state  touching  the  election  of  such  a magistrate, 
scorned  to  accept  an  election  from  a body  of  armed  soldiers, 
so  lately  shattered  and  beaten,  as  if  the  government  of  the 
city  were  dissolved ; but  sent  to  acquaint  the  senators  that 
were  in  the  Capitol,  and  know  if  they  would  approve  the 
election  of  the  soldiers.  To  accomplish  this,  there  was 
one  C.  Pontius,  who  undertook  to  carry  the  news  of  this 
decree  to  those  in  the  Capitol,  though  it  was  with  great 
danger  of  his  life ; for  he  was  to  go  through  the  midst  of 
the  enemies,  who  were  entrenched  and  kept  watch  about 
the  castle.  He  came  therefore  in  the  night-time  to  the 
river  Tiber,  and  by  the  help  of  broad  corks  supporting  the 
weight  of  his  body,  he  was  carried  down  the  stream  in  a 


* II.  1. 10. 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


217 


smooth  calm  water,  and  safely  landed  on  the  other  side. 
From  thence  he  passed  through  places  uninhabited,  being 
conducted  by  darkness  and  silence,  to  the  rock  of  the 
Capitol ; and  climbing  up  through  its  winding  and  rough 
passages,  with  much  labor  and  difficulty  at  last  he  arrived 
at  the  summit,  where,  being  received  by  the  watch,  he 
acquainted  the  senators  with  what  was  done  by  the  soldiers, 
and  having  received  their  approbation  of  the  decree  of 
election,  he  returned  again  to  Camillus.  The  next  day 
after,  one  of  the  barbarians  by  chance  walking  about  this 
rock,  and  seeing  in  one  place  the  prints  of  his  feet  and  his 
falls,  in  another  place  the  grass  trodden  down  which  grew 
upon  the  interspersed  earth,  and  the  plain  marks  of  his 
body  in  its  winding  .ascent  through  the  craggy  precipice, 
went  presently  and  informed  the  rest  of  the  Gauls  of  the 
• whole  matter.  They,  finding  that  a way  was  shown  them 
by  the  enemy,  resolved  to  follow  his  footsteps  ; and  taking 
the  advantage  of  the  dead  time  of  the  night,  when  all  were 
fast  asleep,  not  so  much  as  a watch  stirring  or  a dog 
barking,  they  climbed  up  secretly  to  the  castle. 

But  Fortune  in  this  case  was  wonderfully  propitious  to 
the  Romans,,  in  discovering  and  preventing  such  an  immi- 
nent danger  by  the  voice  of  the  sacred  geese,  which  were 
maintained  about  the  temple  of  Juno  for  the  worship  of 
that  Goddess.  For  that  animal  being  wakeful  by  nature 
and  easily  frighted  with  the  least  noise,  these  sacred  geese 
had  been  so  much  neglected  by  reason  of  the  scarcity  of 
provisions  which  was  in  the  castle,  that  they  were  more 
easily  wakened  by  the  approach  of  the  enemy  out  of  their 
light  and  hungry  sleep.  Therefore  they  presently  perceived 
the  Gauls  appearing  upon  the  walls,  and  with  a loud  voice 
flew  proudly  towards  them  ; but  being  yet  more  frightened 
with  the  sight  of  their  shining  armor,  they  raised  a louder 
gaggling  noise,  which  wakened  the  Romans  ; who  under- 
standing the  design,  presently  beat  back  the  enemies,  and 


218 


CONCERNING  THE  FORTUNE 


threw  them  down  over  the  precipices  of  the  rock.  There- 
fore, in  remembrance  of  this  wonderful  accident,  a dog 
fastened  to  a cross,  and  a goose  lying  in  a bed  of  state  upon 
a rich  cushion,  are  carried  about,  even  to  this  day,  in 
pompous  solemnity.  And  now  who  is  not  astonished  that 
considers  how  great  the  misery  of  the  city  was  at  that  time, 
and  how  great  its  happiness  is  now  at  this  day,  when  he 
beholds  the  splendor  and  riches  of  its  donatives,  the  emu- 
lation of  liberal  arts  that  flourish  in  it,  the  accession  of 
noble  cities  and  royal  crowns  to  its  empire,  and  the  chief 
products  of  sea  and  land,  of  isles  and  continents,  of  rivers 
and  trees,  of  animals  and  fields,  of  mountains  and  metallic 
mines,  crowding  to  adorn  and  beautify  this  place]  Who 
is  not  stunned  with  admiration  at  the  imminent  danger 
which  then  was,  whether  ever  those  things  should  be  or 
no ; and  at  those  poor  timorous  birds,  which  first  began 
the  deliverance  of  the  city,  when  all  places  were  filled  with 
fire,  darkness,  and  smoke,  with  the  swords  of  barbarians 
and  bloody-minded  men  ] What  a prodigy  of  Fortune  was 
it  that  those  great  commanders,  the  Manlii,  the  Servii, 
Postumii,  and  Papirii,  so  famous  for  their  warlike  exploits 
and  for  the  illustrious  families  that  have  descended  from 
them,  should  be  alarmed  in  this  extremity  of  danger  by 
the  silly  geese,  to  fight  for  their  country’s  God  and  their 
country]  And  if  that  be  true  which  Polybius  writes  in 
his  second  book  of  those  Gauls  which  then  possessed 
Pome,  — that  they  made  a peace  with  Camillus  and  de- 
parted, as  soon  as  they  heard  the  news  of  the  invasion  that 
was  made  upon  their  territories  by  the  neighboring  barba- 
rians,— then  it  is  past  all  controversy,  that  Fortune  was 
the  cause  of  Rome’s  preservation  by  drawing  off  the  ene- 
mies to  another  place,  or  rather  forcing  them  from  Rome 
beyond  all  men’s  expectation. 

13.  But  why  do  I dwell  upon  those  things  which  have 
nothing  of  certain  or  evident  truth,  since  the  memories  of 


OF  THE  ROMANS. 


219 


those  times  have  perished,  and  the  history  of  them  is  con- 
fused, as  Livy  tells  us1?  For  those  things  which  happened 
in  following  ages,  being  plain  and  manifest  to  all,  do  suffi- 
ciently demonstrate  the  benignity  of  Fortune  to  Rome; 
among  which  I reckon  the  death  of  Alexander  to  be  no 
small  cause  of  the  Romans’  happiness  and  security.  For 
he,  being  a man  of  wonderful  success  and  most  famous 
exploits,  of  invincible  confidence  and  pride,  who  shot  like 
a star,  with  incredible  swiftness,  from  the  rising  to  the  set- 
ting sun,  was  meditating  to  bring  the  lustre  of  his  arms 
into  Italy.  The  pretence  of  this  intended  expedition  was 
the  death  of  Alexander  Molossus,  who  was  killed  at  Pan- 
dosia  by  the  Bruttians  and  Lucanians ; hut  the  true  cause 
was  the  desire  of  glory  and  the  emulation  of  empire,  which 
instigated  him  to  war  against  all  mankind,  that  he  might 
extend  his  dominion  beyond  the  bounds  of  Bacchus  and 
Hercules.  He  had  heard  of  the  Roman  power  in  Italy, 
terrible  as  an  army  in  battle  array  ; of  the  illustrious  name 
and  glory  which  they  had  acquired  by  innumerable  battles, 
in  which  they  were  flushed  with  victory ; and  this  was 
a sufficient  provocation  to  his  ambitious  spirit  to  com- 
mence a war  against  them,  which  could  not  have  been 
decided  without  an  ocean  of  blood ; * for  both  armies  ap- 
peared invincible,  both  of  fearless  and  undaunted  minds  ; 
and  the  Romans  then  had  no  fewer  than  one  hundred  and 
thirty  thousand  stout  and  valiant  men,| 

All  expert  soldiers,  skilled  on  foot  to  dare, 

Or  from  the  bounding  courser  urge  the  war.  $ 

* See  Odyss.  XVIII.  149. 

t The  rest  of  this  discourse  appears  to  be  lost,  wherein  we  miss  the  arguments 
which  Virtue  alleged  for  herself  in  this  contest. 

$ Odyss.  IX.  49. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


1.  It  is  a troublesome  and  difficult  task  that  philosophy 
undertakes  in  going  about  to  cure  the  disease,  or  rather 
itch,  of  intemperate  prating.  For  that  words,  which  are 
the  sole  remedy  against  it,  require  attention  ; but  they  who 
are  given  to  prate  will  hear  nobody,  as  being  a sort  of 
people  that  love  to  be  always  talking  themselves.  So  that 
the  principal  vice  of  loquacious  persons  is  this,  that  their 
ears  are  stopped  to  every  thing  else  but  their  own  imper- 
tinencies ; which  I take  to  be  a wilful  deafness  in  men, 
controlling  and  contradicting  Nature,  that  has  given  us  two 
ears,  though  but  one  tongue.  Therefore  it  was  that  Eurip- 
ides spoke  very  right  to  a certain  stupid  hearer  of  his  : 

Impossible  it  is  to  fill  that  brain, 

That  in  a moment  lets  out  all  again  ; 

’Tis  but  the  words  of  wisdom  to  unfold 
Unto  a fool,  whose  skull  will  nothing  hold.* 

More  justly  and  truly  might  I say  to  an  idle  prate-too-fast, 
or  rather  concerning  such  a fellow  : 

In  vain  I seek  to  fill  thy  sieve-like  brain, 

That  in  a moment  lets  out  all  again  ; 

Infusing  wisdom  into  such  a skull 
As  leaks  so  fast,  it  never  will  be  full. 

Much  more  may  he  be  said  to  spill  his  instructions  over 
(rather  than  pour  them  into)  a man,  who  is  always  talking 
to  those  that  do  not  hear,  and  never  hears  when  others 


* Euripides,  Frag.  891. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


221 


talk.  For  so  soon  as  a wise  man  has  uttered  any  thing,  be 
it  never  so  short,  garrulity  swallows  it  forthwith  like  the 
sea,  and  throws  it  up  again  threefold,  with  the  violence  of 
a swelling  tide.  Such  was  the  portico  at  Olympia,  called 
Heptaphonos,  by  the  reverberation  of  one  single  voice 
causing  no  less  than  seven  distinct  echoes.  And  in  like 
manner,  if  the  least  word  light  into  the  ears  of  an  imper- 
tinent babbler,  presently  all  the  room  rings  with  it,  and  he 
makes  such  a din, 

That  soon  the  jangling  noise  untunes  the  strings 
Of  minds  sedately  fixt  on  better  things. 

Insomuch  that  we  may  say,  that  the  conduits  and  convey- 
ances of  their  hearing  reach  not  to  the  souls,  but  only  to 
their  tongues.  Therefore  it  is  that  other  people  retain 
what  is  spoken  to  them  ; whereas,  whatever  is  said  to  talk- 
ative people  runs  through  them  as  through  a cullender ; 
and  then  they  run  about  from  place  to  place,  like  empty 
vessels  void  of  sense  or  wit,  but  making  a hideous  noise. 

2.  However,  in  hopes  that  there  is  yet  some  room  left 
to  try  an  experiment  for  the  cure  of  this  distemper,  let  us 
begin  with  this  golden  sentence  to  the  impertinent  prater : 

Be  silent,  boy,  and  thou  wilt  find  i’  th’  end, 

What  benefits  on  silent  lips  attend.* 

Among  these  benefits  two  of  the  first  and  chiefest  are  to 
hear  and  to  be  heard.  To  neither  of  which  can  these 
talkative  companions  ever  attain ; so  unhappy  they  are 
still  to  meet  with  disappointments,  though  they  desire  a 
thing  never  so  much.  For  as  for  those  other  distempers 
of  the  soul,  such  as  avarice,  ambition,  and  exorbitant  love 
of  pleasure,  they  have  this  happiness,  to  enjoy  what  they 
so  eagerly  covet.  But  this  is  that  which  most  afflicts  these 
idle  prattlers,  that  being  desirous  of  nothing  more  than 
of  company  that  will  hear  them  prate,  they  can  never  meet 
with  it,  in  regard  that  all  men  avoid  their  society;  and 

* From  the  Aleadae  of  Sophocles,  Frag.  79. 


222 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


I 


I 


whether  sitting  in  a knot  together  or  walking,  so  soon  as 
they  behold  a prattler  advancing  towards  them,  they  pres- 
ently give  warning  to  each  other  and  adjourn  to  another 
place.  And  as,  when  there  happens  a deep  silence  in  any 
assembly,  so  that  all  the  company  seems  to  be  mute,  we 
say  that  Mercury  is  got  among  them ; so  when  a fool,  full 
of  noise  and  talk,  enters  into  any  room  where  friends  and 
acquaintance  are  met  to  discourse  or  else  to  feast  and  be 
merry,  all  people  are  hushed  of  a sudden,  as  afraid  of  giv- 
ing him  any  occasion  to  set  his  tongue  upon  the  career. 
But  if  he  once  begin  to  open  his  mouth,  up  they  rise  and 
away  they  trip,  like  seamen  foreseeing  a sudden  storm  and 
rolling  of  the  waves,  when  they  hear  “ the  north  wind  be- 
gin to  whistle  from  some  adjoining  promontory,”  and  has- 
tening into  harbor.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he 
never  can  meet  with  any  that  are  willing  either  to  eat  or 
drink  or  lodge  with  him  in  the  same  room,  either  upon  the 
road  or  upon  a voyage,  unless  constrained  thereto  by  ne- 
cessity. For  so  importunate  he  is  in  all  places,  that  some- 
times he  will  pull  you  by  the  coat,  sometimes  by  the  beard, 
and  sometimes  be  hunching  your  sides,  to  make  you  speak. 
How  highly  then  are  to  be  prized  a swift  pair  of  legs,  ac- 
cording to  the  saying  of  Archilochus ! Nay,  by  Jove,  it 
was  the  opinion  of  wise  Aristotle  himself.  For  he  being 
perplexed  with  an  egregious  prater,  and  tired  out  with  his 
absurd  stories  and  idle  repetitious  of,  And  is  not  this  a 
wonderful  thing,  Aristotle'?”  — No  wonder  at  all,  said  he, 
is  this ; but  if  a man  should  stand  still  to  hear  you  prate 
thus,  who  had  legs  to  run  away,  that  were  a wonder  indeed. 
To  another  of  the  same  stamp  that,  after  a long  tale  of  a 
roasted  horse,  excused  himself  by  saying  that  he  was  afraid 
he  had  tired  him  with  his  prolixity ; No,  upon  my  word, 
quoth  the  philosopher,  for  I never  minded  what  you  said. 
On  the  other  side,  should  it  so  fall  out  that  there  was  no 
avoiding  the  vexation  of  one  of  these  chattering  fops,  Na- 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


223 


ture  lias  afforded  us  this  happiness,  that  it  is  in  the  power 
of  the  soul  to  lend  the  outward  ears  of  the  body,  to  endure 
the  brunt  of  the  noise,  while  she  retires  to  the  remoter 
apartments  of  the  mind,  and  there  employs  herself  in  bet- 
ter and  more  useful  thoughts.  By  which  means  those 
sonorous  babblers  are  at  the  same  time  disappointed,  as 
well  of  auditors,  as  of  people  that  believe  what  they  say. 
All  men  look  upon  their  vain  babbling  with  the  same  opin- 
ion that  they  have  of  the  seed  of  people  insatiably  addicted 
to  the  use  of  women  ; for  as  the  one  is  barren  and  useless 
for  generation,  so  is  the  other  void  of  the  end  of  discourse, 
altogether  frivolous  and  impertinent. 

3.  And  yet  there  is  no  member  of  human  bodies  that 
Nature  has  so  strongly  enclosed  within  a double  fortifica- 
tion, as  the  tongue,  entrenched  within  with  a barricado  of 
sharp  teeth,  to  the  end  that,  if  it  refuses  to  obey  and  keep 
silent  when  reason  “ presses  the  glittering  reins  ” within, 
we  should  fix  our  teeth  in  it  till  the  blood  comes,  rather 
than  suffer  the  inordinate  and  unseasonable  din.  For,  ac- 
cording to  the  saying  of  Euripides, 

Our  miseries  do  not  spring 
From  houses  wanting  locks  or  bolts ; 

But  from  unbridled  tongues, 

111  used  by  prating  fools  and  dolts. 

And  truly,  I must  tell  you,  that  they  who  think  that  houses 
without  doors,  and  purses  without  strings,  are  of  no  use  to 
their  masters,  yet  at  the  same  time  set  neither  fence  nor 
door  before  their  lips,  but  suffer  a continual  torrent  of  vain 
and  idle  discourse  to  flow  through  them,  like  the  perpetu- 
al flux  of  water  through  the  mouth  of  the  Pontic  sea,  seem 
to  me  to  have  the  least  esteem  for  human  speech  of  all 
men  in  the  world.  Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  they 
never  gain  belief,  which  is  the  end  of  all  discourse.  For 
the  main  scope  and  intention  of  all  men  that  speak  is  to 


* See  Eurip.  Bacchae,  385. 


224 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


gain  a belief  of  what  they  utter  with  those  that  hear  them  ; 
whereas  talkative  noise-makers  are  never  believed,  let 
them  speak  never  so  much  truth.  For  as  wheat,  when 
crowded  into  a musty  vessel,  is  found  to  exceed  in  meas- 
ure, but  to  be  unwholesome  for  use ; so  the  discourse  of  a 
loquacious  person  swells  and  enlarges  itself  with  lies  and 
falsehood,  but  in  the  mean  time  it  loses  all  force  of  per- 
suasion. 

4.  Then  again,  there  is  no  man  of  modesty  and  civil- 
ity but  would  be  careful  of  preserving  himself  from 
drunkenness.  For  anger,  as  some  are  of  opinion,  is 
the  next  neighbor  to  madness,  while  drunkenness  doth 
dwell  in  the  very  same  house  with  it ; or  rather,  drunken- 
ness is  madness  itself,  inferior  to  it  in  continuance  of  time,  * 
yet  far  exceeding  it  as  it  is  voluntary,  since  it  is  a madness 
of  our  own  choice.  Now  there  is  nothing  for  which  drunk- 
enness is  so  much  abominated  and  decried,  as  for  that 
it  is  the  cause  of  inordinate  and  unlimited  babbling  and 
prating. 

Heated  with  wine,  the  man  at  other  times 

Both  wise  and  grave  sings  loose  and  wanton  rhymes  ; 

He  minds  not  loud  indecent  laughter  then, 

Nor  mimic  dancing,  scorned  by  sober  men.* 

And  yet  both  singing,  laughing,  and  dancing  are  all  but 
trifles  to  that  which  follows,  the  consequences  of  which 
are  oft-times  fatal : 

He  blurts  those  secrets  forth,  which  once  revealed, 

Too  late  he  wishes  they  had  been  concealed. 

This  is  that  which  oftentimes  proves  dangerous,  if  not 
terrible,  to  the  discoverer.  And  who  knows  but  that  the 
poet  might  here  design  to  resolve  a question  much  dis- 
puted among  philosophers,  — that  is  to  say,  what  the  dif- 
ference is  between  being  tipsy  and  stark  drunk,  — by 
attributing  to  the  former  only  mirth  and  jollity  of  humor, 


* See  Odyss.  XIV.  464. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


225 


but  branding  tlie  latter  with  the  foul  reproach  of  noxious 
babbling  \ For,  according  to  the  proverb. 

What  the  sober  heart  conceals, 

That  the  drunken  heart  reveals. 

Wherefore  it  is  reported  of  Bias,  that  sitting  very  silent  at 
a compotation,  drinking  only  when  it  came  to  his  turn,  and 
being  laughed  at  by  one  whose  tongue  ran  at  random,  who 
for  his  silence  called  him  mope  and  fool,  he  made  this  re- 
ply : Find  me  out  that  fool,  said  he,  that  e’er  could  hold 
his  tongue  in  his  cups. 

A citizen  of  Athens,  having  invited  the  king  of  Persia’s 
ambassadors  to  a magnificent  feast,  at  their  request  gave 
the  same  invitation  to  the  most  eminent  philosophers  in 
the  city,  to  bear  them  company.  Now,  when  all  the  rest 
were  propounding  of  themes,  and-  raising  arguments  pro 
and  con,  and  others  were  maintaining  of  paradoxes  to  show 
their  wit  and  learning,  only  Zeno  sat  still,  so  reserved  and 
mute  that  the  ambassadors  took  notice  of  it ; and  there- 
upon, after  they  thought  they  had  opened  his  heart  with 
two  or  three  lusty  brimmers,  Pray  tell  us,  Zeno,  said  they, 
what  report  we  shall  make  concerning  thee  to  our  master  1 
To  whom  Zeno:  Nothing  more,  said  he,  but  that  there 
was  an  old  man  at  Athens  that  could  hold  his  tongue  in 
the  midst  of  his  cups.  Such  profound  and  divine  mysteri- 
ous virtues  are  silence  and  sobriety  ; whereas  drunkenness 
is  'loquacious,  void  of  reason  and  understanding,  and 
therefore  full  of  jangling  and  impertinent  tautologies. 
Wherefore  the  philosophers,  when  they  come  to  define 
drunkenness,  call  it  “ vain  talk  over  wine.’’  So  that  drink- 
ing is  not  condemned,  provided  a man  keep  himself  within 
the  bounds  of  silence  ; only  vain  and  silly  discourse  makes 
wine-bibbing  to  be  drunkenness.  He  then  that  is  drunk 
talks  idly  over  his  wine  ; but  the  babbler  does  it  every- 
where, — in  the  market-place,  at  the  theatre,  in  the  public 

walks,  as  well  by  night  as  by  day.  If  he  be  a physician, 

16 


VOL.  IV. 


226 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


certainly  he  is  more  troublesome  than  the  disease  ; if  your 
; i companion  in  a voyage,  more  insupportable  than  the 
qualms  occasioned  by  the  tumbling  of  the  sea.  If  he 
praise  thee,  his  panegyric  is  more  offensive  than  the 
reproaches  of  another.  It  is  a greater  pleasure  to 
converse  with  vicious  men,  so  they  be  discreet  in  their  lan- 
guage, than  with  twaddlers,  though  never  so  honest.  There- 
fore Nestor  in  Sophocles,  desirous  to  appease  exasperated 
Ajax,  mildly  thus  rebuked  him : 

I blame  thee  not,  for  though  thy  words  are  ill, 

Thy  deeds  bespeak  thee  brave  and  valiant  still.* 

But  there  is  not  the  same  excuse  to  be  made  for  a vain 
babbling  fellow ; for  the  ill  government  of  his  tongue  cor- 
rupts and  vitiates  all  the  merits  of  his  actions. 

5.  Lysias  had  given  to  a certain  accused  criminal  an 
oration  of  his  own  writing.  He,  having  read  it  several 
times  over,  came  to  Lysias  very  much  dejected,  and  told 
him  that,  upon  his  first  perusal  of  it,  it  seemed  to  him 
to  be  a most  admirable  piece  ; but  after  he  had  read  it 
three  or  four  times  over,  he  could  see  nothing  in  it  but 
what  was  very  dull  and  insipid.  To  whom  Lysias,  smil- 
ing : What,  said  he,  is  not  once  enough  to  speak  it  before 
the  judges'?  And  yet  do  but  consider  the  persuasive  elo- 
quence and  grace  that  is  in  Lysias’s  writing,  and  then  I 
may  be  bold  to  affirm, 

That  no  man  living  e’er  was  favored  more 
By  sacred  Muse  that  violet  garlands  wore. 

Certain  it  is  that,  of  all  the  commendations  that  were  ever 
given  to  Homer,  this  is  the  truest,  that  he  alone  avoided 
being  irksome  to  his  readers,  as  one  that  was  always  new 
and  still  flourishing,  as  it  were  in  the  prime  of  poetic 
beauty.  And  yet  in  speaking  thus  of  himself, 

I hate  vain  repetitions,  fondly  made, 

Of  what  has  been  already  plainly  said,  t 

* From  Sophocles  Frag.  770.  t Odyss.  XII.  452. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


227 


lie  shows  how  careful  he  is  to  shun  that  satiety  which,  as 
it  were,  lies  in  wait  for  all  speech,  alluring  the  ear  from 
one  relation  into  another,  and  still  recreating  the  reader 
with  fresh  variety,  in  such  a manner  that  he  never  thinks 
himself  satisfied.  Whereas  men  that  let  their  tongues 
run  at  random  rend  and  tear  the  ears  with  their  tautolo- 
gies, like  those  that,  after  writing-tables  have  been  newly 
cleansed  and  wiped,  deface  them  again  with  their  imperti- 
nent scrawls  and  scratches. 

6.  And  therefore  we  would  have  them  to  remember  this 
in  the  first  place,  that,  as  they  who  constrain  men  to  guz- 
zle down  wine  unmixed  with  water,  and  to  excess,  are  the 
occasion  that  what  was  bestowed  at  first  on  men  as  a bless- 
ing, to  excite  mirth  and  rejoice  the  heart,  becomes  a mis- 
chief, creating  sadness  and  causing  drunkenness ; so  they 
that  make  an  ill  and  inconsiderate  use  of  speech,  which  is 
the  most  delightful  means  of  human  converse,  render  it 
both  troublesome  and  unsociable,  molesting  those  whom 
they  think  to  gratify,  derided  by  those  whose  esteem  and 
admiration  they  covet,  and  offensive  to  such  whose  love 
and  friendship  they  seek.  And  therefore,  as  he  may  be 
truly  said  to  be  no  favorite  of  Venus,  who  with  the  girdle 
of  the  Goddess,  wherein  are  all  manner  of  allurements, 
drives  and  chases  away  his  familiar  acquaintance  from  his 
society  ; so  he  that  vexes  others  with  his  loose  and  extrava- 
gant talk  may  be  as  truly  said  to  be  a rustic,  wanting  alto- 
gether education  and  breeding. 

7.  Now  then,  among  all  other  passions  and  maladies, 
some  are  dangerous,  others  hateful,  and  others  ridiculous  ; 
but  in  foolish  prating  all  these  inconveniences  con- 
cur. Praters  are  derided  when  they  make  relations  of 
common  matters  ; they  are  hated  for  bringing  unwelcome 
tidings  ; they  are  in  danger  for  divulging  of  secrets. 
Whereas  Anarcharsis,  being  feasted  by  Solon,  was  es- 
teemed a wise  man,  for  that,  as  he  lay  asleep  after  the 


228 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


banquet  was  over,  he  was  seen  with  his  left  hand  over  his 
privy  parts,  and  his  right  hand  laid  upon  his  mouth  ; deem- 
ing, as  indeed  he  rightly  believed,  that  his  tongue  required 
the  stronger  curb.  For  though  it  would  be  a hard  task  to 
reckon  up  how  many  men  have  perished  through  the  vene- 
real intemperance,  yet  I dare  say  it  would  be  almost  as 
difficult  to  tell  how  many  cities  and  States  have  been  de- 
molished and  totally  subverted  by  the  inconsiderate  blurt- 
ing out  of  a secret. 

Sylla  besieged  Athens  at  a time  when  it  was  certain  that 
he  could  not  lie  long  before  the  city,  by  reason  that  other 
affairs  and  troubles  called  him  another  way.  For  on  the 
one  side,  Mithridates  ravaged  Asia ; on  the  other,  Marius’s 
party  had  made  themselves  masters  of  Rome.  But  it  hap- 
pened, that  certain  old  fellows  being  met  together  in  a 
barber’s  shop,  among  other  discourse,  blabbed  it  out,  that 
the  Heptachalcon  was  ill  guarded,  and  that  the  city  was  in 
great  danger  of  a surprise  in  that  part.  Which  being 
overheard  and  reported  to  Sylla  by  certain  of  his  spies,  he 
presently  brought  all  his  forces  on  that  side,  and  about 
midnight,  after  a sharp  assault,  entered  the  city  with  his 
whole  army,  and  it  was  a thousand  to  one  but  that  he  had 
laid  it  in  ashes.  However,  he  filled  it  with  the  carcasses 
of  the  slain,  and  made  the  Ceramicus  run  with  blood ; 
being  highly  incensed  against  the  Athenians,  more  for  their 
reproachful  language  than  their  military  opposition.  For 
they  had  abused  both  him  and  his  wife  Metella,  getting  up 
upon  the  walls  and  calling  him  “ mulberry  strewed  with 
dust  meal,”  with  many  other  provoking  scoffs  of  the  same 
nature ; and  merely  for  a few  words  — which,  as  Plato 
observes,  are  the  lightest  things  in  the  world  — they  drew 
upon  their  heads  the  severest  punishment. 

The  tongue  of  one  man  prevented  Rome  from  recovering 
her  freedom  by  the  destruction  of  Nero.  For  there  was 
but  one  night  to  pass  before  Nero  was  to  be  murdered  on 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


229 


the  morrow,  all  things  being  ready  prepared  and  agreed  on 
for  that  purpose.  But  in  the  mean  time  it  happened  that 
he  who  had  undertaken  to  execute  the  act,  as  he  was  going 
to  the  theatre,  seeing  one  of  those  poor  creatures  that 
were  bound  and  pinioned,  just  ready  to  he  led  before  Nero, 
and  hearing  the  fellow  bewail  his  hard  fortune,  gathered 
up  close  to  him,  and  whispered  the  poor  fellow  in  the  ear : 
Pray  only,  honest  friend,  said  he,  that  thou  mayest  but 
escape  this  day ; to-morrow  thou  shalt  give  me  thanks. 
Presently  the  fellow  taking  hold  of  this  enigmatical  speech, 
and  calling  to  mind  the  vulgar  saying,  that  he  is  a fool 
who  lets  slip  a bird  in  the  hand  for  a bird  in  the  bush, 
preferred  the  surer  to  the  juster  way  of  saving  himself, 
and  presently  declared  to  Nero  what  that  man  had  whis- 
pered in  his  ear.  Immediately  the  whisjjerer  was  laid  hold 
of,  and  hurried  away  to  the  place  of  torture,  where  by 
racking,  searing,  and  scourging  he  Avas  constrained,  poor 
miserable  creature,  to  confess  that  by  force  Avliich  before 
he  had  discovered  Avithout  any  compulsion  at  all. 

8.  Zeno,  that  he  might  not  be  compelled  by  the  tortures 
of  his  body  to  betray,  against  his  will,  the  secrets  entrusted 
in  his  breast,  bit  off  his  tongue,  and  spit  it  in  the  tyrant’s 
face.  Notorious  also  Avas  the  example  of  Leaena,  and 
signal  the  reward  which  she  had  for  being  true  to  her  trust 
and  constant  in  her  taciturnity.  She  Avas  a courtesan  Avith 
whom  Harmodius  and  Aristogiton  were  very  familiar ; 
and  for  that  reason  they  had  imparted  to  her  the  great 
hopes  Avliich  they  had  upon  the  success  of  the  conspiracy 
against  the  tyrants,  Avherein  they  Avere  so  deeply  engaged ; 
Avhile  she  on  the  other  side,  having  drunk  freely  of  the 
noble  cup  of  love,  had  been  initiated  into  their  secrets 
through  the  God  of  LoAre ; and  she  failed  not  of  her  voav. 
For  the  two  paramours  being  taken  and  put  to  death  after 
they  had  failed  in  their  enterprise,  she  Avas  also  apprehended 
and  put  to  the  torture,  to  force  out  of  her  a discovery  of 


230 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


the  rest  of  the  accomplices  ; but  all  the  torments  and  ex- 
tremities they  could  exercise  upon  her  body  could  not 
prevail  to  make  her  discover  so  much  as  one  person ; 
whereby  she  manifested  to  the  world  that  the  two  gentle- 
men, her  friends,  had  done  nothing  misbecoming  their 
descent,  in  having  bestowed  their  affections  upon  such  a 
woman.  For  this  reason  the  Athenians,  as  a monument 
of  her  virtue,  set  up  a lioness  (which  the  name  Leaena 
signifies)  in  brass,  without  a tongue,  just  at  the  entrance 
into  the  Acropolis ; by  the  stomachful  courage  of  that 
beast  signifying  to  posterity  the  invincible  resolution  of 
the  woman ; and  by  making  it  without  a tongue,  denoting 
her  constancy  in  keeping  the  secret  with  which  she  was 
entrusted.  For  never  any  word  spoken  did  so  much  good, 
as  many  locked  up  in  silence.  Thus  at  one  time  or  other 
a man  may  utter  what  heretofore  has  been  kept  a secret ; 
but  when  a secret  is  once  blurted  forth,  it  can  never  be 
recalled ; for  it  flies  abroad,  and  spreads  in  a moment  far 
and  near.  And  hence  it  is  that  we  have  men  to  teach  us 
to  speak,  but  the  Gods  are  they  that  teach  us  silence  ; 
silence  being  the  first  thing  commanded  upon  our  first  in- 
itiation into  their  divine  ceremonies  and  sacred  mysteries. 
And  therefore  it  is  that  Homer  makes  Ulysses,  whose  elo- 
quence was  so  charming,  to  be  the  most  silent  of  men  ; and 
the  same  virtue  he  also  attributes  to  his  son,  to  his  wife, 
and  also  to  his  nurse.  For  thus  you  hear  her  speaking: 

Safe,  as  in  hardened  steel  or  sturdy  oak, 

Within  my  breast  these  secrets  will  I lock. 

And  Ulysses  himself,  sitting  by  Penelope  before  he  discov- 
ered himself,  is  thus  brought  in  : 

His  weeping  wife  with  pity  he  beheld, 

Although  not  willing  yet  to  be  revealed. 

He  would  not  move  his  eyes,  but  kept  them  fast, 

Like  horn  or  steel  within  his  eyebrows  placed.* 


* Odyss.  XIX.  494  and  204. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


231 


So  powerfully  possessed  with  continence  were  both  his 
tongue  and  lips  ; and  having  all  the  rest  of  his  membefs  so 
obedient  and  subject  to  his  reason,  he  commanded  his  eye 
not  to  weep,  his  tongue  not  to  speak  a word,  and  his  heart 
neither  to  pant  nor  tremble. 

So  was  his  suffering  heart  confined 

To  give  obedience  to  his  mind ; * 

his  reason  penetrating  even  to  those  inward  motions,  and 
subduing  to  itself  the  blood  and  vital  spirits.  Such  were 
many  of  the  rest  of  his  followers.  For  though  they  were 
dragged  and  haled  by  Polyphemus,  and  had  their  heads 
dashed  against  the  ground,  they  would  not  confess  a word 
concerning  their  lord  and  master  Ulysses,  nor  discover  the 
long  piece  of  wood  that  was  put  in  the  fire  and  prepared 
to  put  out  his  eye  ; but  rather  suffered  themselves  to  be 
devoured  raw  than  to  disclose  any  one  of  their  master’s 
secrets  ; which  was  an  example  of  fidelity  and  reservedness 
not  to  be  paralleled.  Pittacus  therefore  did  very  well, 
who,  when  the  king  of  Egypt  sent  him  an  oblation-beast, 
and  ordered  him  to  take  out  and  set  apart  the  best  and 
worst  piece  of  it,  pulled  out  the  tongue  and  sent  to  him, 
as  being  the  instrument  of  many  good  things  as  well  as 
the  instrument  of  the  greatest  evils  in  the  world. 

9.  Ino  therefore,  in  Euripides,  frankly  extolling  herself, 
says : 

I know  both  when  and  where  my  tongue  to  hold, 

And  when  with  safety  to  be  freely  bold.t 

For  they  that  are  brought  up  under  a truly  generous  and 
royal  education  learn  first  to  be  silent,  and  then  to  talk. 
And  therefore  King  Antigonus,  when  his  son  asked  him 
when  they  should  discamp,  replied,  What ! art  thou  afraid 
of  being  the  only  man  that  shall  not  hear  the  trumpet  ? 
So  loath  was  he  to  trust  him  with  a secret,  to  whom  he 
was  to  leave  his  kingdom ; teaching  him  thereby,  when  he 


* Odyss.  XX.  23. 


t Eurip.  Ino,  Frag.  417. 


232 


OF  GARRULITV,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


came  to  command  another  day,  to  be  no  less  wary  and 
sparing  of  his  speech.  Metellus  also,  that  old  soldier, 
being  asked  some  such  question  about  the  intended  march 
of  his  army,  If  I thought,  said  he,  that  my  shirt  were 
privy  to  this  secret,  I would  pull  it  off  and  throw  it  into 
the  fire.  Eumenes  also,  when  he  heard  that  Craterus  was 
marching  with  his  forces  against  him,  said  not  a word  of 
it  to  his  best  friend,  but  gave  out  all  along  that  it  was 
Neoptolemus  ; for  him  his  soldiers  contemned,  but  they 
admired  Craterus’s  fame  and  virtue ; but  nobody  knew  the 
truth  but  Eumenes  himself.  Thereupon  joining  battle,  the 
victory  fell  to  their  side,  and  they  slew  Craterus,  not  know- 
ing whom  he  was  till  they  found  him  among  the  slain.  So 
cunningly' did  taciturnity  manage  this  combat,  and  conceal 
so  great  an  adversary ; so  that  the  friends  of  Eumenes 
admired  rather  than  reproved  him  for  not  telling  them 
beforehand.  For  indeed,  should  a man  be  blamed  in  such 
a case,  it  is  better  for  him  to  be  accused  after  victory  ob- 
tained by  his  distrust,  than  to  be  obliged  to  blame  others 
after  an  overthrow  because  he  has  been  too  easy  to  impart 
his  secrets. 

10.  Nay,  what  man  is  he  that  dares  take  upon  him  the 
freedom  to  blame  another  for  not  keeping  the  secret  which 
he  himself  has  revealed  to  him'?  For  if  the  secret  ought 
not  to  have  been  divulged,  it  was  ill  done  to  break  it  to 
another ; but  if,  after  thou  hast  let  it  go  from  thyself,  thou 
wouldst  have  another  keep  it  in,  surely  it  is  a great  argu- 
ment that  thou  hast  more  confidence  in  another  than  in 
thyself ; for,  if  he  be  like  thyself,  thou  art  deservedly 
lost ; if  better,  then  thou  art  miraculously  saved,  as  having 
met  with  a person  more  faithful  to  thee  than  thou  art  to 
thy  own  interest.  But  thou  wilt  say,  he  is  my  friend. 
Very  good : yet  this  friend  of  mine  had  another,  in  whom 
he  might  confide  as  much  as  I did  in  him ; and  in  like 
manner  his  friend  another,  to  the  end  of  the  chapter. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


233 


And  thus  the  secret  gains  ground,  and  spreads  itself  by 
multiplication  of  babbling.  For  as  a unit  never  exceeds 
its  bounds,  but  always  remains  one,  and  is  therefore  called 
a unit ; but  the  next  is  two,  which  contains  the  unlimited 
principle  of  diversity,  — for  it  straightway  departs  from 
out  of  itself  (as  it  were)  and  by  doubling  turns  to  a plu- 
rality, — so  speech  abiding  in  the  first  person’s  thoughts 
may  truly  be  called  a secret ; but  being  communicated  to 
another,  it  presently  changes  its  name  into  common  rumor. 
This  is  the  reason  that  Homer  gives  to  words  the  epithet 
of  winged ; for  he  that  lets  a bird  go  out  of  his  hand 
does  not  easily  catch  her  again  ; neither  is  it  possible  for  a 
man  to  recall  and  cage  again  in  his  breast  a word  let  slip 
from  his  mouth ; * for  with  light  wings  it  fetches  many  a 
compass,  and  flutters  about  from  one  quarter  to  another  in 
a moment.  The  course  of  a ship  may  Avell  be  stayed  by 
cables  and  anchors,  which  else  would  spoon  away  before  a 
fresh  gale  of  wind  ; but  there  is  no  fast  riding  or  anchor- 
hold  for  speech,  when  once  let  loose  as  from  a harbor ; 
but  being  whirled  away  with  a sonorous  noise  and  loud 
echo,  it  carries  off  and  plunges  the  unwary  babbler  into 
some  fatal  danger. 

For  soon  a little  spark  of  Are,  let  Ay, 

May  kindle  Ida’s  wood,  so  thick  and  high 

What  one  man  to  his  seeming  friend  lets  go, 

Whole  cities  may  with  ease  enquire  and  know.t 

11.  The  Senate  of  Rome  had  been  debating  among 
themselves  a certain  piece  of  secrecy  for  several  days, 
which  caused  the  matter  to  be  so  much  the  more  suspected 
and  listened  after.  Whereupon  a certain  Roman  lady, 
discreet  enough  in  other  things,  but  yet  a woman,  laid  at 
her  husband  day  and  night,  and  mournfully  importuned 
him  what  the  secret  might  be.  Oaths,  you  may  be  sure, 
6he  was  ready  to  make,  and  to  curse  herself  if  ever  she 


* See  Euripides,  Frag.  1031. 


t Eurip.  Ino,  Frag.  415. 


234 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


(revealed  whatever  he  should  tell ; nor  was  she  wanting  in 
tears,  and  many  moist  complaints  of  her  being  a woman 
so  little  to  be  trusted  by  a husband.  The  Roman  thus 
beset,  yet  Avilling  in  some  measure  to  make  trial  of  her 
fidelity  and  convince  her  of  her  folly,  Thou  hast  overcome 
me,  wife,  said  he,  and  now  I’ll  tell  thee  a most  dreadful 
and  prodigious  thing.  We  were  advertised  by  the  priests, 
that  a lark  was  seen  flying  in  the  air,  with  a golden  helmet 
upon  her  head  and  a spear  in  one  of  her  claws ; now  we 
are  consulting  with  the  augurs  or  soothsayers  about  this 
portent,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  But  keep  it  to  thy- 
self, for  it  may  be  of  great  concernment  for  the  common- 
wealth. Having  so  said,  he  walked  forth  toward  the 
market-place.  No  sooner  was  he  gone,  but  his  wife 
caught  hold  of  the  first  of  her  maids  that  entered  the 
room,  and  then  striking  her  breast  and  tearing  her  hair, 
Woe  is  me,  said  she,  for  my  poor  husband  and  dearest  coun- 
try ! What  will  become  of  us  ? — prompting  the  maid,  as 
! if  she  were  desirous  that  she  should  say  to  her,  Why] 
What  is  the  matter,  mistress'?  Upon  which  she  presently 
unfolded  all  that  her  husband  had  told  her ; nay,  she  for- 
got not  the  common  burden  with  which  all  twattle-baskets 
conclude  their  stories  ; But,  hussy,  said  she,  for  your  life, 
be  sure  you  say  not  a word  of  this  to  any  soul  living.  The 
wench  was  no  sooner  got  out  of  her  mistress’s  sight,  but 
meeting  with  one  of  her  fellow-servants  that  had  little  to 
do,  to  her  she  unbosoms  herself ; she,  big  with  the  news, 
with  no  less  speed  runs  away  to  her  sweetheart,  who  was 
come  to  give  her  a visit,  and  without  any  more  to  do  tells 
him  all.  By  this  means  the  story  flew  about  the  market- 
place before  the  first  deviser  of  it  could  get  thither.  Pres- 
ently one  of  his  acquaintance  meeting  him  asked,  Did  ye 
i come  straight  from  your  house  ? Without  stop  or  stay, 
replied  the  other.  And  did  ye  hear  nothing  ] says  his 
friend.  Why ] quoth  the  other,  Is  there  any  news  ? Oh  ! 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS.  235 

quoth  his  friend,  a lark  has  been  seen  flying  in  the  air, 
with  a golden  helmet  upon  her  head  and  a spear  in  her 
claw,  and  the  Senate  is  summoned  to  consult  about  it. 
Upon  which  the  gentleman,  smiling : God  a mercy,  wife, 
quoth  he,  for  being  so  nimble ! One  would  have  thought 
I might  have  got  into  the  market-place  before  a story  so 
lately  told  thee  ; but  I see  ’twas  not  to  be  done.  There- 
upon meeting  with  some  of  the  senators,  he  soon  delivered 
them  out  of  their  pain.  However,  being  resolved  to  take 
a slight  revenge  of  his  wife,  making  haste  home,  Wife, 
said  he,  thou  hast  undone  me  ; for  it  is  found  out  that  the 
great  secret  I told  thee  was  first  divulged  out  of  my  house  ; 
and  now  must  I be  banished  from  my  native  country  for 
your  wicked  gaggling  tongue.  At  first  his  wife  would 
have  denied  the  matter,  and  put  it  off  from  her  husband 
by  telling  him  there  were  three  hundred  more  besides 
himself  that  heard  the  thing,  and  why  might  not  one  of 
those  divulge  it  as  well  as  he  \ But  he  bade  her  never  tell 
him  of  three  hundred  more,  and  told  her  it  was  an  inven- 
tion of  his  own  framing  to  try  her  and  to  avoid  her  impor- 
tunity. Thus  this  Roman  safely  and  cautiously  made  the 
experiment  of  his  wife’s  ability  to  keep  a secret ; as  when 
we  pour  into  a cracked  and  leaky  vessel,  not  wine  nor  oil, 
but  water  only. 

But  Fulvius,  one  of  Augustus  Caesar’s  minions  and 
favorites,  once  heard  the  emperor  deploring  the  desolation 
of  his  family,  in  regard  his  two  grandchildren  by  his 
daughter  were  both  dead,  and  Postumius,  who  only  re- 
mained alive,  upon  an  accusation  charged  against  him  was 
confined  to  banishment,  so  that  he  was  forced  to  set  up  his 
wife’s^  son  to  succeed  him  in  the  empire,  yet  upon  more 
compassionate  thoughts,  signifying  his  determination  to 
recall  Postumius  from  exile.  This  Fulvius  hearing  related 
the  whole  to  his  wife,  and  she  to  Livia.  Livia  sharply 
expostulated  the  matter  with  Caesar ; wherefore,  seeing  he 


236 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


had  projected  the  thing  so  long  before,  he  did  not  send  for 
his  daughter’s  son  at  first,  but  exposed  her  to  the  hatred 
and  revenge  of  him  that  he  had  determined  to  be  his  suc- 
cessor. The  next  morning  Fulvius  coming  into  Augustus’s 
presence,  and  saluting  him  with  Hail,  O Caesar ! Caesar 
retorted  upon  him,  God  send  thee  more  wit,  Fulvius.  He, 
presently  apprehending  the  meaning  of  the  repartee,  made 
haste  home  again ; and  calling  for  his  wife,  Caesar  under- 
stands, said  he,  that  I have  discovered  his  secret  counsels, 
and  therefore  I am  resolved  to  lay  violent  hands  upon  my- 
self. And  justly  too,  said  she,  thou  dost  deserve  to  die, 
since  having  lived  so  long  with  me,  thou  didst  not  know 
the  lavishness  of  my  tongue,  and  how  unable  I was  to 
keep  a secret.  However,  suffer  me  to  die  first.  And  with 
that,  snatching  the  sword  out  of  her  husband’s  hands,  she 
slew  herself  before  his  face. 

12.  Truly  therefore  was  it  said  by  Philippides  the  come- 
dian, who  being  courteously  and  familiarly  asked  by  King 
Lysimachus,  what  he  should  bestow  upon  him  of  all  the 
treasure  that  he  had,  made  answer,  Any  thing,  O King,  but 
your  secrets. 

But  there  is  another  vice  no  less  mischievous  that  attends 
garrulity,  called  Curiosity.  For  there  are  a sort  of  people 
that  desire  to  hear  a great  deal  of  news,  that  they  may 
have  matter  enough  to  twattle  abroad ; and  these  are  the 
most  diligent  in  the  world  to  pry  and  dive  into  the  secrets 
of  others,  that  they  may  enlarge  and  aggravate  their  own 
loquacity  with  new  stories  and  fooleries.  And  then  they 
are  like  children,  that  neither  can  endure  to  hold  the  ice  in 
their  hands  nor  will  let  it  go  ; or  rather  they  may  be  said 
to  lodge  other  men’s  secrets  in  their  bosoms,  like  so  many 
serpents,  which  they  are  not  able  to  keep  there  long,  be- 
cause they  eat  their  way  through.  It  is  said  that  the  fish 
called  the  sea-needle  and  vipers  rive  asunder  and  burst 
themselves  when  they  bring  forth  ; in  like  manner,  secrets, 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


237 


dropping  from  the  mouths  of  those  that  cannot  contain 
them,  destroy  and  overthrow  the  revealers.  Seleucus  Cal- 
linicus,  having  lost  his  whole  army  in  a battle  fought  with 
the  Galatians,  threw  off  his  royal  diadem,  and  flew  away 
full  speed  on  a horse  with  three  or  four  attendants,  wander- 
ing through  by-roads  and  deserts,  till  at  last  he  began  to 
faint  for  want  of  food.  At  length  coming  to  a certain 
countryman’s  house,  and  finding  the  owner  himself  within, 
he  asked  him  for  a little  bread  and  water ; which  the 
countryman  not  only  readily  fetched  him,  but  what  else  his 
ground  would  afford  he  very  liberally  and  plentifully  set 
before  the  king  and  his  companions,  making  them  all  as 
heartily  welcome  as  it  was  possible  for  him  to  do.  At 
length,  in  the  midst  of  their  cheer,  he  knew  the  king’s 
face.  This  overjoyed  the  man  to  such  a degree,  — that  he 
should  have  the  happiness  to  relieve  the  king  in  his  neces- 
sity, — that  he  was  not  able  to  contain  himself  or  dissem- 
ble his  knowledge  of  the  king ; but  after  he  had  rode  a 
little  way  with  him  and  came  to  take  his  leave  ; Farewell, 
King  Seleucus,  said  the  poor  man.  But  then  the  king, 
stretching  forth  his  right  hand  and  pulling  his  host  to  his 
breast,  as  if  he  had  intended  to  kiss  him,  nodded  to  one 
of  his  followers  to  strike  off  the  countryman’s  head  with 
his  sword. 

E’en  while  lie  speaks,  his  head  rolls  in  the  dust.* 

Whereas  if  he  could  but  have  held  his  peace  and  mastered 
his  tongue  for  a little  while,  till  the  king,  as  afterwards  he 
did,  had  recovered  his  good  fortune  and  grandeur,  he  had 
been  doubtless  better  rewarded  for  his  silence  than  he  was 
for  his  hospitality.  And  yet  this  poor  man  had  some 
colorable  excuse  for  letting  his  tongue  at  liberty  ; that  is  to 
say,  his  hopes,  and  the  kindness  he  had  done  the  king. 

13.  But  most  of  your  twattlers,  without  any  cause  or 
pretence  at  all,  destroy  themselves ; as  it  happened  when 


* II.  X.  457. 


238 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


certain  fellows  began  to  talk  pretty  freely  in  a barber’s 
shop  concerning  the  tyranny  of  Dionysius,  that  it  was  as 
secure  and  inexpugnable  as  a rock  of  adamant : I wonder, 
quoth  the  barber,  laughing,  that  you  should  talk  these 
things  before  me  concerning  Dionysius,  whose  throat  is 
almost  every  day  under  my  razor.  Which  scurrilous  free- 
dom of  the  barber  being  related  to  the  tyrant,  he  caused 
him  forthwith  to  be  crucified.  And  indeed  the  generality 
of  barbers  are  a prating  generation  of  men ; in  regard  the 
most  loquacious  praters  usually  resort  to  their  shops,  and 
there  sit  prattling ; from  whence  the  barbers  also  learn  an 
ill  habit  of  twattling.  Pleasant  therefore  was  the  answer 
of  Archelaus  to  the  barber  who,  after  he  had  cast  the  linen 
toilet  about  his  shoulders,  put  this  question  to  him,  How 
shall  I trim  your  majesty  ; In  silence,  quoth  the  king.  It 
was  a barber  that  first  reported  the  news  of  the  great  over- 
throw which  the  Athenians  received  in  Sicily ; for  being 
the  first  that  heard  the  relation  of  it  in  the  Piraeus,  from  a 
servant  of  one  of  those  who  had  escaped  out  of  the  battle, 
he  presently  left  his  shop  at  sixes  and  sevens,  and  flew  into 
the  city  as  fast  as  his  heels  could  carry  him, 

For  fear  some  other  should  the  honor  claim 

Of  being  first,  when  he  but  second  came.* 

Now  you  may  be  sure  that  the  first  spreader  of  this  news 
caused  a great  hubbub  in  the  city,  insomuch  that  the  peo- 
ple, thronging  together  in  the  market-place,  made  diligent 
enquiry  for  the  first  divulger.  Presently  the  barber  was 
brought  by  head  and  shoulders  to  the  crowd,  and  examined  ; 
but  he  could  give  no  account  of  his  author,  only  one  that 
he  never  saw  or  knew  in  his  life  before  had  told  him  the 
news.  Which  so  incensed  the  multitude,  that  they  im- 
mediately cried  out,  To  the  rack  with  the  traitor,  tie  the 
lying  rascal  neck  and  heels  together.  This  is  a mere  story 
of  the  rogue’s  own  making.  Who  heard  it  I Who  gave 

* II.  XXII.  207. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


239 


any  credit  to  it  beside  himself'?  At  the  same  instant  the 
wheel  was  brought  out,  and  the  poor  barber  stretched  upon 
it,  — not  to  his  ease,  you  may  be  sure.  And  then  it  was, 
and  not  before,  that  the  news  of  the  defeat  was  confirmed 
by  several  that  had  made  a hard  shift  to  escape  the  slaugh- 
ter. Upon  which  the  people  scattered  every  one  to  his 
own  home,  to  make  their  private  lamentation  for  their  par- 
ticular losses,  leaving  the  unfortunate  barber  bound  fast  to 
the  wheel ; in  which  condition  he  continued  till  late  in  the 
evening,  before  he  was  let  loose.  Nor  would  this  reform 
the  impertinent  fool ; for  no  sooner  was  he  at  liberty  but 
he  would  needs  be  enquiring  of  the  executioner,  what 
news,  and  what  was  reported  of  the  manner  of  Nicias  the 
general’s  being  slain.  So  inexpugnable  and  incorrigible  a 
vice  is  loquacity,  gotten  by  custom  and  ill  habit,  that  they 
cannot  leave  it  off,  though  they  were  sure  to  be  hanged. 

14.  And  yet  we  find  that  people  have  the  same  antipa- 
thy against  divulgers  of  bad  tidings,  as  they  that  drink 
bitter  and  distasteful  potions  have  against  the  cups  where- 
in they  drank  them.  Elegant  therefore  is  the  dispute  in 
Sophocles  between  the  messenger  and  Creon : 

Messenger.  By  what  I tell  and  what  you  hear. 

Do  I offend  your  heart  or  ear  t 

Creon.  Why  so  inquisitive  to  sound 

My  grief,  and  search  the  painful  wound  1 

Messenger.  My  news  afflicts  thy  ears,  I find  , 

But  ’tis  the  fact  torments  thy  mind.* 

Thus  they  that  bring  us  bad  tidings  are  as  bad  as  they 
who  are  the  authors  of  our  misery ; and  yet  there  is 
no  restraining  or  correcting  the  tongue  that  will  run  at 
random. 

It  happened  that  the  temple  of  Minerva  in  Lacedaemon 
called  Chalcioecus  was  robbed,  and  nothing  but  an  earthen 
pitcher  left  behind  ; which  caused  a great  concourse  of 
people,  where  every  one  spent  his  verdict  about  the  empty 

* Soph.  Antigone,  317. 


240 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


pitcher.  Gentlemen,  says  one,  pray  give  me  leave  to  tell 
ye  my  opinion  concerning  this  pitcher.  I am  apt  to  be- 
lieve, that  these  sacrilegious  villains,  before  they  ventured 
upon  so  dangerous  an  attempt,  drank  each  of  them  a 
draught  of  hemlock  juice,  and  then  brought  wine  along 
with  them  in  this  pitcher ; to  the  end  that,  if  it  were  their 
good  hap  to  escape  without  being  apprehended,  they  might 
soon  dissolve  and  extinguish  the  strength  and  vigor  of  the 
venom  by  the  force  of  the  wine  un mixed  and  pure  ; but  if 
they  should  be  surprised  and  taken  in  the  fact,  that  then 
they  might  die  without  feeling  any  pain  under  the  torture 
of  the  rack.  Having  thus  said,  the  people,  observing  so 
much  forecast  and  contrivance  in  the  thing,  would  not  be 
persuaded  that  any  man  could  have  such  ready  thoughts 
upon  a bare  conjecture,  but  that  he  must  know  it  to  be  so. 

(Thereupon,  immediately  gathering  about  him,  one  asked 
who  he  was  ; another,  who  knew  him  ; a third,  how  he 
came  to  be  so  much  a philosopher.  And  at  length,  they 
did  so  sift  and  canvass  and  fetch  him  about,  that  the 
fellow  confessed  himself  to  be  one  of  those  that  com- 
mitted the  sacrilege. 

And  were  not  they  who  murdered  the  poet  Ibycus  dis- 
covered after  the  same  manner,  as  they  sat  in  the  theatre  ? 
For  as  they  were  sitting  there  under  the  open  sky  to  be- 
hold the  public  pastimes,  they  observed  a flock  of  cranes 
flying  over  their  heads  ; upon  which  they  whispered  mer- 

)rily  one  to  another,  Look,  yonder  are  the  revengers  of 
Ibycus’s  death.  Which  words  being  overheard  by  some 
that  sat  next  them, — in  regard  that  Ibycus  had  been  long 
missing  but  could  not  be  found,  though  diligent  search  had 
been  made  after  him,  — they  presently  gave  information 
of  what  they  had  heard  to  the  magistrates.  By  whom 
being  examined  and  convicted,  they  suffered  condign  pun- 
ishment, though  not  betrayed  by  the  cranes,  but  by  the 
incontinency  of  their  own  tongues,  and  by  an  avenging 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS.  241 

Erinnys  hovering  over  their  heads  and  constraining  them 
to  confess  the  murder.  For  as  in  the  body,  wounded  and 
diseased  members  draw  to  themselves  the  vicious  humors 
of  the  neighboring  parts ; in  like  manner,  the  unruly 
tongues  of  babblers,  infested  (as  it  were)  with  inflamma- 
tions where  a sort  of  feverish  pulses  continually  lie  beat- 
ing, will  be  always  drawing  to  themselves  something  of 
the  secret  and  private  concerns  of  other  men.  And  there- 
fore the  tongue  ought  to  be  environed  with  reason,  as  with 
a rampart  perpetually  lying  before  it,  like  a mound,  to 
stop  the  overflowing  and  slippery  exuberance  of  imperti- 
nent talk ; that  we  may  not  seem  to  be  more  silly  than 
geese,  which,  when  they  take  their  flight  out  of  Cilicia 
over  the  mountain  Taurus,  which  abounds  with  eagles,  are 
reported  to  carry  every  one  a good  big  stone  in  their  bills, 
instead  of  a bridle  or  barricado,  to  restrain  their  gaggling. 
By  which  means  they  cross  those  hideous  forests  in  the 
night-time  undiscovered. 

15.  Now  then  if  the  question  should  be  asked,  Which 
are  the  worst  and  most  pernicious  sort  of  people  1 I do  not 
believe  there  is  any  man  that  would  omit  to  name  a traitor. 
By  treason  it  was  that  Euthycrates  covered  the  uppermost 
storv  of  his  house  with  Macedonian  timber,  according  to 
the  report  of  Demosthenes ; that  Pliilocrates,  having  re- 
ceived a good  sum  of  money,  spent  it  upon  whores  and 
fish ; and  that  Euphorbus  and  Philagrus,  who  betrayed 
Eretria,  were  so  well  rewarded  by  the  king  with  ample 
possessions.  But  a prattler  is  a sort  of  traitor  that  no 
man  needs  to  hire,  for  that  he  offers  himself  officiously 
and  of  his  own  accord.  Nor  does  he  betray  to  the  enemy 
either  horse  or  walls  ; but  whatever  he  knows  of  public 
or  private  concerns  requiring  the  greatest  secrecy,  that  he 
discloses,  whether  it  be  in  courts  of  judicature,  in  con- 
spiracies, or  management  of  state  affairs,  ’tis  all  one  ; he 
expects  not  so  much  as  the  reward  of  being  thanked  for 

16 


VOL.  IV. 


242 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


his  pains ; nay,  rather  he  will  return  thanks  to  them  that 
give  him  audience.  And  therefore  what  was  said  upon  a 
certain  spendthrift  that  rashly  and  without  any  discretion 
wasted  his  own  estate  by  his  lavish  prodigality  to  others, 

Thou  art  not  liberal ; ’tis  a disease 
Of  vainly  giving,  which  does  thee  possess  ; 

’Tis  all  to  please  thyself,  what  thou  dost  give,* 

may  well  be  retorted  upon  a common  prattler : 

Thou  art  no  friend,  nor  dost  to  me  impart, 

For  friendship’s  sake,  the  6eerets  of  thy  heart ; 

But  as  thy  tongue  has  neither  bolt  nor  lock, 

’Tis  thy  disease,  that  thou  delight’st  to  talk. 

16.  Nor  would  I have  the  reader  think  that  what  has 
hitherto  been  said  has  been  discoursed  so  much  to  blame  as 
to  cure  that  vicious  and  infectious  malady  of  loquaciousness. 
For  though  we  surmount  and  vanquish  the  vices  of  the  mind 
by  judgment  and  exercise,  yet  must  the  judgment  precede. 
For  no  man  will  accustom  himself  to  avoid  and,  as  it  were, 
to  extirpate  out  of  his  soul  those  vices,  unless  he  first 
abominate  them.  Nor  can  we  ever  detest  those  evil  habits 
of  the  mind  as  we  ought  to  do,  but  when  we  rightly  judge 
by  reason’s  light  of  the  prejudice  they  do  us,  and  the  igno- 
miny we  sustain  thereby.  For  example,  we  consider  and 
find  that  these  profuse  babblers,  desirous  of  being  be- 
loved, are  universally  hated  ; while  they  study  to  gratify, 
they  become  troublesome  ; while  they  seek  to  be  admired, 
they  are  derided.  If  they  aim  at  profit,  they  lose  all  their 
labor  ; in  short,  they  injure  their  friends,  advantage  their 
enemies,  and  undo  themselves.  And  therefore  the  first 
remedy  and  cure  for  this  spreading  malady  will  be  this,  to 
reckon  up  all  the  shameful  infamies  and  disasters  that 
attend  it. 

17.  The  second  remedy  is  to  take  into  serious  consider- 
ation the  practice  of  the  opposite  virtue,  by  always  hearing, 
remembering,  and  having  ready  at  hand  the  due  praises 

* From  Epicharmus. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


243 


and  encomiums  of  reservedness  and  taciturnity,  together 
with  the  majesty,  sanctimony,  and  mysterious  profoundness 
of  silence.  Let  them  consider  how  much  more  beloved,  how 
much  more  admired,  how  far  they  are  reputed  to  excel  in 
prudence,  who  deliver  their  minds  in  few  words,  roundly 
and  sententiously,  and  contract  a great  deal  of  sense  within 
a small  compass  of  speech,  than  such  as  fly  out  into  vol- 
uminous language,  and  suffer  their  tongues  to  run  before 
their  wit.  The  former  are  those  whom  Plato  so  much 
praises,  and  likens  unto  skilful  archers,  darting  forth  their 
sentences  thick  and  close,  as  it  were  crisped  and  curled 
one  within  another.  To  this  same  shrewdness  of  expres- 
sion Lycurgus  accustomed  his  fellow-citizens  from  their 
childhood  by  the  exercise  of  silence,  contracting  and  thick- 
ening their  discourse  into  a compendious  delivery.  For  as 
the  Celtiberians  make  steel  of  iron  by  burying  it  in  the 
ground,  thereby  to  refine  it  from  the  gross  and  earthy  part, 
so  the  Laconic  way  of  speech  has  nothing  of  bark  upon  it, 
but  by  cutting  off  all  superfluity  of  words,  it  becomes  steeled 
and  sharpened  to  pierce  the  understanding  of  the  hearers. 
So  their  consciousness  of  language,  so  ready  to  turn  the 
edge  to  all  manner  of  questions,  became  natural  by  their 
extraordinary  practice  of  silence.  And  therefore  it  would 
be  very  expedient  for  persons  so  much  given  to  talk,  always 
to  have  before  their  eyes  the  short  and  pithy  sayings  of 
those  people,  were  it  only  to  let  them  see  the  force  and 
gravity  which  they  contain.  For  example  : The  Lacedae- 
monians to  Philip  ; Dionysius  in  Corinth.  And  when 
Philip  wrote  thus  to  the  Spartans  : If  once  I enter  into 
your  territories,  I will  destroy  ye  all,  never  to  rise  again ; 
they  answered  him  with  the  single  word,  If.  To  King 
Demetrius  exclaiming  in  a great  rage,  What ! have  the 
Spartans  sent  me  but  one  ambassador  ? the  ambassador 
nothing  terrified  replied,  Yes  ; one  to  one.  Certainly  they 
that  spoke  short  and  concisely  were  much  admired  by  the 


244 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


ancients.  Therefore  the  Amphictyons  gave  order,  not  that 
the  Iliad  or  the  Odyssey  or  Pindar’s  paeans  should  be 
written  upon  Pythian  Apollo’s  temple  ; but  Know  thy- 
self; Nothing  too  much;  Give  sureties,  and  mischief  is  at 
hand.  So  much  did  they  admire  conciseness  of  speech, 
comprehending  full  sense  in  so  much  brevity,  made  solid 
as  it  were  by  the  force  of  a hammer.  Does  not  the  Deity 
himself  study  compendious  utterance  in  the  delivery  of  his 
oracles  1 Is  he  not  therefore  called  Loxias,*  because  he 
avoids  rather  loquacity  than  obscurity  \ Are  not  they  that 
signify  their  meaning  by  certain  signs,  without  words,  in 
great  admiration  and  highly  applauded  ? Thus  Heraclitus, 
being  desired  by  his  fellow-citizens  to  give  them  his  opin- 
ion concerning  Concord,  ascended  the  public  pulpit,  and 
taking  a cup  of  cold  water  into  his  hand,  first  sprinkled  it 
with  a little  flour,  then  stirring  it  with  a sprig  of  penny- 
royal, drank  it  off,  and  so  came  down  again ; intimating  there- 
by, that  if  men  would  but  be  contented  with  what  was  next 
at  hand,  without  longing  after  dainties  and  superfluities,  it 
would  be  an  easy  thing  for  cities  to  live  in  peace  and  con- 
cord one  with  another. 

Scilurus,  king  of  the  Scythians,  left  fourscore  sons  be- 
hind him  ; who,  when  he  found  the  hour  of  death  approach- 
ing, ordered  them  to  bring  him  a bundle  of  small  javelins, 
and  then  commanded  every  one  singly  to  try  whether  he 
could  break  the  bundle,  as  it  was,  tied  up  altogether ; which 
when  they  told  him  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  do,  he 
drew  out  the  javelins  one  by  one,  and  brake  them  all  him- 
self with  ease  ; thereby  declaring  that,  so  long  as  they  kept 
together  united  and  in  concord,  their  force  would  be  in- 
vincible, but  that  by  disunion  and  discord  they  would 
enfeeble  each  other,  and  render  their  dominion  of  small 
continuance. 

18.  He  then,  that  by  often  repeating  and  reflection  shall 

* The  name  Loxias  is  usually  derived  from  Aofof,  indirect.  (G.) 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


245 


enure  himself  to  such  precedents  as  these,  may  in  time  per- 
haps be  more  delighted  with  these  short  and  conclusive 
apophthegms  than  with  the  exorbitances  of  loose  and  lav- 
ish discourse.  For  my  own  part,  I must  acknowledge  that 
I am  not  a little  ashamed  of  myself,  when  I call  to  mind  that 
same  domestic  servant  of  whom  I am  now  going  to  speak, 
and  consider  how  great  a thing  it  is  to  advise  before  a man 
speaks,  and  then  to  he  able  to  maintain  and  stick  to  what 
he  has  resolved  upon. 

Pupius  Piso,  the  rhetorician,  being  unwilling  to  be  dis- 
turbed with  much  talk,  gave  orders  to  his  servants  to  answer 
to  such  questions  only  as  he  should  ask  them,  and  say  no 
more.  Then  having  a design  to  give  an  entertainment  to 
Clodius,  at  that  time  magistrate,  he  ordered  him  to  be  in- 
vited, and  provided  a splendid  banquet  for  him,  as  in  all  prob- 
ability he  could  do  no  less.  At  the  time  appointed  several 
other  guests  appeared,  only  they  waited  for  Clodius’s  coming, 
who  tarried  much  longer  than  was  expected ; so  that  Piso 
sent  his  servant  several  times  to  him,  to  know  whether  he 
would  be  pleased  to  come  to  supper  or  no.  Now  when  it 
grew  late  and  Piso  despaired  of  his  coming,  What ! said  he  \ 
to  his  servant,  did  you  call  him'?  Yes,  replied  the  servant. 
Why  then  does  he  not  come  away  ? Because  he  told  me 
he  would  not  come.  Why  did  you  not  tell  me  so  before  ? 
Because,  sir,  you  never  asked  me  the  question.  This  was  a 
Homan  servant.  But  an  Athenian  servant,  while  he  is 
digging  and  delving,  will  give  his  master  an  account  of  the 
articles  and  capitulations  in  a treaty  of  peace.  So  strangely 
does  custom  prevail  in  all  things,  of  Avhich  let  us  now  dis- 
course. , 

19.  For  there  is  no  curb  or  bridle  that  can  tame  or  re- 
strain a libertine  tongue  ; only  custom  must  vanquish  that 
disease.  First  therefore,  when  there  are  many  questions 
propounded  in  the  company  where  thou  art,  accustom  thy- 


246 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


self  to  silence  till  all  the  rest  have  refused  to  give  an 
answer.  For,  as  Sophocles  observes, 

Although  in  racing  swiftness  is  required, 

In  counselling  there’s  no  such  haste  desired ; 

no  more  do  speech  and  answer  aim  at  the  same  mark  with 
running.  For  it  is  the  business  of  a racer  to  get  the 
start  of  him  that  contends  with  him ; but  if  another  man 
gives  a sufficient  answer,  there  needs  no  more  than  to  com- 
mend and  approve  what  he  says,  and  so  gain  the  reputation 
of  a candid  person.  If  not,  then  to  tell  wherein  the  other 
failed  and  to  supply  the  defect  will  neither  be  unseasonable 
nor  a thing  that  can  justly  merit  distaste.  But  above  all 
things,  let  us  take  special  heed,  when  another  is  asked  a 
question,  that  we  do  not  chop  in  to  prevent  his  returning 
an  answer.  And  perhaps  it  is  as  little  commendable,  when 
a question  is  asked  of  another,  to  put  him  by,  and  under 
take  the  solution  of  what  is  demanded  ourselves.  For 
thereby  we  seem  to  intimate  that  the  person  to  whom  the 
question  was  put  was  not  able  to  resolve  it,  and  that  the 
propounder  had  not  discretion  sufficient  to  know  of  whom 
to  ask  it.  Besides,  such  a malapert  forwardness  in  an- 
swering is  not  only  indecent,  but  injurious  and  affrontive. 
For  he  that  prevents  the  person  to  whom  the  question  is 
put  in  returning  his  answer,  would  in  effect  insinuate  a 
What  need  had  you  to  ask  of  him  ? — What  can  he  say  to 
it?  — When  I am  in  presence,  no  man  ought  to  be  asked 
those  questions  but  myself.  And  yet  many  times  we  put 
questions  to  some  people,  not  for  want  of  an  answer,  but 
only  to  minister  occasion  of  discourse  to  provoke  them  to 
familiarity,  and  to  have  the  pleasure  of  their  wit  and  con- 
versation, as  Socrates  was  wont  to  challenge  Thcaetetus 
and  Charmides.  Therefore  to  prevent  another  in  returning 
his  answers,  to  abstract  his  ears,  and  draw  off  his  cogita- 
tions from  another  to  himself,  is  the  same  thing  as  to  run 
and  salute  a man  who  designs  to  be  saluted  by  somebody 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


247 


else,  or  to  divert  bis  eyes  upon  ourselves  which  were  al- 
ready fixed  upon  another ; considering  that  if  he  to  whom 
the  question  is  put  refuse  to  return  an  answer,  it  is  but 
decent  for  a man  to  contain  himself,  and  by  an  answer 
accommodate  to  the  will  of  the  propounder,  modestly  and 
respectfully  to  put  in,  as  if  it  had  been  at  the  request  or 
in  the  behalf  of  the  other.  For  they  that  are  asked  a 
question,  if  they  fail  in  their  answer,  are  justly  to  be  par- 
doned ; but  he  that  voluntarily  presumes  to  answer  for 
another  gives  distaste,  let  his  answer  be  never  so  rational ; 
but  if  he  mistake,  he  is  derided  by  all  the  company. 

20.  The  second  point  of  exercise,  in  reference  to  our 
own  answering  of  questions,  wherein  a man  that  is  given 
to  talk  ought  to  he  extremely  careful,  is  first  of  all  not  to 
be  over-hasty  in  his  answers  to  such  as  provoke  him  to 
talk  on  purpose  to  make  themselves  merry  and  to  put  an 
affront  upon  him.  For  some  there  are  who,  not  out  of 
any  desire  to  be  satisfied,  but  merely  to  pass  away  the 
time,  study  certain  questions,  and  then  propound  them  to 
persons  which  they  know  love  to  multiply  words,  on  pur- 
pose to  make  themselves  sport.  Such  men  therefore  ought 
to  take  heed  how  they  run  headlong  and  leap  into  dis- 
course, as  if  they  were  glad  of  the  occasion,  and  to  con- 
sider the  behavior  of  the  propounder  and  the  benefit  and 
usefulness  of  the  question.  When  we  find  that  the  pro- 
pounder is  really  desirous  to  be  informed,  it  is  convenient 
then  for  a man  to  bethink  himself  awhile,  and  make  some 
pause  between  the  question  and  the  answer ; to  the  end 
that  the  proposer,  if  he  pleases  to  make  any  additions  to 
his  proposal,  may  have  time  to  do  it,  and  himself  a conven- 
ient space  to  consider  what  answer  to  make,  for  fear  of 
running  at  random  and  stifling  the  question  before  it  be 
fully  propounded,  or  of  giving  one  answer  for  another  for 
want  of  considering  what  he  ought  to  say,  — which  is  the 
effect  of  an  over-hasty  zeal  to  be  talking.  True  it  is, 


248 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


indeed,  that  the  Pythian  priestess  was  wont  to  give  her 
oracular  answers  at  the  very  instant,  and  sometimes  before 
the  question  was  propounded.  For  that  the  Deity  whom 
she  serves 

fBoth  understands  the  mute  that  cannot  speak, 

And  hears  the  silent  e’er  his  mind  he  break.* 

But  it  behooves  a man  that  would  return  a pertinent  an- 
swer, to  stay  till  he  rightly  apprehend  the  sense  and  under- 
stand the  intent  of  him  that  propounds  the  question,  lest 
he  may  happen  to  make  good  the  proverb, 

A rake  we  called  for ; they  refused  a bowl. 

Besides,  we  must  subdue  this  inordinate  and  insatiate  greed- 
iness of  having  all  the  talk,  that  it  may  not  seem  as  if  we 
had  some  old  flux  of  humors  impostumated  about  the 
tongue,  which  we  were  willing  to  have  lanced  and  let 
out  by  a question.  Socrates  therefore,  though  never  so 
thirsty  after  violent  exercise,  never  would  allow  himself  the 
liberty  to  drink,  till  he  had  drawn  one  bucket  of  water 
and  poured  it  out  upon  the  ground ; to  the  end  he  might 
accustom  his  sensual  appetite  to  attend  reason’s  appoint- 
ment. 

21.  Now  therefore  we  come  to  understand  that  there 
are  three  sorts  of  answers  to  questions,  the  necessary,  the 
polite,  and  the  superfluous.  For  example,  if  a man  should 
ask  whether  Socrates  is  within,  the  other,  if  he  Avere  in  an 
ill-humor  or  not  disposed  to  make  many  Avords,  would 
answer,  Not  within  ; or  if  he  intended  to  be  more  Laconic, 
he  would  cut  off  “ within,”  and  reply  briefly,  No.  Thus 
the  Lacedaemonians,  when  Philip  sent  them  an  epistle,  to 
knoAV  whether  or  not  they  would  admit  him  into  their 
city,  vouchsafed  him  no  other  answer  than  only  No,  fairly 
written  in  large  letters  upon  a sheet  of  paper.  Another 
that  would  answer  more  courteously  Avould  say : He  is  not 
within ; he  is  gone  among  the  bankers ; and  perhaps  he 


* See  Ilerod.  I.  47. 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


249 


would  add,  Where  he  expects  some  friends.  But  a super- 
fluous prater,  if  he  chance  to  have  read  Antimachus  of 
Colophon,  would  reply : He  is  not  within ; but  is  gone 
among  the  bankers,  in  expectation  to  meet  certain  Ionian 
friends,  who  are  recommended  to  him  in  a letter  from  Al- 
cibiades,  who  lives  at  Miletus  with  Tissaphernes,  one  of 
the  great  king  of  Persia’s  lieutenant-generals,  who  for- 
merly assisted  the  Lacedaemonians,  but  is  now,  by  the 
solicitation  of  Alcibiades,  in  league  with  the  Athenians ; 
for  Alcibiades,  being  desirous  to  return  to  his  own  country, 
has  prevailed  with  Tissaphernes  to  change  his  mind  and 
join  with  the  Athenians.  And  thus  perhaps  you  shall  have 
him  run  on  and  repeat  the  whole  eighth  book  of  Thu- 
cydides, and  overwhelm  a man  with  his  impertinent 
discourse,  till  he  has  taken  Miletus,  and  banished  Alci- 
biades a second  time.  Herein  therefore  ought  a man 
chiefly  to  restrain  the  profuseness  of  his  language,  by 
following  the  footsteps  of  the  question,  and  circumscribing 
the  answer,  as  it  were,  within  a circle  proportionable  to 
the  benefit  which  the  propounder  proposes  to  make  of 
his  question.  It  is  reported  of  Carneades,  that  before  he 
was  well  known  in  the  world,  while  he  was  disputing  in 
the  Gymnasium,  the  president  of  the  place  sent  him  an 
admonition  to  moderate  his  voice  (for  he  naturally  spoke 
very  deep  and  loud) ; in  answer  to  which  he  desired  the 
president  to  send  him  a gauge  for  his  voice,  when  the  pres- 
ident not  improperly  made  answer : Let  that  be  the  person 
who  disputes  with  thee.  In  like  manner,  the  intent  of 
the  propounder  ought  to  be  the  rule  and  measure  of  the 
answer. 

22.  Moreover,  as  Socrates  was  wont  to  say,  that  those 
meats  were  chiefly  to  be  abstained  from  which  allured  men 
to  eat  when  they  were  not  a-hungry,  and  those  drinks  to 
be  refrained  that  invited  men  to  drink  when  they  were  not 
a-dry ; so  it  would  behoove  a man  that  is  lavish  of  his 


250 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


tongue,  to  be  afraid  of  those  discourses  and  themes  where- 
in he  most  delights  and  makes  it  his  business  to  be  most 
prolix,  and  whenever  he  perceives  them  flowing  in  upon 
him,  to  resist  them  to  the  utmost  of  his  power.  For  ex- 
ample, your  martial  men  are  always  talking  of  sieges  and 
battles,  and  the  great  poet  often  introduces  Nestor  boasting 
of  his  own  achievements  and  feats  of  arms.  The  same 
disease  is  incident  to  noted  pleaders  at  the  bar,  and  accom- 
panies such  as  have  unexpectedly  risen  to  be  the  favorites 
of  great  princes.  For  such  will  be  always  up  with  their 
stories,  — how  they  were  introduced  at  first,  how  they 
ascended  by  degrees,  how  they  got  the  better  in  such  a 
case,  what  arguments  they  used  in  such  a case,  and  lastly 
how  they  were  hummed  up  and  applauded  in  court.  For 
to  say  truth,  gladness  and  joy  are  much  more  loquacious 
than  the  sleeplessness  .so  often  feigned  in  their  comedies, 
rousing  up  and  still  refreshing  itself  with  new  relations ; 
and  therefore  they  are  prone  to  fall  into  such  stories  upon 
the  least  occasion  given.  For  not  only 

Where  the  body  most  is  pained, 

There  the  patient  lays  his  hand  ; 

but  pleasure  also  has  a voice  within  itself,  and  leads  the 
tongue  about  to  be  a support  to  the  memory.  So  lovers 
spend  the  greatest  part  of  their  time  in  songs  and  sonnets, 
to  refresh  their  memories  with  the  representations  of  their 
mistresses  ; concerning  which  amours  of  theirs,  when  com- 
panions are  wanting,  they  frequently  discourse  with  things 
that  are  void  of  life.  Thus, 

O dearest  bed,  whereon  we  wont  to  rest ; 

and  again, 

O blessed  lamp  divine,  — for  surely  thee 
Bacchis  believes  some  mighty  Deity,  — 

Surely  the  greatest  of  the  Gods  thou  art, 

If  she  so  wills  who  does  possess  my  heart. 

And  indeed  it  may  well  be  said,  that  a loose-tongued  fel- 
low is  no  more,  in  respect  of  his  discourse,  than  a white 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


251 


line  struck  with  chalk  upon  white  marble.  For  in  regard 
there  are  several  subjects  of  discourse,  and  many  men  are 
more  subject  to  some  than  to  others,  it  behooves  every 
one  to  be  on  his  guard  especially  against  these,  and  to  sup- 
press them  in  such  a manner  that  the  delight  which  they 
take  therein  may  not  decoy  them  into  their  beloved  pro- 
lixity and  profuseness  of  words.  The  same  inclination  to 
overshoot  themselves  in  prattling  appears  in  such  as  are 
prone  to  that  kind  of  discourses  wherein  they  suppose 
themselves  to  excel  others,  either  in  habit  or  experience. 
For  such  a one,  being  as  well  a lover  of  himself  as  am- 
bitious of  glory, 

The  chiefest  part  of  all  the  day  doth  spend, 

Himself  to  pass  and  others  to  transcend.* 

For  example,  he  that  reads  much  endeavors  to  excel  in 
history ; the  grammarian,  in  the  artificial  couching  of 
words ; the  traveller  is  full  of  his  geography.  But  all 
these  surplusages  are  to  be  avoided  with  great  caution, 
lest  men,  intoxicated  therewith,  grow  fond  of  their  old  in- 
firmities, and  return  to  their  former  freaks,  like  beasts  that 
cannot  be  driven  from  their  haunts.  Cyrus  therefore,  yet 
a young  stripling,  was  most  worthy  of  admiration,  who 
would  never  challenge  his  equals  and  playfellows  to  any 
exercise  wherein  he  excelled,  but  to  such  only  wherein  he 
knew  himself  to  be  inferior  ; unwilling  that  they  should 
fret  for  the  loss  of  the  prize  which  he  was  sure  to  win, 
and  loath  to  lose  what  he  could  himself  gain  from  the 
others’  better  skill. 

On  the  other  side,  the  profuse  talker  is  of  such  a dispo- 
sition that,  if  any  discourse  happen  from  which  he  might 
be  able  to  learn  something  and  inform  his  ignorance,  that 
he  refuses  and  rejects,  nor  can  you  hire  him  even  to  hold 
his  tongue  ; but  after  his  rolling  and  restless  fancy  has 
mustered  up  some  few  obsolete  and  all-to-be-tattered  rhap- 

* From  the  Antiope  of  Euripides,  Frag.  183. 


252 


OF  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


soclies  to  supply  his  vanity,  out  he  flings  them,  as  if  he 
were  master  of  all  the  knowledge  in  the  world.  Just  like 
one  amongst  us  who,  having  read  two  or  three  of  Ephorus’s 
books,  tired  all  men’s  ears,  and  spoiled  and  brake  up  all 
the  feasts  and  societies  wherever  he  came,  with  his  con- 
tinual relations  of  the  battle  of  Leuctra  and  the  conse- 
quences of  it ; by  which  means  he  got  himself  a nickname, 
and  every  one  called  him  Epaminondas. 

23.  But  this  is  one  of  the  least  inconveniences  of  this 
infirmity  ; and  indeed  we  ought  to  make  it  one  step  towards 
the  cure,  to  turn  this  violent  vein  of  twattling  upon  such 
subjects  as  those.  For  such  a loquacity  is  less  a nuisance 
when  it  superabounds  in  what  belongs  to  humane  litera- 
ture. It  would  be  well  also  that  the  sort  of  people  who 
are  addicted  to  this  vice  should  accustom  themselves  to 
write  upon  some  subject  or  other,  and  to  dispute  of  certain 
questions  apart.  For  Antipater  the  Stoic,  as  we  may 
probably  conjecture,  either  not  being  able  or  else  unwilling 
to  come  into  dispute  with  Carneades,  vehemently  inveigh- 
ing against  the  Stoics,  declined  to  meet  him  fairly  in  the 
schools,  yet  would  be  always  writing  answers  against  him ; 
and  because  he  filled  whole  volumes  full  of  contradictory 
arguments,  and  still  opposed  him  with  assertions  that  only 
made  a noise,  he  was  called  Calamoboas,  as  one  that  made 
a great  clamor  with  his  pen  to  no  purpose.  So  it  is  very 
probable  that  such  fighting  with  their  own  shadows,  and 
exclaiming  one  against  another  apart  by  themselves,  driving 
and  restraining  them  from  the  multitude,  would  render 
them  gradually  more  tolerable  and  sociable  in  civil  com- 
pany ; as  curs,  after  they  have  once  discharged  their  fury 
upon  sticks  and  stones,  become  less  fierce  towards  men. 
It  would  be  always  of  great  importance  to  them  to  con- 
verse with  their  superiors  and  elders ; for  that  the  awful 
reverence  and  respect  Avliich  they  bear  to  their  dignity  and 
gravity  may  accustom  them  in  time  to  silence. 


OP  GARRULITY,  OR  TALKATIVENESS. 


253 


And  it  would  be  evermore  expedient  to  intermix  and  in- 
volve with  these  exercises  this  manner  of  ratiocination 
with  ourselves,  before  we  speak,  and  at  the  very  moment 
that  the  words  are  ready  to  break  out  of  our  mouths : 
What  is  this  which  I would  say,  that  presses  so  hard  to  be 
gone  ? For  what  reason  would  this  tongue  of  mine  so  fain 
he  talking'?  What  good  shall  I get  by  speaking?  What 
mischief  shall  I incur  by  holding  my  peace?  For  we  are 
not  to  ease  and  discharge  ourselves  of  our  words,  as  if  they 
were  a heavy  burthen  that  overloaded  us  ; for  speech  re- 
mains as  well  when  uttered  as  before ; but  men  either 
speak  in  behalf  of  themselves  when  some  necessity  com- 
pels them,  or  for  the  benefit  of  those  that  hear  them,  or 
else  to  recreate  one  another  with  the  delights  of  converse, 
on  purpose  to  mitigate  and  render  more  savory,  as  with 
salt,  the  toils  of  our  daily  employments.  But  if  there  be 
nothing  profitable  in  speaking,  nothing  necessary  to  them 
that  hear  what  is  said,  nothing  of  satisfaction  or  delight, 
what  need  is  there  it  should  be  spoken?  For  words  may 
be  in  vain  and  to  no  purpose,  as  well  as  deeds.  But  after 
and  above  all  that  has  been  said,  we  ought  always  to  bear 
in  remembrance,  and  always  to  have  at  our  tongue’s  end, 
that  saying  of  Simonides,  that  he  had  often  repented  him 
of  talking,  but  never  of  keeping  silent.  Then  as  for  ex- 
ercise, we  must  believe  it  to  be  a matter  of  great  impor- 
tance, as  being  that  which  overcomes  and  masters  all  things  ; 
considering  Avhat  watchful  care  and  even  toil  and  labor 
men  will  undergo  to  get  rid  of  an  old  cough  or  hiccough. 
But  silence  and  taciturnity  not  only  never  cause  a dry 
throat,  as  Hippocrates  observes,  but  are  altogether  free 
from  pain  and  sorrow. 


OF  LOVE. 


FLA VI ANUS  AND  AUTOBULUS,  SONS  OF  PLUTAECH. 

1.  Flavianus.  Was  it  not  in  Helicon,  dear  Autobulus, 
that  those  discourses  were  held  concerning  Love,  which  — 
whether  thou  hast  already  set  them  down  in  writing,  or 
still  earnest  them  in  thy  memory,  as  having  often  desired 
them  from  thy  father  — we  are  now  in  expectation  that 
thou  wilt  recite  to  us,  at  our  importunate  request  ? 

Autobulus.  I was  in  Helicon,  dear  Flavianus,  among 
the  Muses,  at  what  time  the  Thespians  performed  the 
Erotic  solemnities.  For  they  celebrate  every  four  years 
certain  games  and  festivals  very  magnificent  and  splendid 
in  honor  of  Cupid,  as  well  as  of  the  Muses. 

Flav.  Know’st  thou  then  what  it  is  we  all  desire  at  thy 
hands,  as  many  as  are  gathered  here  together  to  be  thy 
auditors  ? 

Autob.  No;  but  I shall  know,  when  I am  once  by  you 
informed. 

Flav.  Curtail,  we  beseech  ye,  your  discourse  at  present, 
forbearing  the  descriptions  of  meadows  and  shades,  to- 
gether with  the  crawling  ivy,  and  whatever  else  poets  are 
so  studious  to  add  to  their  descriptions,  imitating  with  more 
curiosity  than  grace  Plato’s  Ilissus,*  with  the  chaste  tree 
and  the  gentle  rising  hillock  covered  with  green  grass. 

Autob.  What  needed  my  relation,  dearest  Flavianus, 
such  a proem  as  this?  The  occasion  that  gave  birth  to 

* See  Plato’s  Pliaedrus,  p.  230  B. 


OF  LOVE. 


255 


these  discourses  of  itself  (as  it  were)  asks  for  a chorus,  and 
it  requires  a theatre ; otherwise  there  is  nothing  wanting 
of  a complete  drama.  Therefore  let  us  only  beseech 
Memory,  the  mother  of  the  Muses,  to  be  propitious  and 
assist  us  in  the  discovery  of  the  fable. 

2.  For  a long  time  before  we  were  born,  when  our 
father  had  newly  espoused  our  mother,  an  unlucky  vari- 
ance that  fell  out  between  their  parents  caused  him  to  take 
a journey  to  Thespiae,  with  an  intention  to  sacrifice  to  the 
God  of  Love ; and  he  carried  my  mother  also  to  the  feast 
(for  that  it  properly  belonged  to  her  as  well  to  make  the 
feast  as  to  perform  the  sacrifice),  besides  several  of  his 
familiar  acquaintance  that  accompanied  him  from  his 
house.  Now  being  arrived  at  Thespiae,  he  met  with 
Daphnaeus,  the  son  of  Archidamus,  avIio  was  in  love  with 
Lysandra,  the  daughter  of  Simon,  and  who  was,  above  all 
her  suitors,  chiefly  the  most  welcome  and  acceptable  to  her. 
There  he  also  found  Soclarus,  the  son'of  Aristion,  who  was 
come  from  Tithorea ; together  with  Protogenes  of  Tarsus 
and  Zeuxippus  the  Lacedaemonian,  by  whom  he  had  been 
several  times  kindly  entertained ; and  he  said  that  most  of 
the  chief  men  among  the  Boeotians  were  there  also.  Thus 
they  stayed  for  two  or  three  days  in  the  city,  entertaining 
each  other  with  learned  discourses,  one  while  in  the  com- 
mon wrestling-places,  sometimes  in  the  theatres,  still  keep- 
ing company  together.  After  that,  avoiding  the  trouble- 
some contest  of  the  harpers  and  musicians,  — it  being 
found  out  that  all  had  been  settled  beforehand  by  favor  and 
intrigue,  — the  greatest  part  brake  company,  as  if  they 
had  been  discamping  out  of  an  enemy’s  country,  retired  to 
Helicon,  and  took  up  their  lodgings  among  the  Muses. 
Thither  the  next  morning  came  to  them  Anthemion  and 
Pisias,  persons  of  eminent  nobility,  and  both  allied  to 
Baccho,  surnamed  the  Fair,  and  in  some  way  at  difference 
one  with  another,  by  reason  of  the  affection  which  they 


256 


OF  LOVE. 


severally  bore  to  him.  For  there  was  at  Thespiae,  Is- 
menodora,  of  an  illustrious  family,  and  Avealthy  withal ; 
and  indeed  in  all  other  respects  discreet  and  modest;  and 
moreover  she  had  continued  a AvidoAV  no  little  time,  Avithout 
spot  or  stain  to  her  reputation,  though  both  young  and 
beautiful. 

Noav  it  happened  that  while  this  brisk  AvidoAV  was  en- 
deavoring to  make  up  a match  betAveen  Baccho,  Avho  Avas 
the  son  of  her  intimate  friend,  and  a certain  just  blooming 
virgin  nearly  allied  to  herself,  by  often  talking  Avith  the 
young  gentleman  and  much  frequenting  his  company,  she 
began  to  feel  some  sparks  of  kindness  kindled  for  him  in 
her  own  breast.  Aftenvards  hearing  him  highly  com- 
mended by  others,  and  speaking  many  things  in  his  praise 
herself,  and  finding  him  beloved  by  a great  number  of  per- 
sons of  the  best  rank,  by  degrees  she  fell  desperately  in 
love  Avith  the  vouth ; nevertheless  Avith  a resolution  to  do 
nothing  unbeseeming  her  birth  and  quality,  but  after 
public  Avedlock  to  acknowledge  him  as  her  husband.  But 
as  the  match  seemed  impracticable  by  reason  of  the  distance 
of  their  years,  so  the  mother  of  the  young  man  suspected 
the  nobility  and  grandeur  of  her  house  not  to  be  correspon- 
dent to  her  son's  condition,  which  rendered  him  incapable 
of  such  a preferment.  Moreover,  his  companions  that 
were  Avont  to  go  a hunting  Avitli  him,  weighing  the  differ- 
ence between  his  and  the  age  of  Ismenodora,  filled  his 
head  with  several  scruples,  and  scaring  him  Avith  continual 
frumps  and  scoffs,  more  effectually  hindered  the  match 
than  they  who  labored  industriously  and  seriously  to  pre- 
vent it.  And  the  young  man  himself  felt  ashamed  at  his 
age  to  be  married  to  a AvidoAV.  At  last,  liOAvever,  shaking 
off  all  others,  he  applies  himself  to  Pisias  and  Anthemion 
for  their  advice  in  a matter  of  so  great  concernment.  The 
elder  of  these  tAvo,  Anthemion,  Avas  his  cousin,  and  Pisias 
the  most  earnest  of  his  loATers.  The  latter  therefore  with- 


OF  LOVE. 


257 


stood  the  match  with  all  his  might,  and  upbraided  Anthe- 
mion,  as  one  that  went  about  to  betray  the  young  man  to 
Ismenodora.  On  the  other  side,  Anthemion  told  Pisias, 
that  he  did  not  well  to  do  as  he  did,  having  the  reputation 
of  a Avorthy  honest  man,  to  imitate  those  lewd  lovers,  and 
endeavor  to  deprive  his  friend  of  a noble  house,  a rich 
wife,  and  other  great  conveniences,  that  he  might  have  the 
pleasure  to  see  him  frequently  naked  in  the  wrestling- 
places,  fresh  and  smooth,  and  a stranger  to  female  sports. 

3.  However,  to  prevent  the  growing  of  any  quarrel  be- 
tween them,  through  long  and  passionate  disputes,  they 
chose  for  umpires  of  the  controversy  my  father  and  those 
friends  that  were  with  him.  And  beside  them,  as  if  they 
had  been  chosen  on  purpose,  Daphnaeus  pleaded  for  Pisias, 
and  for  Anthemion,  Protogenes  ; who  bitterly  inveighing 
against  Ismenodora,  O Hercules,  cried  Daphnaeus,  what 
may  we  not  expect,  when  Protogenes  bids  defiance  to  love  ? 
he  that  all  along  has  spent  as  well  the  serious  as  sportive 
hours  of  his  life  both  in  love  and  for  love,  without  regard 
either  to  learning  or  his  country  ; nor  like  to  Laius,  who  was 
but  five  days’  journey  distant  from  home,  — for  his  was  a 
slow  sort  of  love  upon  the  dry  land,  — whereas  your  Cupid, 
Protogenes, 

With  nimble  wings  displayed, 

crossed  the  seas  from  Cilicia  to  Athens,  merely  to  visit  and 
straggle  up  and  down  with  lovely  boys.  And  indeed,  such 
at  first  was  the  true  cause  of  Protogenes’s  peregrination. 

4.  At  which  the  company  falling  into  a loud  laughter  ; 
Plow ! said  Protogenes,  can  you  believe  that  I at  this  time 
Avage  Avar  against  love,  and  that  I do  not  rather  fight  for 
love  against  intemperate  desire  and  lascivious  Avantonness, 
Avhich,  under  the  shelter  of  the  most  honest  and  fairest 
names  that  are,  let  themselves  loose  into  the  most  shame- 
ful acts  of  inordinate  lust  and  concupiscence  ? Then  Daph- 
naeus : Do  ye  number  wedlock  and  the  conjunction  of  man 

17 


VOL.  IV. 


258 


OF  LOVE. 


and  wife  (than  which  there  is  no  tie  more  sacred  in  this 
life)  among  the  vile  and  dishonest  actions  of  the  world  1 
Why  truly,  replied  Protogenes,  this  same  bond  of  wedlock, 
as  being  necessary  for  generation,  is  not  undeservedly  per- 
haps extolled  by  our  grave  politicians  and  lawgivers,  and 
by  them  recommended  to  the  multitude.  But  I must  tell 
ye,  if  you  mean  true  love,  there  is  not  a farthing’s  worth  of 
it  to  be  found  among  women.  Nor  do  I believe  that  either 
you  yourselves,  or  any  other  that  dote  so  much  as  you  pre- 
tend to  do  upon  women  and  virgins,  love  them  any  other- 
wise than  as  flies  love  milk,  or  bees  love  honey-combs  ; or 
as  cooks  and  butchers  fat  up  calves  and  poultry  in  the  dark, 
not  out  of  any  extraordinary  affection  which  they  bear  to 
these  creatures,  but  for  the  gain  which  they  make  of  them. 
But  as  Nature  prompts  all  men  to  the  use  of  bread  and 
meat  with  moderation  and  so  far  as  may  suffice  the  appe- 
tite, the  excess  of  which  becomes  a vice,  under  the  name 
of  gluttony  or  gormandizing  ; thus  it  is  natural  for  men  and 
women  to  desire  the  pleasures  of  mutual  enjoyment,  but  as 
for  that  impetuous  concupiscence  that  hurries  the  greatest 
part  of  mankind  with  so  much  strength  and  violence,  it  is 
not  properly  called  love.  For  love  that  is  bred  in  a young 
and  truly  generous  heart,  by  means  of  friendship,  terminates 
in  virtue  ; whereas  all  our  desires  towards  women,  let  them 
be  taken  in  the  best  sense  he  can,  serve  us  only  to  reap  the 
fruit  of  pleasure,  and  to  assist  us  in  the  fruition  of  youth 
and  beauty.  As  Aristippus  testified  to  one  that  would  have 
put  him  out  of  conceit  with  Lais,  for  that,  as  he  said,  she 
did  not  truly  love  him ; no  more,  said  he,  am  I beloved  by 
pure  wine  or  good  fish,  and  yet  I willingly  make  use  of 
both.  For  the  end  of  desire  is  pleasure  and  enjoyment. 
But  love,  having  once  lost  the  hopes  of  friendship,  will 
neither  tarry,  nor  cherish  for  beauty’s  sake  that  which  is 
irksome,  though  never  so  gaudy  in  the  flower  of  youth,  if 
it  bring  not  forth  the  fruit  of  a disposition  propense  to 


OF  LOVE. 


259 


friendship  and  virtue.  And  therefore  it  is  that  you  hear  a 
certain  husband  in  a tragedy  thus  talking,  to  his  wife  : 

Tliou  hat’st  me  ? True ; — and  I thy  proud  disdain 
Will  brook  with  patience,  careless  of  the  pain, 

So  long  as  my  dishonor  gives  me  gain. 

Now  I take  him  to  be  not  at  all  a more  amorous  man  than 
this,  that  can  endure,  for  the  sake  of  his  carnal  pleasure,  and 
not  for  gain,  the  plague  of  a curst  ill-natured  shrew,  that  is 
always  scolding.  The  first  of  which  love-martyrs  Philip- 
pides  the  comedian  thus  derided  in  the  person  of  Stratocles 
the  rhetorician: 

She  lowers  and  growls  and  turns  her  tail 
With  fury  so  unkind, 

The  wittol  blest  would  think  himself, 

To  kiss  her  coif  behind. 

Now  if  this  be  the  passion  you  talk  of  which  is  to  be  called 
Love,  it  is  a spurious  and  effeminate  love  that  sends  us  to 
the  women’s  chambers,  as  it  were  to  the  Cynosarges  at 
Athens.  Or  rather,  as  they  say  there  is  a sort  of  generous 
and  true  bred  mountain  eagle,  which  Homer  calls  the  black 
eagle  and  eagle  of  prey,  and  then  again  there  is  another 
sort  of  bastard  eagle,  that  takes  fish  and  birds  that  are  lazy 
and  slow  of  flight,  and  wanting  food  makes  a shrill  and 
mournful  noise  for  hunger ; thus  the  true  genuine  love  is 
that  of  boys,  not  flaming  with  concupiscence,  as  according 
to  Anacreon  the  love  of  maids  and  virgins  does,  neither 
besmeared  with  odoriferous  ointments,  nor  alluring  with 
smiles  and  rolling  glances  ; but  you  shall  find  him  plain 
and  simple  and  undebauched  with  pleasures  in  the  schools 
of  the  philosophers,  or  in  the  wrestling-lists  and  places  of 
public  exercise,  smart  and  generous  in  the  chase  of  youth, 
and  exhorting  to  virtue  all  that  he  finds  to  be  fit  objects  of 
his  diligence  ; whereas  that  other  love,  nice  and  effeminate, 
and  always  nestling  in  the  bosoms  and  beds  of  women,  pur- 
suing soft  pleasures,  and  wasted  with  unmanly  delights, 
that  have  no  gust  of  friendship  or  heavenly  ravishment  of 


260 


OF  LOVE. 


mind,  is  to  be  despised  and  rejected  of  all  mankind.  This 
indeed  Solon  did,  when  he  forbade  slaves  and  servants  the 
use  of  male  familiarity  and  of  dry  ointment,  but  granted 
them  the  liberty  to  accompany  with  women ; as  looking 
upon  friendship  to  be  laudable  and  civil,  but  pleasure  to 
be  a vulgar  thing  and  unbecoming  a man  born  free. 
Whence  it  appears  that  to  make  love  to  a slave  boy  is 
ignoble  and  unworthy  of  a freeman  ; for  this  is  mere  mis- 
chievous love  of  copulation,  like  the  affection  toward 
women. 

5.  Now  while  Protogenes  was  desirous  to  say  more, 
Daphnaeus  interrupting  him  said : Truly  you  have  done 
well  to  put  us  in  mind  of  Solon,  and  we  may  make  use  of 
him  as  the  judge  of  a person  addicted  to  love.  Hear  what 
he  says : 

Then  dote  upon  the  flowery  youth  of  boys. 

Their  fragrant  breath  admiring  and  soft  thighs. 

Add  to  this  of  Solon  that  other  of  Aeschylus : 

Ungrateful,  for  the  kisses  of  my  lips. 

Not  to  revere  the  glory  of  my  hips. 

These  are  proper  judges  of  love  ; but  others  there  are  who 
deride  all  those  that  would  have  lovers  inspect  thighs  and 
haunches,  like  so  many  sacrificers  and  diviners.  And  for 
my  part  I draw  from  hence  a very  strong  argument  on  the 
behalf  of  the  women.  For  if  male  converse,  which  is 
altogether  against  nature,  neither  extinguishes  nor  is  any 
ways  noxious  to  amorous  affection,  much  more  probable  is  it 
that  the  love  of  women,  which  is  according  to  nature,  should 
reach  to  the  consummation  of  friendship,  by  virtue  of  that 
obsequious  beauty  which  attends  it.  For  I must  tell  you, 
Protogenes,  the  submission  of  the  female  to  the  male  was 
by  the  ancients  expressed  by  the  word  j (dgig  ( grace  or  favor). 
For  which  reason  Pindar  observes  that  Vulcan  was  by 
Juno  brought  forth  without  the  graces ; and  Sappho  tells 
a young  virgin,  not  yet  ripe  for  matrimony, 


OF  LOVE. 


261 


A little  child  thou  seem’st,  and  without  grace. 

And  a certain  person  puts  the  question  to  Hercules, 

By  force  or  liy  persuasion  did  the  maid 
Her  favors  yield  1 

W 

But  the  submission  of  males  to  males,  whether  it  be  by 
compulsion  and  strength,  like  a violent  and  forcible  rape, 
or  whether  it  be  voluntary,  — men  suffering  themselves 
weakly  and  effeminately  to  be  covered  by  each  other,  like 
four-footed  beasts,  and  counterfeiting  the  act  of  generation 
in  defiance  of  nature  (as  Plato  says),  — is  void  of  all  grace, 
brutish,  and  contrary  to  the  end  of  venereal  pleasure. 
Wherefore  I am  apt  to  believe  that  Solon  wrote  those  lines 
when  he  was  young,  brisk,  and  full  of  seed  (as  Plato 
phrases  it),  but  when  he  was  grown  into  years,  he  sang 
another  note  : 

The  sports  of  Venus,  now,  are  my  delight. 

Or  else  with  Bacchus  to  carouse  ; 

At  other  times  the  Muses’  charms  invite  ; 

These  are  the  chiefest  pleasures  mankind  knows ; — 

as  if  he  had  altered  his  course  of  life,  and  retired  from  the 
storms  and  tempests  of  pederastic  fury  into  the  calms  of 
wedlock  and  philosophy.  Now  then,  Protogenes,  let  us 
but  consider  the  truth  of  the  matter,  we  shall  find  the  pas- 
sion of  lovers  to  be  the  same,  whether  it  be  for  boys  or  for 
women  ; or  if,  out  of  a contentious  humor,  you  will  dis- 
tinguish them,  you  shall  find  that  this  affection  for  boys 
does  not  keep  itself  within  bounds,  but  like  a late-born 
issue,  clandestinely  brought  forth  in  the  dark  and  out  of 
season,  it  strives  to  expel  the  truly  genuine  and  legitimate 
love,  which  is  much  the  more  ancient.  For  give  me  leave 
to  tell  ye,  my  dear  friend,  it  is  but  (as  it  were)  of  yester- 
terday’s  standing  or  of  the  day  before  — since  young  boys 
began  to  strip  and  show  themselves  naked  in  the  public 
places  of  exercise  — that  this  frenzy,  getting  in  by  degrees 
and  crowding  in  there,  afterwards  by  little  and  little  be- 


262 


OF  LOVE. 


came  better  fledged  and  gathered  strength  of  wings  in  the 
wrestling-  rings,  so  that  now  the  insolence  of  it  can  no 
longer  be  so  restrained  but  that  still  it  will  be  affronting  and 
adulterating  conjugal  love,  which  is  the  coadjutrix  of  Na- 
ture and  helps  to  immortalize  mortal  mankind,  raising  up 
and  immediately  restoring  again  by  generation  our  human 
nature  when  it  has  been  extinguished  by  death.  But  this 
same  Protogenes  denies  there  is  any  pleasure  in  male  con- 
cupiscence, for  he  is  ashamed  and  afraid  to  acknowledge 
it.  Therefore  there  must  be  some  decent  pretence  for  the 
feeling  and  handling  these  adult  and  lovely  youths.  And 
truly  he  has  found  out  a very  clever  excuse,  alleging  it  to 
be  for  the  sake  of  friendship  and  virtue.  Therefore  he 
rolls  himself  in  the  dust,  washes  with  cold  water,  erects  his 
brows,  and  outwardly  pretends  to  philosophy  and  chastity, 
for  fear  of  the  law ; but  when  darkness  covers  the  earth, 
and  all  people  have  betaken  themselves  to  their  rest, 

Sweet  the  ripe  fruit  he  finds,  its  keeper  gone. 

Now  if  it  be  as  Protogenes  says,  that  no  carnal  conjunction 
attends  these  masculine  familiarities,  how  can  it  be  love, 
when  Venus  is  absent ; seeing  that  of  all  the  Goddesses, 
she  it  is  that  Cupid  is  bound  to  obey  and  attend,  and  that 
he  has  no  honor  or  power  but  what  she  confers  upon  him'? 
But  if  there  be  a sort  of  love  without  Venus,  as  a man 
may  be  drunk  without  wine  by  drinking  the  decoctions  of 
figs  or  barley,  the  disturbance  of  such  a love  must  prove 
fruitless  and  to  no  end,  and  consequently  loathsome  and 
offensive. 

6.  These  things  thus  said,  it  was  apparent  that  Pisias 
found  himself  touched  to  the  quick,  and  much  concerned 
for  what  Daphnaeus  had  spoken.  But  after  he  had  been 
silent  awhile,  O Hercules,  said  he,  what  a strange  impu- 
dence and  levity  is  this  in  men,  to  acknowledge  themselves 
tied  to  women  by  their  generating  parts,  like  dogs  to 


OF  LOVE. 


263 


bitches  ; by  this  means  expelling  and  banishing  love  from 
the  places  of  exercise,  from  the  public  porticos,  and  from 
conversing  under  the  open  sky  and  sunshine,  to  the  stews, 
poniards,  philters,  and  sorceries  of  lascivious  women;  for 
it  is  not  convenient  for  the  chaste  either  to  love  or  to 
be  beloved.  At  which  words,  as  my  father  told  me,  he 
took  Protogenes  by  the  hand,  and  repeated  to  him  these 
verses : 

Words  such  as  these  the  Argive  courage  warm; 

And  the  affronted  youth  provoke  to  arm. 

For  surely  (he  added)  the  exorbitant  language  of  Pisias 
gives  us  good  reason  to  take  Daphnaeus’s  part,  while  he 
introduces  over  the  head  of  wedlock  a society  void  of  love, 
and  utterly  a stranger  to  that  same  friendship  which 
descends  and  is  inspired  from  above ; which,  if  real  affec- 
tion and  submission  be  wanting,  can  hardly  be  restrained 
by  all  the  curbs  and  yokes  of  shame  and  fear.  Then 
Pisias:  For  my  part,  said  he,  I give  little  heed  to  this 
argument ; for  as  for  Daphnaeus,  I find  him  in  the  same 
condition  with  brass.  For  as  brass  is  not  so  easily  melted 
by  the  fire  as  by  the  force  of  the  same  melted  and  liquid 
metal  being  poured  upon  it,  which  mollifies  both  alike,  and 
causes  them  to  run  and  mix  together  ; so  it  is  not  the  beauty 
of  Lysandra  that  inflames  him,  but  the  conversing  along 
with  one  that  is  already  inflamed  and  full  of  fire,  that  sets 
him  all  in  a flame  himself ; and  it  is  apparent  that,  unless 
he  makes  haste  to  us,  he  will  suddenly  be  melted  with  his 
own  heat.  But  I perceive,  said  he,  the  same  thing  will 
befall  me  which  Anthemion  has  most  reason  to  desire,  that 
I too  shall  offend  the  judges ; and  therefore  I shall  say 
no  more.  Then  Anthemion:  ’Tis  very  true  indeed,  your 
fear  is  just;  for  you  ought  at  the  first  to  have  spoken  to 
the  purpose,  and  what  was  proper  to  the  argument  in 
hand. 

7.  To  this  Pisias  replied  : 1 am  willing  enough  that 


264 


OF  LOVE. 


every  woman  should  have  her  lover;  but  withal,  it  very 
much  concerns  Baccho  to  have  a care  how  he  entangles 
himself  in  Ismenodora’s  wealth ; lest,  while  we  match  him 
with  so  much  grandeur  and  magnificence,  we  consume  him 
to  nothing,  like  tin  among  brass.  For  I must  tell  you,  it 
would  be  a hard  matter  for  so  young  a stripling  as  he  is, 
though  he  should  marry  a plain  and  ordinary  Avoman,  to 
keep  the  upper  hand,  like  Avine  mixed  Avith  Avater.  But 
we  see  her  already  design  superiority  and  command ; else 
Avhy  should  she  refuse  so  many  suitors  of  great  wealth  and 
noble  extraction  that  court  her  daily,  to  avoo  herself  a mere 
hoy,  that  has  but  neAA'ly  assumed  the  robes  of  manhood 
and  is  more  fit  to  go  to  school  than  to  marry,  xlnd  there- 
fore those  husbands  that  are  wise,  without  any  admonition, 
out  of  their  OAvn  foresight,  clip  their  Avives’  Avings  them- 
selves ; that  is,  they  prune  away  their  riches,  that  prompt 
them  to  luxury  and  vanity,  and  render  them  inconstant  and 
foolish.  For  many  times,  by  the  help  of  these  Avings,  they 
soar  out  of  their  husbands’  reach  and  fly  quite  aAvay ; or  if 
they  stay  at  home,  better  it  were  for  a man  to  be  chained 
Avith  fetters  of  gold,  as  they  chain  their  prisoners  in  Ethi- 
opia, than  to  be  tied  to  the  riches  of  a Avife. 

8.  HoAvever,  said  Protogenes,  he  has  not  hinted  to  us  in 
the  least  the  hazard  Ave  run  of  inverting  absurdly  and 
ridiculously  the  counsel  of  Hesiod,  Avhose  words  are 
these : 

Take  to  thy  home  a woman  for  thy  bride 
When  in  the  ripeness  of  thy  manhood’s  pride  : 

Thrice  ten  thy  sum  of  years,  the  nuptial  prime ; 

Nor  far  fall  short,  nor  far  exceed  the  time. 

Four  years  the  ripening  virgin  should  consume, 

And  wed  the  fifth  of  her  expanded  bloom.* 

Quite  contrary  to  this  precept,  Ave  are  going  about  to 
couple  a young  lad,  scarce  ripe  for  marriage,  to  a lady 
much  older  than  himself ; like  those  that  graft  the  tender 


* Hesiod,  AVorks  and  Days,  696,  translated  by  Elton. 


OF  LOVE. 


265 


scions  of  dates  and  fig-trees  upon  old  stocks,  to  make  them 
bear  fruit  before  their  season.  But  you  will  say,  The  woman 
is  in  love  up  to  the  ears,  and  burns  with  desire.  Who  is  he 
that  will  hinder  her  from  masquerading  before  his  doors, 
from  singing  her  amorous  lamentations  at  his  windows, 
from  adorning  his  statues  with  chaplets  and  garlands  of 
flowers,  from  duelling  her  rivals,  and  winning  him  from 
them  all  by  feats  of  arms'?  For  these  are  acts  that  demon- 
strate the  height  of  a passionate  affection.  Let  her  knit 
her  brows,  refrain  all  manner  of  pomp  of  luxury ; let  her 
put  on  a garb  and  countenance  suitable  to  such  a violent 
passion.  But  if  bashful  and  modest,  let  her  sit  at  home, 
expecting  her  suitors  and  gallants  to  come  and  court  her 
there.  But  who  would  not  fly  and  abominate  a woman 
that  professes  love,  and  loathe  the  idea  of  taking  one  to 
wife  who  makes  such  an  impudent  incontinence  the  first 
step  to  future  nuptials? 

9.  When  Protogenes  had  thus  concluded  ; Do  you  not 
see,  Anthemion,  saith  my  father,  how  they  again  make 
common  cause  against  us,  enforcing  us  still  to  continue  our 
discourse  of  nuptial  love,  who  deny  not  ourselves  to  be  the 
upholders  of  it,  nor  ever  avoided  the  being  one  of  that 
celebrated  chorus  ? Most  certainly  I do,  replied  Anthemion ; 
therefore  proceed  in  the  defence  of  conjugal  affection  ; and 
let  us  have  also  your  assistance  in  maintaining  the  argu- 
ment about  riches,  with  which  Pisias  chiefly  seems  to  scare 
us.  ’Tis  the  least  we  can  do,  said  my  father ; for  what  in 
the  world  will  not  be  made  a reproach  to  womankind, 
should  we  reject  Ismenodora  because  she  is  in  love  and 
wealthy  to  boot  ? Grant  that  she  is  imperious  as  well  as 
rich.  What  then  if  she  is  beautiful  and  young?  What 
if  she  is  somewhat  stately  and  haughty,  by  reason  of  her 
illustrious  birth?  There  is  nothing  of  crabbedness,  nothing 
scornful,  nothing  sour,  nothing  troublesome,  in  women 
truly  chaste  and  modest.  And  yet  their  very  chastity  gains 


266 


OF  LOVE. 


them  the  name  of  shrews  and  furies.  But  you  will  say, 
since  it  may  be  a man’s  misfortune  to  be  so  hampered, 
would  it  not  be  better  to  marry  some  Thracian  Abrotonon 
or  some  Milesian  Bacchis,  whom  he  can  get  in  the  market 
for  money  and  a handful  of  nuts  ? And  yet  we  have 
known  some  men  that  have  been  miserably  henpecked  by 
this  sort  of  underlings.  The  Samian  minstrels  and  morris- 
dancers,  such  as  were  Aristonica,  Oenanthe  with  her  tabor 
and  pipe,  and  Agathoclia,  insulted  over  the  diadems  of 
sovereigns.  The  Syrian  Semiramis  was  a poor  wench,  kept 
by  one  of  Ninus’s  slaves,  partly  as  his  servant,  partly  as  his 
harlot,  till  Ninus,  meeting  her  and  taking  a fancy  to  her, 
at  length  doted  upon  her  to  that  degree,  that  she  not  only 
governed  him  as  she  pleased  herself,  but  contemned  him ; 
so  that,  finding  she  had  got  the  absolute  mastery  over  him, 
she  became  so  bold  as  to  desire  him  to  do  her  the  favor  to 
see  her  sit  but  one  day  upon  his  throne,  with  the  royal 
diadem  upon  her  head,  dispatching  the  public  business. 
To  which  the  king  consenting,  and  giving  order  to  all  his 
officers  to  yield  her  the  same  obedience  as  to  himself,  at 
first  she  was  very  moderate  in  her  commands,  only  to  make 

(trial  of  the  guards  about  her ; but  when  she  saw  that  they 
obeyed  her  without  the  least  hesitation  or  murmuring,  she 
commanded  them  first  to  lay  hold  of  Ninus  himself,  then 
to  bind  him,  at  length  to  kill  him.  Which  being  done,  she 
took  the  government  upon  herself,  and  reigned  victoriously 
j over  all  Asia  with  great  splendor  and  renown. 

And  was  not  Belestiche  a barbarian  courtesan  bought 
in  the  market,  in  whose  honor  the  Alexandrians  erected 
temples  and  altars,  with  inscriptions  to  Venus  Belestiche 
as  marks  of  the  king’s  affection  to  her'?  And  as  for  her 
who  is  in  this  very  city  enshrined  in  the  same  temple  and 
honored  with  the  same  solemnities  as  Cupid,  and  whose 
gilded  statue  stands  among  kings  and  queens  at  Delphi, 
— I would  fain  know  what  dowry  of  hers  it  was  that 


OF  LOVE. 


267 


brought  so  many  lovers  into  such  subjection  to  her*  But 
as  those  great  men,  through  their  softness  and  effeminacy, 
became  a prey  to  those  women ; so  on  the  other  side,  men 
of  low  and  mean  condition,  having  married  women  both 
wealthy  and  of  splendid  extraction,  neither  lowered  sail 
nor  abated  any  thing  of  their  courage  and  greatness  of 
mind,  but  lived  together  with  their  wives,  always  honoring 
them,  and  keeping  that  superiority  over  them  which  was 
their  right  and  due.  But  he  that  contracts  and  reduces 
his  wife  within  a narrow  compass,  and  makes  her  less,  like 
a ring  that  is  too  big  for  the  finger,  to  prevent  her  from 
dropping  off,  is  like  to  those  that  dock  off  their  mares’ 
tails  and  clip  their  manes,  and  then  lead  them  to  a river  or 
pond ; for  it  is  reported,  that  when  those  mares  perceive 
themselves  so  ill  favoredly  shorn  and  disfigured,  they  lose 
their  natural  courage,  and  will  afterwards  suffer  themselves 
to  be  covered  by  asses. 

Now,  as  it  is  a base  thing  to  prefer  the  riches  of  a woman 
above  her  virtue  or  nobility,  so  is  it  as  great  folly  to  reject 
wealth,  when  accompanied  with  virtue  and  illustrious  par- 
entage. Antigonus  writing  to  a captain  of  his,  Avhom  he 
had  ordered  to  fortify  the  hill  Munychia,  bade  him  not  only 
make  the  collar  strong  but  keep  the  dog  lean ; intimating 
thereby  that  he  should  take  care  to  impoverish  the  Athe- 
nians. But  there  is  no  necessity  for  the  husband  of  a rich 
and  beautiful  wife  to  make  her  poor  or  to  disfigure  her ; 
but  by  self-control  and  prudence,  and  by  seeming  not  to 
admire  any  thing  extravagantly  in  her,  to  carry  himself  so 
that  she  may  perceive  that,  as  he  designs  not  to  be  a tyrant, 
so  she  must  not  expect  him  to  be  her  subject;  giving  his 
own  character  that  weight  in  the  balance,  that  the  scale 
may  be  turned  without  offence  and  for  the  good  of  both. 


* The  famous  courtesan  Phryne  was  a native  of  Thespiae,  where  her  marble 
statue  stood  in  the  temple  of  Love.  She  also  sent  her  own  statue  by  Praxiteles 
(who  was  her  lover)  to  the  temple  at  Delphi.  See  Pausanias,  X.  15,  1.  (G.) 


268 


OF  LOVE. 


Now,  as  for  Ismenodora,  her  years  are  fit  for  marriage,  and 
she  is  a woman  most  likely  to  bear  children ; nay,  I am 
informed  that  she  is  now  in  her  prime.  For,  continued  he, 
smiling  upon  Pisias,  she  is  not  elder  than  any  of  her 
rivals  ; neither  has  she  any  gray  hairs,  as  some  that  keep 
company  with  Baccho.  Now  if  those  people  think  their 
converse  with  the  young  gentleman  no  way  misbecoming 
their  gravity,  what  hinders  but  that  she  may  affect  and 
cherish  him  better  than  any  young  virgin  whatever'?  For 
I must  needs  say,  it  is  a difficult  matter  many  times  rightly 
to  mix  and  blend  the  tempers  of  young  people  ; in  regard 
it  will  require  some  time  to  make  them  sensible  of  several 
extravagancies  which  they  may  commit,  until  they  have 
laid  aside  the  pride  and  wantonness  which  is  incident  to 
youth.  For  many  a blustering  tempest  will  happen  be- 
tween the  new-married  couple  before  they  can  be  brought 

)to  endure  the  yoke,  and  draw  quietly  together,  more  espe- 
cially if  the  God  of  Love  appear  among  them ; and  youth- 
ful wantonness  — like  the  wind  in  the  absence  of  the  pilot 
— will  disturb  and  confuse  the  happiness  of  the  match, 
while  the  one  has  not  skill  to  govern  and  the  other  refuses 
to  be  governed.  Now  then,  if  it  be  so  that  nurses  are 
sought  for  to  look  after  sucking  infants,  and  schoolmasters 
to  teach  children ; if  masters  of  exercise  direct  young 
striplings,  and  the  lover  his  youth ; if  the  law  and  the 
captain-general  govern  those  that  are  of  age,  so  that  no 
man  can  be  said  to  be  at  his  own  liberty  to  do  what  he 
list ; where  is  the  absurdity  for  a wife,  that  has  wit  and 
discretion  and  the  advantage  of  years,  to  govern  and  direct 
the  life  and  conversation  of  a youthful  husband,  profitable 
to  him  as  exceeding  him  in  wisdom,  and  augmenting  the 
pleasure  of  her  society  by  the  sweetness  of  her  disposition 
and  reality  of  affection?  To  conclude,  said  he,  we  that 
are  Boeotians  ourselves  ought  to  reverence  Hercules,  and 
not  to  be  offended  with  those  that  marry  women  elder  than 


OF  LOVE. 


269 


themselves ; knowing,  as  we  do,  that  even  Hercules  him- 
self gave  his  own  wife  Megara,  being  then  three  and  thirty 
years  old,  to  Iolaus  his  son,  being  no  more  than  sixteen 
years  of  age. 

10.  While  they  were  in  the  midst  of  these  discourses, 
one  of  Pisias’s  companions  and  friends,  as  my  father  re- 
ported, came  galloping  towards  them  out  of  the  city,  whip 
and  spur,  to  bring  the  news  of  a strange  and  wonderful 
accident.  Por  Ismenodora,  believing  that  Baccho  no  "way 
disliked  being  married  to  her,  blit  only  was  deterred  by  the 
importunities  of  his  friends  that  dissuaded  him  from  the 
match,  resolved  not  to  let  the  young  man  escape  her.  To 
this  purpose  she  sent  for  certain  sparks  of  her  acquaint- 
ance, whom  she  knew  to  be  stout  and  resolute  young 
gentlemen,  and  some  women  that  were  well-wishers  to  her 
amours,  and  observing  the  hour  that  Baccho  was  wont  to 
pass  by  her  house  to  the  wrestling-place,  well  attended  and 
decently  garbed,  one  day  when  he  came  near  the  outermost 
door,  anointed  as  he  was  for  the  exercise,  with  two  or  three 
more  in  the  same  posture,  she  met  him  in  the  street,  and 
gently  twitched  his  upper  coat.  This  signal  being  given, 
her  friends  rushed  forth,  and  fairly  and  softly  catching 
him  up  in  his  mandilion  and  doublet,  in  a huddle  together 
they  carried  him  into  the  house,  and  locked  the  door  fast 
after  them.  Then  came  the  women  also,  and  pulling  off 
his  mandilion,  threw  about  him  a costly  nuptial  garment. 
The  servants  likewise,  running  up  and  down  from  one  place 
to  another,  adorned  the  posts  not  only  of  Ismenodora’s 
but  of  Baccho’s  house  with  olive  and  laurel  boughs  ; and 
a minstrel  likewise  was  ordered  to  pipe  along  the  street. 
The  story  thus  related,  the  Thespians  and  strangers  some 
of  them  laughed,  some  others  were  heinously  offended, 
and  did  what  they  could  to  exasperate  the  presidents  of 
the  public  exercises.  For  they  have  a great  command  over 
the  young  gentlemen,  and  keep  a severe  and  vigilant  eye 


270 


OF  LOVE. 


upon  all  their  actions.  And  now  there  was  not  a word 
said  of  the  sports  that  were  intended ; but  all  the  people, 
forsaking  the  theatre,  flocked  to  Ismenodora’s  house,  dis- 
coursing and  debating  the  matter  one  among  another. 

11.  But  when  Pisias’s  friend,  with  his  horse  all  foaming 
and  in  a sweat,  as  if  he  had  brought  intelligence  from  the 
army  in  time  of  war,  had  delivered  his  news,  being  hardly 
able  to  speak  for  want  of  breath,  and  concluding  his  story 
with  saying  that  Ismenodora  had  ravished  Baccho ; my 
father  told  me,  that  Zeuxippus  fell  a laughing,  and  as  he 
was  a great  admirer  of  that  poet,  repeated  the  verses  of 
Euripides : 

Wanton  witn  wealth,  fair  lady,  thou  hast  done 

No  more  than  nature  teaches  every  one. 

But  Pisias,  starting  up  out  of  his  seat,  made  a great  ex- 
clamation, crying  out : O ye  Gods ! when  will  ye  put  an 
end  to  this  licentiousness,  that  will  in  the  end  subvert  our 
city  1 For  now  all  things  are  running  into  disorder  through 
violation  of  the  laws ; but  perhaps  it  is  now  looked  upon 
as  a slight  matter  to  transgress  the  law  and  violate  justice, 
for  even  the  law  of  nature  is  transgressed  and  broken  by 
the  insolent  anarchy  of  the  female  sex.  Was  ever  there 
any  such  thing  committed  in  the  island  of  Lemnos  ? Let 
us  go,  said  he,  let  us  go  and  deliver  up  the  wrestling-place 
and  the  council  house  to  the  women,  if  the  city  be  so  effem- 
inate as  to  put  up  with  these  indignities.  Thus  Pisias 
brake  from  the  company  in  a fury ; nor  would  Protogenes 
leave  him,  partly  offended  at  what  had  happened,  and 
partly  to  assuage  and  mollify  his  friend.  But  Anthem  ion  : 
’Twas  a juvenile  bold  attempt,  said  he,  and  a truly  Lem- 
nian  one  — I venture  to  say  so  since  we  are  now  by  our- 
selves— of  a lady  warmly  in  love.  To  whom  Soclarus 
smiling : Do  you  then  believe,  said  he,  that  this  was  a real 
ravishment  and  force,  and  not  rather  a stratagem  of  the 
young  man’s  own  contrivance  (for  he  has  wit  at  will),  to 


OF  LOVE. 


271 


tlie  end  he  might  escape  out  of  the  hands  of  his  ruder  male 
lovers  into  the  embraces  of  a fair  and  rich  widow  1 Never 
say  so,  said  Anthemion,  nor  have  such  a suspicion  of  Bac- 
cho.  For  were  he  not  naturally,  as  he  is,  of  a plain  and 
open  temper,  he  would  still  never  have  concealed  this  thing 
from  me,  to  whom  he  has  always  imparted  his  secrets,  and 
whom  he  knew  to  be  always  a favorer  of  Ismcnodora’s  de- 
sign. But,  according  to  the  saying  of  Heraclitus,  it  is  a 
hard  matter  to  withstand  love,  not  anger ; for  whatever  love 
has  a desire  to,  it  will  purchase  with  the  hazard  of  life, 
fortune,  and  reputation.  Now  where  is  there  a more  mod- 
est and  orderly  woman  in  all  our  city  than  Ismenodora  ] 
When  did  you  ever  hear  an  ill  word  spoken  of  her  1 Or 
when  did  ever  any  thing  done  in  her  house  give  the  least 
suspicion  of  an  ill  act  ? Bather  we  may  say  that  she  seems 
to  be  inspired  beyond  other  women  with  something  above 
human  reason. 

12.  Then  Pemptides  smiling:  Truly,  said  he,  there  is  a 
certain  disease  of  the  body,  which  they  call  sacred  ; so  that 
it  is  no  wonder  if  some  men  give  the  appellation  of  sacred 
and  divine  to  the  most  raging  and  vehement  passion  of  the 
mind.  But  as  in  Egypt  once  I saw  two  neighbors  hotly 
contending  about  a serpent  which  crept  before  them  in  the 
road,  while  both  concluded  it  to  be  good  luck,  and  each 
assumed  the  happy  omen  to  himself ; so  seeing  some  of 
you  at  this  time  haling  love  into  the  chambers  of  men, 
others  into  the  cabinets  of  the  women,  as  a divinely  tran- 
scendent good,  I do  not  wonder,  since  it  is  a passion  so 
powerful  and  greatly  esteemed,  that  it  is  magnified  and 
held  in  greatest  veneration  by  those  that  have  most  reason 
to  clip  its  wings  and  expel  and  drive  it  from  them.  Hith- 
erto therefore  I have  been  silent,  perceiving  the  debate  to 
be  rather  about  a particular  concern,  than  any  thing  for 
the  public  good.  But  now  that  Pisias  is  gone,  I would 
willingly  understand  from  one  of  you,  upon  what  account 


272 


OF  LOVE. 


it  was  that  they  who  first  discoursed  of  love  were  so  fond 
to  deify  it. 

13.  So  soon  as  Pemptides  had  done,  and  my  father  was 
about  to  say  something  in  answer  to  his  question,  another 
messenger  came  from  the  city  inlsmenodora’s  name,  request- 
ing Anthemion  to  come  to  her ; for  that  the  tumult  increased, 
and  the  presidents  of  the  games  could  not  agree,  while  one 
was  of  opinion  that  Baccho  was  to  be  demanded  and  deliv- 
ered into  their  hands,  and  the  other  thought  it  an  imper- 
tinence to  meddle  with  that  which  nothing  concerned  them. 

Thus  Anthemion  being  gone,  my  father  addressed  him- 
self to  Pemptides  by  name,  and  so  entered  into  the  follow- 
ing discourse:  You  seem  to  me,  sir,  to  have  hit  upon  a 
very  strange  and  nice  point,  or  rather,  as  I may  so  say,  to 
have  endeavored  to  stir  things  which  are  not  to  be  moved, 
in  reference  to  the  opinion  which  we  have  of  the  Gods, 
while  you  demand  a reason  and  demonstration  of  every 
thing  in  particular.  For  it  is  sufficient  to  believe  accord- 
ing to  the  faith  of  our  forefathers  and  the  instructions  of 
the  country  where  we  have  been  bred  and  born,  than  which 
we  cannot  utter  or  invent  a more  certain  argument ; 

For  surely  all  the  wit  of  human  brain 

This  part  of  knowledge  never  could  attain  * 

For  this  is  a foundation  and  basis  common  to  all  piety  and 
religion ; of  which  if  the  steady  rule  and  decreed  maxims 
be  once  disordered  and  shaken,  all  the  rest  must  totter  and 
become  suspected.  And  no  question  but  you  have  heard 
what  a clamor  was  raised  against  Euripides  when  he  made 
this  beginning  of  his  Melanippe : 

Jupiter,  if  his  name  be  so  ; 

'Tis  only  by  hearsay  that  I know,  t 

But  when  he  exhibited  the  tragedy  a second  time,  he  seems 
to  have  had  such  a confidence  in  the  lofty  style  and  elabo- 
rate eloquence  of  his  work,  that  he  thus  altered  the  verse: 

* Eurip.  Bacchae,  203.  t Eurip.  Melanippe,  Frag.  483  and  484. 


OF  LOVE. 


273 


Jove,  for  we  own  he  has  received  that  name 
From  truth  alone,  and  not  from  common  fame.* 

What  difference  then  is  there  between  calling  in  question 
the  name  of  Jupiter  and  Minerva,  and  doubting  of  the 
name  of  Cupid  or  Love1?  For  it  is  not  of  late  that  Love 
has  challenged  altars  and  sacrifices,  neither  is  he  a foreigner 
started  up  out  of  any  barbarian  superstition,  as  were  the 
Attae  and  the  Adonii,  introduced  by  I know  not  what  sort 
of  hermaphrodites  and  idle  women.  Nor  has  he  clandes- 
tinely crept  into  honors  no  way  becoming  him,  to  avoid  the 
accusation  of  bastardy  and  being  unduly  enrolled  in  the 
catalogue  of  the  Gods.  But  when  you  hear  Empedocles 
thus  saying, 

And  friendship  too  (observe  my  song) 

Is  like  to  these,  both  broad  and  long  : 

But  this  thou  must  not  think  to  find 
With  eyes  of  body,  but  of  mind, 

you  ought  to  believe  all  this  to  be  said  of  Love.  For  Love 
is  no  more  visible  than  any  of  the  rest  of  the  ancient  Dei- 
ties, but  apprehended  only  by  opinion  and  belief ; for  every 
one  of  which  if  you  require  a reason  and  demonstrative 
argument,  by  enquiring  after  every  temple  and  making  a 
sophistical  doubt  upon  every  altar,  you  shall  find  nothing 
free  from  inquisition  and  malicious  slander.  For,  that  I 
may  go  no  farther,  observe  but  these : 

I do  not  Venus  see  with  mortal  eyes, 

The  Goddess  unto  whom  we  sacrifice  ; 

Yet  this  is  she  that  mighty  Cupid  bare, 

Whose  offspring  all  terrestrial  beings  are.t 

Therefore  Empedocles  gives  her  the  epithet  of  the  Giver 
of  Life,  and  Sophocles  calls  her  Fruitful ; both  very  aptly 
and  pertinently.  For  indeed  the  great  and  wonderful  work 
of  generation  is  properly  the  work  of  Venus,  where  Love 
is  only  an  assistant  when  present  with  Venus ; but  his  ab- 
sence renders  the  act  itself  altogether  irksome,  dishonor- 

* See  Aristoph.  Frogs,  1244.  t Euripides,  Frag.  890. 

von.  iv.  18 


274 


OF  LOVE. 


able,  harsh,  and  ungrateful.  For  the  conjunction  of  man 
and  woman  without  true  affection,  like  hunger  and  thirst, 
terminates  in  satiety,  and  produces  nothing  truly  noble  or 
commendable ; but  when  the  Goddess  by  means  of  Love 
puts  away  all  loathsome  glut  of  pleasure,  she  perpetuates 
delight  by  a continual  supply  of  friendship  and  harmony 
of  temper.  Therefore  Parmenides  asserts  Love  to  be  the 
most  ancient  of  all  the  works  of  Venus,  writing  thus  in  his 
Cosmogony : 

Of  all  the  Gods  that  rule  above, 

She  first  brought  forth  the  mighty  Love. 

But  ILesiod,  in  my  opinion,  seems  more  philosophically 
to  make  Love  the  eldest  of  all  the  Gods,  as  from  whom 
all  the  other  Deities  derive  their  beginning.  Therefore, 
should  we  deprive  Love  of  the  honors  which  are  decreed 
him,  the  ceremonies  we  ascribe  to  Venus  will  be  no  longer 
in  request.  For  it  is  not  sufficient  to  say,  that  some  men 
reproach  Love  and  load  him  with  contumelies,  but  abstain 
from  giving  her  an  ill  word  ; for  upon  the  same  theatre  we 
hear  these  scandals  fixed  upon  both: 

Love,  idle  of  himself,  takes  up  his  rest 
And  harbors  only  in  the  slothful  breast.* 

And  in  another  place  thus  upon  Venus  : 

She  does  not  the  name  of  Cypris  only  own, 

But  by  a hundred  other  names  is  known  : 

She’s  hell  on  earth,  continued  violence, 

And  rage  subduing  all  the  force  of  sense. t 

As  indeed  we  may  say  of  the  rest  of  the  Gods,  that  there 
is  not  one  that  has  escaped  the  scandalous  jibes  of  illiterate 
scurrility.  Look  upon  Mars,  as  in  a brazen  sculpture,  pos- 
sessing the  place  just  opposite  to  Love,  how  highly  has  he 
been  honored,  how  lowly  degraded  by  men  ? 

S wine- snou ted  Mars,  and  as  a beetle  blind, — 

’Tis  he,  fair  dames,  disorders  all  mankind.! 

Homer  also  gives  him  the  epithets  of  murderous  and  Jack- 

* Eurip.  Danae,  Frag.  324.  t Sophocles,  Frag.  856.  | Sophocles.  Frag.  754. 


OF  LOVE. 


275 


a-bofh-sides.  Moreover,  Chrysippus,  explaining  the  name 
of  this  Deity,  fixes  a villanous  accusation  upon  him.  For, 
says  he,  Ares  is  derived  from  uvuiqeIv,  which  signifies  to  de- 
stroy ; thereby  affording  an  occasion  for  some  to  give  the 
name  of  Ares  or  Mars  to  that  same  proneness  and  per- 
verse inclination  of  men  to  wrath  and  passion,  and  to 
quarrel  and  fight  one  with  another.  Others  affirm  Venus 
to  be  nothing  but  our  concupiscence ; that  Mercury  is  no 
more  than  the  faculty  of  speech ; that  the  Muses  are  only 
the  names  for  the  arts  and  sciences ; and  that  Minerva 
is  only  a fine  word  for  prudence.  And  thus  you  see  into 
what  an  abyss  of  atheism  we  are  like  to  plunge  ourselves, 
while  we  go  about  to  range  and  distribute  the  Gods  among 
the  various  passions,  faculties,  and  virtues  of  men. 

14.  I plainly  perceive  it,  replied  Pemptides ; for  I 
neither  believe  it  lawful  to  make  the  Gods  to  be  pas- 
sions, nor  on  the  other  side,  to  make  the  passions  to  be 
Deities.  To  whom  my  father:  Well  then,  said  he,  do 
you  believe  Mars  to  be  a God,  or  a passion  of  ours  ? To 
which  when  Pemptides  replied,  that  he  thought  Mars  to 
be  the  Deity  that  rectified  the  angry  and  courageous  part 
of  man  ; my  father  presently  retorted  upon  him : Why 
then!  said  he,  shall  our  passionate  part,  and  those  wrathful 
inclinations  within  us  that  provoke  us  to  mischief  and 
bloodshed,  have  a Deity  to  overrule  and  govern  them  ; and 
will  you  not  allow  the  same  guardianship  over  our  better 
propensities  to  love,  friendship,  society,  and  peace  ? Is 
there  a Deity  called  Enyalius  and  Stratius  that  presides 
and  has  the  superintendence  over  those  that  kill  and  are 
slain,  a Deity  that  bears  rule  in  matters  of  arms,  all  war- 
like preparations,  assaults  of  cities,  and  depredations  of 
countries,  and  distributes  rewards  as  he  sees  occasion  ; and 
shall  there  be  no  Deity  to  be  a witness  and  overseer, 
a supreme  governor  and  director,  of  conjugal  affection, 
which  terminates  in  concord  and  happy  society?  Nay, 


276 


OF  LOVE. 


do  we  find  that  they  who  make  it  their  sport  to  hunt  wild 
goats,  hares,  and  deer,  are  not  without  their  forest  Deity 
to  encourage  them ; and  they  that  make  it  their  business 
to  trepan  wolves  and  bears  into  snares  and  pitfalls,  pray 
for  good  luck  to  Aristaeus, 

Who  first  of  all  for  the  wild  beasts  of  prey 
With  gins  and  snares  in  secret  ambush  lay ; 

and  that  Hercules,  having  bent  his  bow,  before  he  let  fiy 
at  the  bird  which  he  intended  to  hit,  invoked  another 
Deity,  as  we  find  in  Aeschylus, 

Hunter  Apollo,  and  to  hunters  kind, 

Direct  this  arrow  to  the  mark  designed ; * 

but  for  men  that  hunt  the  most  noble  game  of  love  and 
friendship,  is  there  no  God  nor  so  much  as  one  Daemon 
to  assist  and  prosper  so  laudable  an  enterprise?  Truly, 
Daphnaeus,  for  my  part,  I cannot  believe  a man  to  be  a 
more  inconsiderable  plant  than  an  oak  or  mulberry  tree, 
or  the  vine  which  Homer  reverently  calls  by  the  name  of 
Hemeris,  considering  that  man  in  his  due  season  also  is 
endued  with  a powerful  faculty  to  bud  and  pleasantly  put 
forth  the  beauties  both  of  his  body  and  mind. 

15.  To  whom  Daphnaeus  : In  the  name  of  all  the  Gods, 
who  ever  thought  otherwise  ? All  those  must  certainly,  re- 
plied my  father,  who  believe  the  care  of  ploughing,  sow- 
ing, and  planting  is  an  employment  becoming  the  Gods 
(and  have  they  not  for  this  purpose  certain  Nymphs  attend- 
ing them,  called  Dryads, 

Who  with  the  trees  they  cherish  live  and  die  ’ — 

and  does  not 

The  joyous  Bacchus  send  increase  of  fruit, 

The  chaste  autumnal  light,  to  every  tree  ? — 

as  Pindar  sings),  and  who  yet  will  not  allow  that  the 
nourishment  and  growth  of  children  and  young  people, 
who  in  the  flower  of  their  age  are  to  be  formed  and  shaped 

* From  the  Prometheus  Released  of  Aeschylus,  Frag.  195. 


OF  LOVE. 


277 


into  several  varieties  of  beauty,  is  under  the  care  and 
tuition  of  any  Deity ; or  that  there  is  any  Divinity  to  take 
care  that  man,  being  once  born,  may  be  guided  and  con- 
ducted in  the  true  paths  of  virtue,  and  to  prevent  the  ten- 
der plant  from  being  bowed  and  bent  the  wrong  way  for 
want  of  a good  instructor,  or  by  the  depraved  conversation 
of  those  with  whom  he  lives.  For  my  part,  I look  upon 
it  as  a heinous  piece  of  indignity  and  ingratitude  thus  to 
say,  while  we  are  all  the  time  enjoying  the  bounty  and 
benignity  of  God,  which  he  is  ready  to  disperse  and  diffuse 
over  all,  and  which  never  abandons  the  distresses  and 
needs  of  mortals.  And  yet  in  many  of  these  needs  the 
duty  to  be  performed  is  rather  necessary  than  pleasant. 
Thus  our  being  delivered  from  the  mothers  womb  is  no 
such  delightful  thing,  as  being  attended  with  pain  and 
issues  of  blood ; and  yet  there  is  a celestial  midwife  and 
overseer  that  takes  particular  care  of  that  necessity,  which 
is  Lucina.  And  indeed  a man  had  better  never  be  born, 
than  to  be  made  bad  and  wicked  for  want  of  a good  tutor 
and  guardian.  Nay,  we  find  that  the  divine  power  does 
not  desert  us  in  our  sickness,  nor  after  we  are  dead ; there 
being  still  some  Deity  or  other  who  claims  some  certain 
peculiar  employment  or  function,  even  upon  those  occa- 
sions. Among  the  rest,  there  is  one  that  helps  to  convey 
the  souls  of  such  as  have  ended  this  life  into  the  other 
world,  and  lays  them  asleep,  according  to  this  of  the  poet : 

For  shady  night  ne’er  brought  me  forth  to  play 
With  artful  touch  upon  the  tuneful  lyre, 

Nor  to  be  mistress  of  prophetic  fire, 

Nor  pains  of  rude  distempers  to  allay; 

But  to  convey  the  souls  of  the  deceased 
Each  one  to  their  appointed  place  of  rest.* 

Nevertheless  these  ministerial  functions  have  many  diffi- 
culties and  troubles  which  attend  them ; whereas  we  can- 
not imagine  any  employment  more  holy,  any  exercise  more 

* See  Nauck,  Frag.  Adesp.  333. 


278 


OF  LOVE. 


sacred,  or  any  contention  for  prize  and  glory  more  becom- 
ing a Deity,  than  to  direct  and  assist  the  lawful  endeavors 
and  pursuits  of  lovers  in  their  prime  of  years  and  beauty. 
There  is  nothing  dishonorable,  nothing  of  forced  necessity 
in  this ; but  gentle  persuasion  and  alluring  grace,  render- 
ing labor  delightful,  leads  to  virtue  and  friendship,  which 
never  attains  the  true  accomplishment  of  the  end  it  aims 
at  without  some  divine  assistance,  nor  can  have  any  other 
conductor  and  master  than  Cupid  himself,  who  is  the  friend 
and  companion  of  the  Muses,  the  Graces,  and  Venus  his 
own  mother.  For,  according  to  Melannippides, 

Great  Love  it  is,  that  in  the  heart  of  man 
Sows  the  sweet  harvest  of  unstained  desire ; 

and  he  always  mingles  those  things  that  are  sweetest  with 
those  that  are  fairest.  What  do  you  say,  Zeuxippus  \ Can 
we  believe  it  to  be  otherwise  1 

16.  In  truth,  I judge  it  so,  replied  Zeuxippus;  and  I 
think  it  would  be  absurd  to  affirm  the  contrary.  And 
would  it  not  be  absurd  indeed,  said  my  father,  since  there 
are  four  sorts  of  friendships,  according  to  the  determina- 
tion of  the  ancients,  — the  first,  say  they,  is  natural,  the 
next  is  that  of  kindred  and  relations,  the  third  is  that  of 
friends  and  acquaintance,  and  last  is  that  of  lovers,  — if 
three  of  these  have  their  several  tutelar  Deities,  under  the 
names  of  the  patron  of  friendship,  the  patron  of  hospitali- 
. ty,  and  he  who  knits  affection  between  those  of  the  same 
race  and  family ; while  only  amorous  affection,  as  if  it 
were  unhallowed  and  under  interdiction,  is  left  without  any 
guardian  or  protector,  which  indeed  requires  the  greatest 
care  and  government  above  all  the  rest"?  All  that  you  say, 
replied  Zeuxippus,  is  undeniable. 

By  the  way,  replied  my  father,  we  may  here  take  notice 

Iof  what  Plato  says  upon  this  subject,  as  pertinent  to  our 
discourse.  For  he  says,  that  there  is  a certain  madness  trans- 
mitted from  the  body  to  the  soul,  proceeding  from  a malig- 


OF  LOVE. 


279 


nant  mixture  of  ill-humors,  or  a noxious  vapor  or  rather 
pernicious  spirit  that  possesses  the  heart ; which  madness 
is  a rugged  and  terrible  disease.  The  other  is  a kind  of 
furv,  partaking  something  of  divine  inspiration ; neither 
is  it  engendered  within,  but  is  an  insufflation  from  without, 
and  a disturbance  of  the  rational  and  consiclerative  faculty, 
deriving  its  beginning  and  motion  from  some  stronger 
power ; the  common  affection  of  which  is  called  the  en- 
thusiastic passion.  For  as  ’l^itvoog  signifies  filled  with 
breath , and  HucpQcov  denotes  replete  with  prudence  ; so  this 
commotion  of  the  soul  is  called  enthusiasm  (from  t v&sog)  by 
reason  it  participates  of  a more  divine  power.  Now  the 
prophetic  part  of  enthusiasm  derives  itself  from  the  in- 
spiration of  Apollo  possessing  the  intellect  of  the  sooth- 
sayer ; but  Bacchanal  fury  proceeds  from  Father  Bacchus. 

And  with  the  Corybantes  ye  shall  dance, 

says  Sophocles.  For  as  for  the  extravagancies  of  the 
priests  of  Cybele,  the  mother  of  the  Gods,  and  those 
which  are  called  panic  terrors  and  ejaculations,  they  are 
all  of  the  same  nature  with  the  Bacchanal  orgies.  There 
is  also  a third  sort  of  enthusiasm,  proper  to  the  Muses, 
which,  possessing  an  even  tempered  and  placid  soul,  ex- 
cites and  rouses  up  the  gifts  of  poetry  and  music.  But  as 
for  that  same  warlike  fury  which  is  called  Arimanian,  it  is 
well  known  to  descend  from  the  God  of  War;  a sort  of 
fury,  wherein  there  is  no  grace  nor  musical  sweetness,  call- 
ing forth  tearful  Mars,  and  rousing  up  the  people  to  dis- 
cord and  tumult.*  * 

There  remains  yet  one  sort  more  of  alienation  of  the 
understanding  in  man,  the  same  neither  obscure,  nor  yet 
altogether  calm  and  quiet;  concerning  which  I would  fain 
ask  Pemptides, 

Which  of  the  Gods  it  is  who  shakes  the  spear 

That  beareth  fruit  so  lovely  and  so  fair. 

* See  Aeschylus,  Suppliants,  665. 


280 


OF  LOVE. 


But  Avitliout  expecting  a resolution  of  this  question,  I mean 
that  erotic  fury  that  possesses  lovely  youths  and  chaste 
women,  yet  a hot  and  vehement  transport.  For  do  we  not 
see  how  the  warrior  lays  down  his  arms,  and  submits  to 
this  more  prevalent  rage  1 

His  grooms,  o’erjoyed  he  had  the  war  forsook, 

His  ponderous  arms  from  off  his  shoulders  took ; * 

and  thus  having  renounced  the  hazards  of  battle,  he  sits 
down  a quiet  spectator  of  other  men’s  dangers.  As  for 
these  Bacchanalian  motions  and  frisking  of  the  Corybantes, 
there  is  a way  to  allay  those  extravagant  transports,  by 
changing  the  measure  from  the  Trochaic  and  the  tone  from 
the  Phrygian.  And  the  Pythian  prophetess,  descending 
from  her  tripos  and  quitting  the  prophetic  exhalation,  be- 
comes sedate  and  calm  again.  Whereas  the  fury  of  love, 
wherever  it  seizes  either  man  or  woman,  sets  them  in  a 
flame  ; no  music,  no  appeasing  incantations,  no  changes  of 
place  are  able  to  quench  or  put  a stop  to  it ; but  being  in 
presence,  they  love  ; being  absent,  they  desire ; by  day 
they  prosecute  their  importunate  visits ; by  night  they 
serenade  at  the  windows ; sober,  they  are  continually  call- 
ing upon  their  loves  ; and  when  they  are  fuddled,  are 
always  teasing  the  company  with  their  love  songs  and 
madrigals.  Neither,  as  one  was  pleased  to  say,  are  poeti- 
cal fancies,  by  reason  of  their  lively  expressions,  rightly 
called  waking  dreams  ; but  the  dialogues  of  persons  en- 
amored, discoursing  with  their  absent  loves,  and  dallying, 
embracing,  and  expostulating  with  them  as  if  they  were 
present,  much  rather  deserve  this  name.  For  the  sight 
seems  to  delineate  other  fancies  in  the  water,  that  quickly 
glide  away  and  slip  out  of  the  mind  ; whereas  the  imagina- 
tions of  lovers,  being  as  it  were  enamelled  by  fire,  leave  the 
images  of  things  imprinted  in  the  memory,  moving,  living, 
speaking,  and  remaining  for  a long  time.  So  that  Cato 

* II.  VII.  121. 


OF  LOVE. 


281 


tlie  Roman  was  wont  to  say,  that  the  soul  of  a lover  dwelt 
in  the  soul  of  the  person  beloved,  for  that  there  is  settled 
and  fixed  in  the  one  the  form,  shape,  manners,  conversa- 
tion and  actions  of  the  other  ; by  which  being  led,  the  lover 
quickly  dispatches  a long  journey,  — as  the  Cynics  say 
they  have  found  a compendious  and  direct  road  to  virtue, 
— and  he  is  carried  from  love  to  friendship,  as  it  were  with 
wind  and  tide,  the  God  of  Love  assisting  his  passion.  In 
short  then  I say,  that  the  enthusiasm  of  lovers  is  neither 
void  of  divine  inspiration,  neither  is  it  under  the  guardian- 
ship and  conduct  of  any  other  Deity  but  him  whose  festi- 
vals we  solemnize,  and  to  whom  we  offer  our  oblations. 
Nevertheless,  in  regard  we  measure  the  excellency  of  a 
Deity  by  his  puissance  and  by  the  benefit  which  we  receive 
at  his  hands,  and  esteem  power  and  virtue  to  be  the  two 
chiefest  and  most  divine  of  all  human  blessings,  it  may 
not  be  unseasonable  to  consider  whether  Love  be  inferior 
in  power  to  any  other  of  the  Gods.  For,  according  to 
Sophocles, 

Great  is  the  puissance  of  the  Cyprian  Queen, 

And  great  the  honor  which  her  triumphs  win.* 

Great  is  also  the  dominion  of  Mars  ; and  indeed  we  see  the 
power  of  all  the  rest  of  the  Gods  divided  in  some  measure 
between  these  two,  — the  one  being  most  naturally  allied 
to  the  beautiful,  the  other  most  mighty  in  the  resistance 
of  evil,  and  both  being  originally  bred  in  the  soul,  as  Plato 
says  of  his  ideas. 

Now  then  let  us  consider,  the  venereal  delight  is  a thing 
that  may  be  purchased  for  a drachm,  and  there  is  no  man 
that  ever  underwent  any  pain  or  danger  for  the  sake  of 
venereal  enjoyments,  unless  he  were  inflamed  with  the 
fires  of  love.  Insomuch,  that  not  to  mention  such  courte- 
sans as  either  Phryne  or  Lais,  we  find  that  the  harlot 
Gnathaenion, 


* Soph.  Trachin.  497. 


282 


OF  LOVE. 


By  lanthorn-light,  at  evening  late, 

Waiting  and  calling  for  some  mate, 

is  often  passed  by  and  neglected ; 

But  if  some  spirit  blow  the  fire, 

Kindled  by  love’s  extreme  desire, 

this  makes  the  pleasure  equally  esteemed  and  valued  with 
the  treasures  of  Tantalus  and  all  his  vast  dominions.  So 
faint  and  so  soon  cloyed  is  venereal  desire,  unless  rendered 
grateful  by  the  charms  and  inspiration  of  love.  Which 
is  more  evidently  confirmed  by  this  ; for  that  many  men 
admit  others  to  partake  of  their  venereal  pleasures,  prosti- 
tuting not  only  their  mistresses  and  concubines,  but  also  their 
own  wives,  to  the  embraces  of  their  friends  ; as  it  is  reported 
of  the  Roman  Gabba,  who  inviting  Maecenas  to  his  house, 
and  perceiving  him  winking  and  nodding  upon  his  wife, 
turned  away  his  head  upon  his  pillow,  as  if  he  had  been 
asleep,  while  they  dallied  together ; yet  at  the  same  time, 
when  one  of  the  servants  came  creeping  out  of  the  next 
room,  to  steal  a bottle  of  wine  from  the  cupboard,  presently 
turning  about  with  his  eyes  open,  Varlet,  said  he,  ’tis  only 
to  pleasure  Maecenas  that  I sleep.  But  this  perhaps  is  not 
so  strange,  considering  that  Gabba  was  a low  buffoon. 

At  Argos  there  was  a great  animosity  between  Nicostra- 
tus  and  Phayllus,  so  that  they  always  opposed  each  other 
and  quarrelled  at  the  council-board.  Now  when  King 
Philip  made  a visit  to  that  city,  Phayllus  bethought  him- 
self, that  he  could  not  miss  the  highest  preferment  the  gov- 
ernment could  afford,  if  he  could  but  oblige  the  king  with 
the  company  of  his  wife,  who  was  both  beautiful  and  young. 
Nicostratus,  smelling  this  design,  walked  to  and  fro  before 
Phayllus’s  house  with  some  of  his  servants,  to  observe  who 
went  in  and  out.  They  had  not  stayed  long,  but  out  came 
Phayllus’s  wife,  whom  he  had  dressed  up  in  high  shoes, 
with  a mantle  and  cap  after  the  Macedonian  fashion,  like 
one  of  the  king’s  pages,  in  which  disguise  she  secretly 


OF  LOVE. 


283 


passed  in  to  the  king’s  lodgings.  ••  Since  then  there  ever 
were  and  still  are  so  many  lovers,  did  you  ever  know  of 
any  one  that  ever  prostituted  his  particular  male  friend, 
though  it  were  to  gain  the  honors  ascribed  to  Jupiter  him- 
self? Truly,  I believe  there  never  was  any  such.  For 
why?  There  never  was  any  one  that  would  pretend  to 
oppose  and  contend  with  a tyrant;  hut  there  are  many 
rivals  and  competitors,  that  will  quarrel  and  tight  for  boys 
that  are  beautiful  and  in  the  prime  of  their  years.  It  is 
reported  of  Aristogiton  the  Athenian,  Antileon  of  Metapon- 
tum,  and  Melanippus  of  Agrigentum,  that  they  never  con- 
tested with  tyrants,  though  they  wasted  and  ruined  the  com- 
monwealth and  indulged  the  impetuosity  of  their  lust,  until 
they  found  them  attempting  their  own  male  concubines : 
then  they  withstood  them  with  the  utmost  peril  of  their 
lives,  as  if  they  had  been  to  defend  their  temples  and  their 
most  sacred  sanctuaries.  Alexander  also  is  said  to  have  sent 
to  Theodorus,  the  brother  of  Proteas,  in  these  words : Send 
me  that  musical  girl  that  plays  and  sings  so  well,  and  take 
ten  talents  for  her,  unless  thou  lovest  her  thyself.  Another 
time,  when  one  of  his  minions,  Antipatridas,  came  to  be 
jovial  with  him,  and  brought  a minstrel  in  his  company  to 
complete  the  mirth,  being  greatly  affected  with  the  girl’s 
playing  and  singing,  he  asked  Antipatridas  whether  he  had 
any  extraordinary  kindness  for  her  ? He  answered,  that  he 
loved  her  as  his  eyes.  Then  all  the  plagues  of  mankind 
light  upon  thee,  quoth  the  prince.  However,  he  would  not 
so  much  as  touch  the  girl. 

17.  Consider  also  what  vast  power  love  has  over  martial 
men  and  warriors,  not  slothful,  as  Euripides  * will  have  it 
to  be,  nor  unwarlike,  nor 

Slumbering  on  a girl’s  soft  cheek,  t 

For  a man  that  is  once  inflamed  with  love  wants  not 


* Eurip.  Danae,  Frag.  324. 


t Soph.  Antigone,  784. 


284 


OF  LOVE. 


Mars  himself  to  be  his  second,  when  he  is  to  engage 
with  his  enemies ; but  confiding  in  the  Deity  that  is  within 
him, 

Ventures  through  fire  and  seas,  and  blustering  storms, 

While  love  of  friend  his  daring  courage  warms  ; 

and  breaks  through  all  opposition,  if  his  mistress  require 
any  proof  of  his  valor.  Therefore  we  read  in  Sophocles, 
that  the  daughters  of  Niobe  being  wounded  with  arrows  to 
death,  one  of  them,  as  she  lay  wallowing  in  blood,  calls 
out  for  no  other  help  or  succor  to  assist  her  in  her  revenge, 
but  her  lover. 

Where  is  my  love  ? she  cried  ; 

Were  I but  armed  with  that, 

I yet  would  be  revenged 
For  my  untimely  fate.* 

You  know  the  reason  wffiy  Cleomachus  the  Pharsalian  fell 
in  battle.  I am  a stranger  to  the  story,  replied  Pemptides, 
and  would  willingly  therefore  hear  it.  Certainly  it  is  very 
well  worth  your  knowledge,  said  my  father. 

In  the  heat  of  the  war  between  the  Chalcidians  and  the 
Eretrians,  Cleomachus  went  with  the  Thessalian  force  to 
aid  the  Chalcidians  ; at  what  time  it  was  evident  that  the 
Chalcidians  were  the  stronger  in  foot,  but  they  found  it  a 
difficult  thing  to  withstand  the  force  of  the  enemies’  horse. 
Thereupon  they  requested  Cleomachus,  being  their  confed- 
erate and  a man  signalized  for  his  courage,  to  give  the 
first  onset  upon  the  enemies’  cavalry.  Presently  the  youth 
whom  he  most  entirely  loved  being  present,  he  asked  him 
whether  he  would  stay  and  be  a spectator  of  the  combat. 
To  which  when  the  lad  gave  his  consent,  and  after  many 
tender  kisses  and  embraces  had  put  on  his  helmet,  Cleo- 
machus’s  love  redoubling  his  courage,  being  surrounded 
with  some  few  of  the  flower  of  the  Thessalian  horse,  he 
charged  into  the  thickest  of  the  enemy  and  put  them  to 
the  rout ; which  the  heavy-armed  infantry  seeing,  they  be- 

* Soph.  Niobe,  Frag.  407. 


OF  LOVE. 


285 


took  themselves  also  to  flight,  so  that  the  Chalcidians 
obtained  a noble  victory.  However,  Cleomachus  was 
there  slain,  and  the  Chalcidians  show  his  monument  erected 
in  the  market-place,  with  a fair  pillar  standing  upon  it  to 
this  day ; and  whereas  they  abominated  pederasty  before, 
after  that  they  admired  and  affected  it  above  all  other 
pleasures.  Nevertheless,  Aristotle  tells  us  that  Cleoma- 
chus indeed  lost  his  life  after  the  victorious  battle  which 
he  gained  from  the  Eretrians,  but  as  for  that  Cleomachus 
who  was  thus  kissed  by  his  male  concubine,  that  he  was 
of  Chalcis  in  Thrace,  and  sent  to  aid  the  Chalcidians  in 
Euboea.  Which  is  the  reason  of  that  same  ballad  gener- 
ally sung  among  them  : 

Fair  youths,  whose  mothers  brought  you  forth 
Lovely  in  form,  and  noble  for  your  birth  ; 

Envy  not  men  of  courage,  prompt  in  arms, 

The  kind  fruition  of  your  tempting  charms. 

For  softest  love  with  daring  valor  reigns 
In  equal  honor  through  Chalcidian  plains. 

Dionysius  the  poet,  in  his  poem  entitled  Causes,  informs 
us  that  the  name  of  the  lover  was  Anton,  and  that  the 
youth  beloved  was  called  Philistus. 

And  is  it  not  a custom  among  you  Thebans,  Pemptides, 
for  the  lover  to  present  the  beloved  with  a complete  suit 
of  armor  when  he  is  come  of  age  ? And  Pammenes,  a 
very  great  soldier  but  very  amorously  given,  quite  altered 
the  method  of  embattling  the  heavy-armed  infantry,  and 
blames  Homer,  as  one  that  knew  not  what  belonged  to 
love,  for  marshalling  the  several  divisions  of  the  Achaeans 
according  to  their  tribes  and  clans,  and  not  placing  the 
lover  by  his  beloved,  so  that  the  close  order  which  he 
afterwards  describes  might  have  been  the  consequence,  in 
which 

Spears  lean  on  spears,  on  targets  targets  throng, 

Helms  stuck  to  helms,  and  man  drove  man  along ; * 


* II.  XIII.  131. 


286 


OF  LOVE. 


the  only  way  to  render  a battalion  invincible.  For  men 
will  desert  those  of  the  same  tribe  or  family,  nay,  their 
very  children  and  parents  ; but  never  any  enemy  could 
pierce  or  penetrate  between  a lover  and  his  darling  minion, 
in  whose  sight  many  times  when  there  is  no  necessity  the 
lover  delights  to  show  his  courage  and  contempt  of  danger  ; 
like  Thero  the  Thessalian,  who  clapping  his  left  hand  to 
the  wall,  and  then  drawing  his  sword,  struck  off  his  thumb, 
thereby  challenging  his  rival  to  do  the  same.  Or  like  an- 
other, who  falling  in  battle  upon  his  face,  as  his  enemy  was 
about  to  follow  his  blow,  desired  him  to  stay  till  he  could 
turn,  lest  his  male  concubine  should  see  that  he  had  been 
wounded  in  the  back. 

And  therefore  we  find  that  the  most  warlike  of  nations 
are  most  addicted  to  love,  as  the  Boeotians,  Lacedaemo- 
nians, and  Cretans.  And  among  the  most  ancient  heroes 
none  were  more  amorous  than  Meleager,  Achilles,  Aris- 
tomenes,  Cimon,  and  Epaminondas ; the  latter  of  which 
had  for  his  male  concubines  Asopiclius  and  Caphisodorus, 
who  was  slain  with  him  at  the  battle  of  Mantinea  and  lies 
buried  very  near  him.  And  when  . . . had  rendered  him- 
self most  terrible  to  the  enemy  and  most  resolute,  Eucna- 
mus  the  Amphissean,  that  first  made  head  against  him  and 
slew  him,  had  heroic  honors  paid  him  by  the  Phocians. 
It  would  be  a task  too  great  to  enumerate  the  amours 
of  Hercules ; but  among  the  rest,  Iolaus  is  honored  and 
adored  to  this  day  by  many,  because  he  is  thought  to  have 
been  the  darling  of  that  hero ; and  upon  his  tomb  it  is 
that  lovers  plight  their  troths  and  make  reciprocal  vows 
of  their  affection.  Moreover,  Hercules,  being  skilled  in 
physic,  is  said  to  have  recovered  Alcestis  from  death’s  door 
in  kindness  to  Admetus,  who,  as  he  had  a great  love  for 
his  wife,  so  was  greatly  beloved  by  the  hero.  For  it  is 
said  that  even  Apollo,  doting  upon  Admetus, 

Became  his  slave  for  a long  weary  year. 


OF  LOVE. 


287 


And  here,  methinks,  we  have  very  opportunely  mentioned 
Alccstis  ; for  although  the  temper  of  women  has  little  to 
do  with  Mars,  Love  many  times  drives  them  to  daring  at- 
tempts beyond  their  own  nature,  even  to  death.  And  if 
there  be  any  credit  to  be  given  to  the  fables  of  the  poets, 
the  stories  of  Alcestis,  Protesilaus,  and  Eurydice  the  wife 
of  Orpheus,  plainly  evince  us  that  Pluto  himself  obeys  no 
other  God  but  Love.  For,  as  Sophocles  says, 

To  others  — be  their  fame  or  birth  whate’er — 

Nor  equity  nor  favor  will  he  show ; 

But  rigorous,  and  without  remorse  severe, 

His  downright  justice  only  makes  them  know  ; 

but  to  lovers  he  pays  a reverence : to  them  alone  is  he 
neither  implacable  nor  inexorable.  And  therefore,  al- 
though it  is  a very  good  thing  to  be  initiated  into  the 
Eleusinian  ceremonies,  still  I find  the  condition  of  those 
much  better  in  hell  who  are  admitted  into  the  mysteries  of 
love  ; which  I speak  as  neither  altogether  confiding  in 
fables,  nor  altogether  misbelieving  them.  For  they  speak 
a great  deal  of  sense,  and  many  times,  by  a certain  kind 
of  divine  good  hap,  hit  upon  the  truth,  when  they  say 
that  lovers  are  permitted  to  return  from  hell  to  sunlight 
again;  but  which  way  and  how,  they  know  not,  as  wan- 
dering from  the  right  path,  which  Plato,  first  of  all  men, 
by  the  assistance  of  philosophy  found  out.  For  there  are 
several  slender  and  obscure  emanations  of  truth  dispersed 
among  the  mythologies  of  the  Egyptians  ; only  they  want 
an  acute  and  experienced  huntsman,  who  is  skilled  in 
tracing  out  great  mysteries  by  small  tracks.  And  therefore 
let  them  go. 

And  now,  since  we  find  the  power  of  love  to  be  so  great, 
let  us  take  a little  notice  of  that  which  we  call  the  benev- 
olence and  favor  of  it  towards  men ; not  whether  it  con- 
fers many  benefits  upon  those  that  are  addicted  to  it,  — for 
that  is  a thing  apparent  to  all  men,  — but  whether  the 


288 


OF  LOVE. 


blessings  that  men  receive  by  it  are  more  and  greater  than 
any  other.  And  here  Euripides,  notwithstanding  that  he 
was  a person  so  amorous  as  he  was,  admires  the  meanest 
gift  it  has  ; for,  says  he, 

Love  into  men  poetic  fire  infuses, 

Though  ne’er  before  acquainted  with  the  Muses.* 

And  lie  might  well  have  said,  that  love  makes  a man  wise 
and  prudent  that  was  a fool  and  sottish  before,  and  a cow- 
ard bold  and  daring,  as  we  have  already  shown ; as  when 
we  heat  wood  in  .the  tire  to  make  it  strong,  when  before  it 
was  weak.  In  like  manner,  he  that  was  a sordid  miser 
before,  falling  once  in  love,  becomes  liberal  and  lofty- 
minded,  his  covetous  and  pinching  humor  being  mollified 
by  love,  like  iron  in  the  fire,  so  that  he  is  more  pleased 
with  being  liberal  to  the  objects  of  his  love,  than  before 
delighted  to  receive  from  others.  For  ye  all  know  that 
Anytus,  the  son  of  Anthemion,  fell  in  love  with  Alci- 
biades ; who,  understanding  that  Anytus  had  invited  sev- 
eral of  his  friends  to  a noble  and  splendid  banquet,  came 
into  the  room  in  masquerade,  and  going  to  the  table,  after 
he  had  taken  one  half  of  the  silver  cups  and  other  plate, 
went  his  way.  Which  when  some  of  the  guests  took  very 
ill,  and  told  Anytus  that  the  young  lad  had  demeaned  him- 
self very  rudely  and  saucily ; Not  so,  said  Anytus,  but  very 
civilly,  since,  when  it  Avas  in  his  poAver  to  have  taken  all 
the  rest,  he  Avas  so  civil  as  to  leave  me  some. 

18.  Pleased  with  this  story,  O Hercules,  quoth  Zeuxip- 
pus,  Iioav  have  you  almost  raced  out  of  mind  that  heredi- 
tary hatred  which  I had  conceived  against  Anytus,  for  his 
ill  opinion  of  Socrates  and  philosophy,  since  he  Avas  be- 
come so  gentle  and  generous  in  his  amours.  Be  it  so,  said 
my  father  ; but  let  us  proceed.  Love  is  of  that  nature, 
that  it  renders  those  that  Avere  severe  and  morose  before 
both  affable  and  pleasant  in  their  humor.  For  as 

* From  the  Stheneboea  of  Euripides,  Frag.  666. 


OF  LOVE. 


289 


The  burning  tapers  make  the  house  more  light. 

And  all  things  look  more  glorious  to  the  sight ; 

so  the  heat  of  love  renders  the  soul  of  man  more  lively 
and  cheerful.  But  most  men  go  quite  contrary  to  reason 
in  this  particular.  For  when  they  behold  a glittering  light 
in  a house  by  night,  they  admire  and  look  upon  it  as  some- 
thing celestial ; but  when  they  see  a narrow,  pitiful,  abject 
soul  of  a sudden  replenished  with  understanding,  generos- 
ity, sense  of  honor,  courtesy,  and  liberality,  they  do  not 
believe  themselves  constrained  to  say,  as  Telemachus  in 
Homer, 

Surely  some  God  within  this  house  resides.* 

For  the  love  of  the  Graces,  tell  me,  said  Daphnaeus,  is  it 
not  a thing  altogether  as  much  savoring  of  divinity,  that  a 
man  who  contemns  all  other  things,  not  only  his  friends 
and  familiar  acquaintance,  but  also  the  laws,  the  magis- 
trates, even  kings  and  princes  themselves,  who  fears  noth- 
ing, is  astonished  at  nothing,  cares  for  nothing,  but  thinks 
himself  able  to  defy  the  “ barbed  lightning,”  f yet,  so  soon 
as  he  beholds  the  object  of  his  burning  love, 

As  dunghill  cravens,  by  a sudden  blow. 

Hang  their  loose  wings  with  little  list  to  crow, 

should  presently  lose  all  his  prowess,  and  that  all  his 
bravery  should  fail  him,  as  if  his  heart  were  quite  sunk  to 
the  bottom  of  his  body  ? And  it  were  not  impertinent  to 
make  mention  of  Sappho  here  among  the  Muses.  For 
the  Romans  report  in  their  stories  that  Cacus,  the  son 
of  Vulcan,  vomited  lire  and  flames  out  of  his  mouth.  And 
indeed  Sappho  speaks  as  if  her  words  were  mixed  with 
fire,  and  in  her  verses  plainly  discovers  the  violent  heat  of 
her  heart,  according  to  that  of  Philoxenus, 

Seeking  for  cure  of  love-inflicted  wounds, 

From  pleasing  numbers  and  melodious  sounds. 

* Odyss.  XIX.  40. 


VOL.  IV. 


19 


t Pindar,  Pyth.  I.  7. 


290 


OF  LOVE. 


I 


And  here,  Daphnaeus,  if  the  love  of  Lysandra  have  not 
buried  in  oblivion  your  former  sportive  dalliances,  I would 
desire  you  to  call  to  mind  and  oblige  us  with  the  repetition 
of  those  elegant  raptures  of  Sappho,  wherein  she  tells  us 
how  that,  when  the  person  beloved  by  her  appeared,  her 
speech  forsook  her,  her  body  was  all  over  in  a sweat ; how 
she  grew  pale  and  wan,  and  was  surprised  with  a sudden 
trembling  and  dizziness.  To  this  Daphnaeus  consented ; 
and  so  soon  as  he  had  recited  the  verses,  said  my  father : 
So  Jupiter  help  me,  is  not  this  an  apparent  seizure  of  some- 
thing more  than  human  upon  the  soul  ? Can  this  be  other 
than  some  celestial  rapture  of  the  mind  1 What  do  we 
find  equal  to  it  in  the  Pythian  prophetess,  when  she  sits 
upon  the  tripod  ? Where  do  we  find  the  flutes  which  are 
used  in  the  Bacchanalian  orgies,  or  the  tabors  played  upon 
in  the  ceremonies  of  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  rouse  up 
such  noble  transports  among  that  fanatic  sort  of  enthusiasts? 
Many  there  are  that  behold  the  same  body  and  the  same 
beauty,  but  the  lover  only  admires  and  is  ravished  with  it. 
And  what  is  the  reason,  do  ye  think?  For  we  do  not  per- 
ceive or  understand  it  from  Menander,  when  he  says  : 


’Tis  the  occasion  that  infects  the  heart, 

For  only  he  that’s  wounded  feels  the  smart. 


But  it  is  the  God  of  Love  that  gives  the  occasion,  seizing 
upon  some,  and  letting  others  go  free.  What  therefore 
had  been  more  seasonable  for  me  to  have  spoken  before, 
since  it  is  now  chopped  into  my  mouth  (as  Aeschylus  says), 
I think  I will  not  even  now  let  go,  as  being  a matter  of 
great  importance.  For  it  may  be,  my  dear  friend,  there  is 
not  any  thing  in  the  world  which  was  not  made  perceptible 
by  sense,  but  what  gained  credit  and  authority  at  the  first 
either  from  fables,  or  from  the  law,  or  else  from  rational 
discourse.  And  therefore  poets,  lawgivers,  and  in  the 
third  place  philosophers,  were  all  along  the  first  that  in- 
structed and  confirmed  us  in  our  opinion  of  the  Gods. 


OF  LOVE. 


291 


For  all  agree  that  there  are  Gods ; but  concerning  their 
number,  their  order,  their  essence  and  power,  they  vastly 
differ  one  among  another.  For  the  philosophers’  Deities 
are  subject  neither  to  age  nor  diseases,  neither  do  they 
undergo  any  labor  or  pain, 

Exempted  from  the  noise  and  hurry 

Of  busy  Acherontic  ferry. 

And  therefore  they  will  not  admit  poetical  Deities,  like  Strife 
and  Prayers  ; * nor  will  they  acknowledge  Fear  and  Terror 
to  be  Gods  or  the  sons  of  Mars.  They  also  differ  from 
the  lawgivers  in  many  things.  Thus  Xenophanes  told  the 
Egyptians  not  to  worship  Osiris  as  a God  if  they  thought 
him  to  be  mortal,  and  if  they  thought  him  to  be  a God  not 
to  bewail  him.  Then  again,  the  poets  and  lawgivers  vary 
from  the  philosophers,  and  will  not  so  much  as  hear  them, 
while  they  deify  certain  ideas,  numbers,  unities,  and  spirits ; 
such  is  the  wild  variety  and  vast  difference  of  opinions 
among  this  sort  of  people.  Therefore,  as  there  were  at 
Athens  the  three  factions  of  the  Parali,  Epacrii,  and 
Pedieis,  that  could  never  agree  but  were  always  at  variance 
one  with  another,  yet  when  they  were  assembled,  gave 
their  suffrages  unanimously  for  Solon,  and  chose  him  with 
one  consent  for  their  peacemaker,  governor,  and  lawgiver, 
as  to  whom  the  highest  reward  of  virtue  was,  without  all 
doubt  or  question,  due  ; so  the  three  different  sects  or  fac- 
tions in  reference  to  the  Gods,  in  giving  their  opinions 
some  for  one  and  some  for  another,  as  being  by  no  means 
willing  to  subscribe  one  to  another,  are  all  positive  in  their 
consent  as  to  the  God  of  Love.  Him  the  most  famous  of 
the  poets,  and  the  numerous  acclamations  of  the  philoso- 
phers and  lawgivers,  have  enrolled  in  the  catalogue  of  the 
Gods  “ with  loud  praises  and  harmonious  acclaim,”  as 
Alcaeus  says  of  the  Mitylenaeans  when  they  chose  Pittacus 
for  their  prince.  So  Hesiod,  Plato,  and  Solon  bring  forth 

* See  II.  IX.  602. 


292 


OF  LOVE. 


Cupicl  out  of  Helicon,  and  conduct  him  in  pomp  and  state 
into  the  Academy,  to  be  our  king,  governor,  and  director, 
drawn  in  by  friendship  and  intercourse  with  all  their 
pairs  of  horses,  — not  the  friendship  which,  as  Euripides 
says,  is 

With  fetters  bound,  but  not  of  brass,* 

as  if  the  bonds  of  love  were  only  the  cold  and  ponderous 
chains  of  necessity,  made  use  of  as  a colorable  pretence  to 
excuse  and  qualify  shame,  but  such  friendship  as  is  carried 
upon  winged  chariots  to  the  most  lovely  objects  that  exist, 
and  to  sights  more  divine  than  this  earth  affords.  But  on 
this  point  others  have  better  discoursed. 

19.  After  my  father  had  thus  delivered  himself ; Do  you 
not  perceive,  said  Soclarus,  how,  being  fallen  a second  time 
into  the  same  matter,  you  have  as  it  were  by  force  con- 
strained yourself,  and  unjustly  deprived  us  — if  I may 
speak  what  I think  — of  that  same  sacred  discourse  which 
you  were  entering  into?  For  as  before  you  gave  us  a hint 
concerning  Plato  and  the  Egyptians,  but  passed  them  over 
as  if  it  had  been  done  against  your  will ; so  you  do  now 
again.  Now  as  to  what  has  been  notably  uttered  by  Plato, 
or  rather  by  our  Goddesses  here  (the  Muses)  through  Plato’s 
mouth,  do  not  trouble  yourself  to  tell  us  this,  even  although 
we  should  request  it.  But  whereas  you  have  obscurely 
hinted  that  the  fables  of  the  Egyptians  accord  with  Plato’s 
opinion  concerning  love,  we  know  you  have  too  great 
kindness  for  us  to  conceal  your  knowledge  from  us ; and 
though  it  be  but  a little  of  those  important  matters,  it  shall 
suffice  us.  Thereupon  the  rest  of  the  company  declaring 
their  readiness  to  give  attention,  my  father  thus  began : 
The  Egyptians,  said  he,  and  also  the  Grecians  set  up  two 
Deities  of  love  ; the  one  vulgar,  the  other  celestial ; to 
which  they  add  a third,  which  they  believe  to  be  the  sun  ; 
and  as  for  Venus,  they  pay  her  a very  great  veneration. 

* Eurip.  Pirithous,  Frag.  698. 


OF  LOVE. 


293 


We  ourselves  also  do  find  that  there  is  a great  affinity  and 
resemblance  between  the  sun  and  the  God  of  Love.  For 
neither  of  them  is  material  fire,  as  some  conjecture.  All 
that  we  acknowledge  is  only  this,  that  there  is  a certain 
soft  and  generative  heat  and  warmth  proceeding  from  the 
sun,  which  affords  to  the  body  nourishment,  light,  and  re- 
laxation of  cold ; whereas  that  warmth  which  comes  from 
love  works  the  same  effects  in  the  soul.  And  as  the  sun 
breaking  forth  from  the  clouds  and  after  a thick  fog  is 
much  hotter ; so  love,  after  passionate  anger  and  jealousies 
are  over,  and  the  beloved  one  is  again  reconciled,  grows 
more  delightful  and  fervent.  Moreover,  as  some  believe 
the  sun  to  be  kindled  and  extinguished,  they  also  imagine 
the  same  things  concerning  love,  as  being  mortal  and  un- 
stable. For  neither  can  a constitution  not  enured  to 
exercise  endure  the  sun,  nor  the  disposition  of  an  illiterate 
and  ill- tutored  soul  brook  love  without  trouble  and  pain;  • 
for  both  are  alike  distempered  and  diseased,  for  which  they 
lay  the  blame  upon  the  power  of  the  God,  and  not  their 
own  weakness.  Herein  only  there  may  seem  to  be  some 
difference  between  them ; for  that  the  sun  displays  to  the 
sight  upon  the  earth  both  beauty  and  deformity  at  once, 
but  love  is  a luminary  that  affords  us  the  view  of  beautiful 
objects  only,  and  persuades  lovers  to  cast  their  eyes  only 
upon  what  is  pleasing  and  delightful,  and  with  a careless 
eye  to  overlook  all  other  things.  On  the  other  side,  they 
that  attribute  the  name  of  Venus  to  the  moon,  although 
they  have  no  convincing  proof,  still  have  hit  upon  a certain 
similarity.  For  that  the  moon  is  celestial  and  divine,  and 
the  region  of  mixture  between  mortal  and  immortal ; but 
it  is  weak  of  itself,  obscure  and  dark  without  the  presence 
of  the  sun ; as  Venus  is  where  love  is  absent.  Therefore 
more  properly  and  with  more  probability  the  moon  is 
likened  to  Venus,  and  the  sun  to  Love,  rather  than  to  any 
other  of  the  Gods. 


294 


OF  LOVE. 


Nevertheless,  we  must  not  therefore  say  they  are  all  one. 
For  neither  are  the  soul  and  body  the  same,  but  distinct ; 
as  the  sun  is  visible,  but  love  is  perceptible  only  by  sense. 
And  if  it  might  not  be  thought  too  harsh  a saying,  a man 
might  affirm  that  the  sun  and  love  act  contrary  to  one 
another.  For  the  sun  diverts  the  understanding  from 
things  intelligible  to  sensible  objects,  alluring  and  fascinat- 
ing the  sight  with  the  grace  and  splendor  of  his  rays,  and 
persuading  us  to  search  for  other  things,  and  even  for 
truth  itself,  within  and  about  himself,  and  nowhere  else. 
And  we  appear  to  be  passionately  in  love  with  the  sun, 
because,  as  Euripides  says, 

He  always  on  the  earth  displays 

The  glory  of  his  burning  rays,* 

for  want  of  our  knowledge  of  another  life,  or  rather, 
through  our  forgetfulness  of  those  things  Avhich  love  calls 
to  our  remembrance.  For  as,  when  we  are  newly  awaked 
and  come  into  a bright  and  dazzling  light,  we  forget  what- 
ever appeared  to  the  soul  in  our  dreams  ; so  the  sun  seems 
to  stupefy  our  recollection  and  impoison  our  understanding, 
when  we  change  from  the  former  life  and  enter  this  world, 
so  that  in  our  pleasure  and  admiration  we  forget  all  other 
considerations  besides  that  of  the  present  life.  Though 
there  indeed  are  the  real  substances  proper  for  the  con- 
templation of  the  soul ; here,  as  in  sleep,  it  embraces  only 
dreams,  and  gazes  in  admiration  and  astonishment  at  what 
appears  to  it  most  beautiful  and  divine,  Avhile 

Fallacious  charming  dreams  about  it  fly ; — 

it  being  persuaded  that  here  every  thing  is  goodly  and 
highly  to  be  prized,  unless  it  happens  upon  some  divine  and 
chaste  love  to  be  its  physician  and  preserver.  This  love,  en- 
tering through  the  body,  becomes  a guide  to  lead  the  soul 
from  the  world  below  to  truth  and  the  fields  of  truth, 


* Eurip.  Hippol.  193. 


OF  LOVE. 


295 


where  full,  pure,  deceitless  beauty  dwells  ; and  leading 
forth  and  guiding  upward  those  that  now  after  a long  time 
are  eager  to  embrace  and  live  with  such  beauty,  it  stands 
by  them,  like  a friendly  mystagogue  at  the  sacred  ceremo- 
nies of  initiation.  But  no  sooner  is  the  soul  sent  from 
thence  again,  but  love  is  no  longer  able  to  make  her  ap- 
proaches of  herself,  but  by  the  body.  And  therefore  as 
geometricians,  when  children  are  not  able  of  themselves  to 
apprehend  the  intelligible  ideas  of  incorporeal  and  impas- 
sible substance,  form  and  set  before  their  eyes  the  tangible 
and  visible  imitations  of  spheres,  cubes,  and  dodecahe- 
drons ; in  like  manner  celestial  love,  having  framed  lovely 
mirrors  to  represent  lovely  objects,  — things  mortal  and 
passible  to  represent  things  divine,  and  sensible  objects  to 
represent  those  perceptible  only  to  the  eye  of  reason, 
— shows  them  to  us  glittering  in  the  forms,  colors,  and 
shape  of  youth  in  its  prime,  and  first  insensibly  moves  the 
memory  inflamed  by  the  sight  of  these  objects. 

Whence  it  comes  to  pass  that  some,  through  the  stupid- 
ity of  their  friends  and  acquaintance,  endeavoring  by  force 
and  against  reason  to  extinguish  that  flame,  have  enjoyed 
nothing  of  true  benefit  thereby,  but  only  either  disquieted 
themselves  with  smoke  and  trouble,  or  else  rushing  head- 
long into  obscure  and  irregular  pleasures,  obstinately  cast 
themselves  away.  But  as  many  as  by  sober  and  modest 
ratiocination  have  sincerely  extinguished  the  raging  heat 
of  the  fire,  and  left  behind  only  a warm  and  glowing  heat 
in  the  soul,  — which  causes  no  violent  earthquake,  as  it  was 
once  called,  rousing  the  seed  and  causing  a gliding  of 
atoms  compressed  by  smoothness  and  titillation,  but  a won- 
derful and  engendering  diffusion,  as  in  a blossoming  and 
well-nourished  plant,  which  opens  the  pores  of  obedience 
and  affection,  — these,  I say,  in  a short  time  passing  by 
the  bodies  of  those  whom  they  love,  penetrate  more  in- 
wardly and  fall  to  admire  their  manners  and  dispositions ; 


296 


OF  LOVE. 


and  calling  off  their  eyes  from  the  body,  they  converse  to- 
gether, and  contemplate  one  another  in  their  discourses  and 
in  their  actions,  provided  there  be  but  the  least  scrip  or 
appearance  of  beauty  in  the  understanding.  If  not.  they 
let  them  go,  and  turn  their  affections  upon  others,  like  bees 
that  will  not  fasten  upon  many  plants  and  flowers,  because 
they  cannot  gather  honey  from  them.  But  where  they  find 
any  footstep,  any  emanation,  any  resemblance  of  a divinity, 
ravished  with  delight  and  admiration  as  they  recall  it  to 
memory,  they  attract  it  to  themselves,  and  are  revived  by 
striving  to  attain  to  what  is  truly  amiable,  happy,  and  be- 
loved by  all  mankind. 

20.  True  it  is,  that  the  poets,  according  to  their  sportive 
humor,  seem  to  write  many  things  in  merriment  concerning 
this  Deity,  and  to  make  him  the  subject  of  their  lascivious 
songs  in  the  height  of  their  revelling  jollity,  making  but 
little  serious  mention  of  him ; whether  out  of  judgment 
and  reason,  or  being  assured  of  the  truth  by  divine  inspira- 
tion, is  the  question.  Among  the  rest,  there  is  one  thing 
which  they  say  very  oddly  concerning  the  birth  and  gener- 
ation of  this  God : 

Young  Zephyr,  doting  on  his  golden  hair, 

At  last  the  silver-slippered  Iris  won  ; 

And  thus  embraced,  at  length  she  bore  a son. 

Of  all  the  Gods  the  shrewdest  and  most  fair  : * 

unless  the  grammarians  have  likewise  persuaded  you,  by 
saying  that  this  fable  was  invented  to  set  forth  the  variety 
and  gay  diversity  of  passions  that  attend  on  love. 

To  whom  Daphnaeus : To  what  other  end  or  purpose 
could  it  be  1 Hear  me  then,  said  my  father ; for  ’tis  no 
more  than  what  the  celestial  meteor  constrains  us  to  say. 
The  affection  of  the  sight  in  the  case  of  the  rainbow  (or 
Iris)  is  caused  by  reflection.  For  when  the  sight  lights 
upon  a cloud  somewhat  of  a dewy  substance,  but  smooth, 


* From  Alcaeus. 


OF  LOVE. 


297 


and  moderately  thick  withal,  and  we  behold  the  repercus- 
sion of  the  sunbeams  upon  it,  together  with  the  light  and 
splendor  about  the  sun,  it  begets  an  opinion  in  us  that  the 
apparition  is  in  the  cloud.  In  like  manner,  this  same 
subtle  invention  of  love-sophistry  in  generous  and  noble 
souls  causes  a repercussion  of  the  memory  from  objects 
that  here  appear  and  are  called  beautiful,  to  the  beauty 
really  divine,  truly  amiable  and  happy,  and  by  all  admired. 
But  most  people  pursuing  and  taking  hold  of  the  fancied 
image  of  this  beauty  in  boys  and  women,  as  it  were  seen  in 
a mirror,  reap  nothing  more  assured  and  certain  than  a 
little  pleasure  mixed  with  pain.  But  this  seems  to  be  no 
more  than  a delirium  or  dizziness  of  the  vulgar  sort,  be- 
holding their  empty  and  unsatisfied  desires  in  the  clouds, 
as  it  were  in  so  many  shadows ; like  children  who,  think- 
ing to  catch  the  rainbow  in  their  hands,  snatch  at  the  ap- 
parition that  presents  itself  before  their  eyes.  But  a 
generous  and  modest  lover  observes  another  method ; for 
his  contemplations  reflect  only  on  that  beauty  which  is 
divine  and  perceptible  by  the  understanding ; but  lighting 
upon  the  beauty  of  a visible  body,  and  making  use  of  it  as 
a kind  of  organ  of  the  memory,  he  embraces  and  loves, 
and  by  conversation  argumenting  his  joy  and  satisfaction 
still  more  and  more  inflames  his  understanding.  But 
neither  do  these  lovers  conversing  with  bodies  rest  satisfied 
in  this  world  with  a desire  and  admiration  of  this  same 
light ; neither  when  they  are  arrived  at  another  world  after 
death,  do  they  return  hither  again  as  fugitives,  to  hover  about 
the  doors  and  mansions  of  new-married  people  and  disturb 
their  dreams  with  ghosts  and  visions ; which  sort  of  visions 
really  come  only  from  men  and  women  given  to  pleasure 
and  corporeal  delights,  who  by  no  means  deserve  the  name 
and  characters  of  true  lovers.  Whereas  a lover  truly 
chaste  and  amorous,  being  got  to  the  true  mansion  of 
beauty,  and  there  conversing  with  it  as  much  as  it  is  law- 


298 


OF  LOYE. 


ful  for  him  to  do,  mounted  upon  the  wings  of  chaste  desire, 
becomes  pure  and  hallowed ; and  being  initiated  into  sacred 
orders,  continues  dancing  and  sporting  about  his  Deity,  till 
returning  again  to  the  meadows  of  the  Moon  and  Venus, 
and  there  laid  asleep,  he  becomes  ready  for  a new  nativity. 
But  these  are  points  too  high  for  the  discourse  which  we 
have  proposed  to  ourselves. 

To  return  therefore  to  our  purpose ; Love,  according  to 
Euripides,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  Gods,  delights 

When  mortals  here  his  honored  name  invoke  ; * 

on  the  other  side,  he  is  no  less  offended  when  any  affront 
or  contempt  is  put  upon  him,  as  he  is  most  kind  and  be- 
nign to  those  that  entertain  him  with  proper  respect.  For 
neither  does  Jupiter  surnamed  the  Hospitable  so  severely 
prosecute  injuries  done  to  strangers  and  suppliants,  nor  is 
Jupiter  Genitalis  so  rigorous  in  accomplishing  the  curses 
of  parents  disobeyed,  as  Love  is  to  listen  to  the  complaints 
of  injured  lovers ; being  the  scourger  and  punisher  of 
proud,  ill-natured,  and  ill-bred  people.  For,  not  to  mention 
Euxynthetus  and  Leucomantis,  at  this  day  in  Cyprus  called 
the  Peeper,  ’tis  a hundred  to  one  but  you  have  heard  of  the 
punishment  inflicted  upon  Gorgo  the  Cretan,  not  much  un- 
like to  that  of  Leucomantis,  only  that  Gorgo  was  turned 
into  a stone  as  she  looked  out  of  a window  to  see  her  love 
going  to  his  grave.  With  this  Gorgo  Asander  fell  in  love, 
a young  gentleman  virtuous  and  nobly  descended,  but  re- 
duced from  a flourishing  estate  to  extremity  of  poverty. 
However,  he  did  not  think  so  meanly  of  himself  but  that, 
being  her  kinsman,  he  courted  this  Gorgo  for  a wife, 
though  she  had  many  suitors  at  the  same  time  by  reason 
of  her  great  fortune  ; and  he  so  carried  this  business  that, 
notwithstanding  his  numerous  and  wealthy  rivals,  he  had 
gained  the  good-will  of  all  her  guardians  and  nearest  rela- 
tions. . . . 


* Eurip.  Hippol.  7. 


OF  LOVE. 


299 


21.  Now  as  for  those  things  which  they  say  are  the 
causes  that  beget  love,  they  are  not  peculiar  to  this  or  the 
other  sex,  but  common  to  both.  For  it  cannot  be  that 
those  images  that  enter  into  amorous  persons  and  whisk 
about  from  one  part  to  another,  by  their  various  forms 
moving  and  tickling  the  mass  of  atoms  that  slide  into  the 
seed,  can  come  from  young  boys,  and  that  the  same  cannot 
come  from  young  women.  But  as  to  these  noble  and 
sacred  remembrances  with  which  the  soul  is  winged,  re- 
calling that  same  divine,  real,  and  Olympic  beauty,  what 
should  hinder  but  that  these  may  pass  from  boys  and  young 
men,  and  also  from  virgins  and  young  women,  whenever 
a disposition  chaste  and  good-natured  appears  united  with 
bloom  of  youth  and  grace  of  body"?  For,  as  a handsome 
and  well-made  shoe  shows  the  proportion  of  the  foot  (as 
Ariston  says),  so  they  that  have  judgment  in  these  matters 
can  discern  the  splendid,  upright,  and  uncorrupted  foot- 
steps of  a noble  and  generous  soul  in  beautiful  forms  and 
features,  and  bodies  undefiled.  For,  if  a voluptuous  per- 
son, who  when  the  question  was  put  to  him, 

To  which  are  your  hot  passions  most  inclined, 

Or  to  the  male,  or  to  the  female  kind  i 

answered  thus, 

’Tis  the  same  thing  to  me 

Where’er  I beauty  see, 

was  thought  to  have  returned  a proper  and  pertinent  an- 
swer and  one  that  accorded  with  his  passions,  is  it  possible 
that  a noble  and  generous  lover  directs  his  amours  not  to 
loveliness  and  good-nature,  but  only  to  the  parts  that  dis- 
tinguish the  sex?  For  certainly  a man  that  delights  in 
horses  will  no  less  value  the  mettle  and  swiftness  of  Po- 
dargus,  than  of  Aetha  that  was  Agamemnon’s  mare ; and 
he  that  is  a good  huntsman  does  not  only  delight  in  dogs, 
but  mixes  with  his  cry  the  bitches  of  Crete  and  Laconia ; 
and  shall  he  that  is  a lover  as  well  as  of  civil  behavior 


300 


OF  LOVE. 


carry  liimself  with  an  inequality  more  to  one  than  to 
another,  and  make  a distinction,  as  of  garments,  between 
the  love  of  men  and  women  1 But  some  say  that  beauty 
is  the  flower  of  virtue.  Will  they  then  affirm,  that  the 
female  sex  never  blossoms  nor  makes  any  show  of  tendency 
to  virtue  'l  It  were  absurd  to  think  so.  Therefore  was 
Aeschylus  in  the  right  when  he  said,  that  he  could  never 
mistake  the  fire  in  the  eye  of  a young  woman  who  had 
once  known  a man.  Now  then  are  those  signs  and  marks  of 
lasciviousness,  wantonness,  and  impudence  to  be  discovered 
in  the  visages  of  women,  and  shall  there  be  no  light  shining 
in  their  faces  for  the  discovery  of  modesty  and  chastity  \ 
Nay,  shall  there  be  many  such  signs,  and  those  apparent, 
and  shall  they  not  be  able  to  allure  and  provoke  love  ? 
Both  are  contrary  to  reason,  and  dissonant  from  truth. 
But  every  one  of  these  things  is  common  to  both  sexes,  as 
we  have  showed. 

Now  then,  Daphnaeus,  let  us  confute  the  reason  that 
Zeuxippus  has  but  now  alleged,  by  making  love  to  be  all 
one  with  inordinate  desire  that  hurries  the  soul  to  intem- 
perance. Not  that  it  is  his  opinion,  but  only  what  he  has 
frequently  heard  from  men  morose  and  no  way  addicted  to 
love.  Of  this  class  there  are  some  who,  marrying  poor 
silly  women  for  the  sake  of  some  petty  portion,  and  having 
nothing  to  do  with  them  and  their  money  but  to  make 
them  perpetual  drudges  in  pitiful  mechanic  employments, 
are  every  day  brawling  and  quarrelling  with  them. 
Others,  more  desirous  of  children  than  of  wives,  like  cica- 
dae  that  spill  their  seed  upon  squills  or  some  such  like 
herb,  discharge  their  lust  in  haste  upon  the  next  they 
meet  with ; and  having  reaped  the  fruit  they  sought  for, 
bid  marriage  farewell  or  else  regard  it  not  at  all,  neither 
caring  to  love  nor  to  be  beloved.  And  in  my  opinion,  the 
words  arsQysiv  and  arsQyeadai,  which  signify  dearly  to  love  and 
dearly  to  be  beloved  again , differing  but  one  letter  from 


OF  LOVE. 


301 


ariyuv,  which  signifies  to  contain  or  endure , seem  to  me  to 
import  and  denote  that  mutual  kindness  called  conjugal, 
which  is  intermixed  hv  time  and  custom  Avith  necessity. 
But  in  that  Avedlock  Avhich  love  supports  and  inspires,  in 
the  first  place,  as  in  Plato’s  Commonwealth,  there  will  be 
no  such  language  as  “thine”  and  “mine.”  For  properly  to 
speak,  there  is  not  community  of  goods  among  all  friends ; 
but  only  Avhere  tA\ro  friends,  though  severed  in  body,  yet 
have  their  souls  joined  and  as  it  were  melted  together,  and 
neither  desire  to  be  tAVO  nor  believe  themselves  to  be 
separate  persons.  And,  in  the  second  place,  there  Avill  be 
that  mutual  respect  and  reverence,  which  is  the  chiefest 
happiness  of  wedlock.  Noav  as  to  that  respect  that 
comes  from  Avithout,  carrying  Avith  it  more  force  of  laAV 
than  voluntary  and  reciprocal  duty,  or  that  comes  by  fear 
and  shame, 

And  many  other  curbs,  that  loose  desire 

And  lawless  frisks  of  wanton  heat  require,* 

these  are  ahvays  present  with  those  who  are  coupled  in 
matrimony.  Whereas  in  love  there  is  so  much  continency, 
so  much  modesty,  and  so  much  of  loyal  affection,  that  even 
if  it  happen  upon  an  intemperate  and  lascivious  soul,  it  is 
thereby  diverted  from  all  other  amours,  by  cutting  off  all 
malapert  boldness  and  bringing  doAvn  the  insolence  of  im- 
perious pride  ; instead  of  which  it  introduces  modest  bash- 
fulness, silence,  and  submission,  and  adorning  it  with  decent 
and  becoming  behavior,  makes  it  for  ever  after  the  obedient 
observer  of  one  lover.  Most  certainly  you  have  heard  of 
that  celebrated  and  highly  courted  courtesan  Lais,  Iioav  her 
beauty  inflamed  all  Greece,  or  rather  Iioav  tAvo  seas  strove 
for  her.  This  famous  beauty,  being  seized  Avith  an  ardent 
affection  for  Hippolochus  the  Thessalian,  leaving  the  Acro- 
corinthus,  as  the  poet  describes  it, 

With  sea-green  water  all  encompassed  round, f 
* Sophocles,  Frag.  784.  t See  Euripides,  Frag.  1069. 


302 


OF  LOVE. 


and  privately  avoiding  the  great  army  (as  I may  call  it)  of 
those  that  courted  her  favor,  withdrew  herself  modestly  to 
the  enjoyment  of  him  only ; but  the  women,  incensed  with 
jealousy  and  envying  her  surpassing  beauty,  dragged  her 
into  the  temple  of  Venus,  and  there  stoned  her  to  death ; 
for  which  reason  it  is  called  to  this  day  the  temple  of  Ve- 
nus the  Murderess.  We  ourselves  have  known  several 
young  damsels,  mere  slaves,  who  never  would  submit  to 
the  embraces  of  their  masters,  and  private  men  who  have 
disdained  the  company  of  queens,  when  love  had  the  abso- 
lute dominion  of  their  hearts.  For,  as  in  Rome,  when 
there  is  a dictator  chosen,  all  other  chief  magistrates  lay 
down  their  offices ; so  all  such  persons,  where  love  is  truly 
predominant,  are  immediately  free  and  manumitted  from 
all  other  lords  and  masters,  and  afterwards  live  like  servants 
in  the  temple  of  Love.  And  indeed  a virtuous  and  gener- 
ous lady,  once  linked  to  her  lawful  husband  by  an  unfeigned 
affection,  will  sooner  choose  the  embraces  of  bears  and 
dragons,  than  to  be  the  bed-fellow  of  any  other  person 
whatsoever  but  her  only  spouse. 

22.  Of  this  although  we  might  produce  examples  with- 
out number,  yet  among  you,  that  are  now  joined  (as  it 
were)  in  the  same  dance  and  festival  with  Love,*  it  will 
not  be  from  the  purpose  to  relate  the  story  of  Camma  the 
Galatian.  For  she  being  a woman  of  transcendent  beauty, 
and  married  to  Sinatus  the  tetrarch,  Synorix,  one  of  the 
most  powerful  men  in  all  Galatia,  fell  desperately  in  love 
with  her ; and  that  he  might  enjoy  her,  murdered  her  hus- 
band Sinatus,  since  he  could  not  prevail  with  her  either  by 
force  or  persuasion,  while  her  husband  was  alive.  There- 
upon Camma,  having  no  other  sanctuary  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  her  chastity  nor  consolation  in  her  affliction,  retired 
to  the  temple  of  Diana,  where  she  remained  a votaress  to 

* The  dialogue  is  supposed  to  be  held  at  the  festival  of  Love.  See  §§  1 and  2. 
(G). 


OF  LOVE. 


303 


the  Goddess,  not  admitting  any  person  so  much  as  to  speak 
to  her,  though  she  had  many  suitors  that  sought  her  in 
wedlock.  But  when  Syuorix  boldly  presumed  to  put  the 
question  to  her,  she  neither  seemed  to  reject  his  motion, 
neither  did  she  upbraid  him  with  the  crime  he  had  com- 
mitted ; as  if  he  had  been  induced  to  perpetrate  so  vile  an 
act,  not  out  of  any  malicious  intent  to  Sinatus,  but  merely 
out  of  a pure  and  ardent  love  and  affection  to  her.  There- 
upon he  came  with  greater  confidence,  and  demanded  her 
in  marriage.  She,  on  the  other  side,  met  him  no  less 
cheerfully  ; and  leading  him  by  the  hand  to  the  altar  of  the 
Goddess,  after  she  had  poured  forth  a small  quantity  of 
hydromel  well  tempered  with  a rank  poison,  as  it  were  an 
atonement  offering  to  the  Goddess,  she  drank  off  the  one 
half  of  that  which  remained  herself,  and  gave  the  other 
half  to  the  Galatian.  And  then,  so  soon  as  she  saw  he 
had  drunk  it  off,  she  gave  a loud  groan,  and  calling  her 
deceased  husband  by  his  name ; This  day,  said  she,  my 
most  dear  and  beloved  husband,  I have  long  expected,  as 
having  lived,  deprived  of  thee,  a desolate  and  comfortless 
life.  But  now  receive  me  joyfully  ; for  for  thy  sake  I have 
revenged  myself  upon  the  most  wicked  among  men,  willing 
to  have  lived  with  thee,  and  now  no  less  rejoicing  to  die 
with  him.  Thus  Synorix,  being  carried  out  of  the  temple, 
soon  after  expired  ; but  Camma,  surviving  him  a day  and 
a night,  is  reported  to  have  died  with  an  extraordinary  res- 
olution and  cheerfulness  of  spirit. 

23.  Now  in  regard  there  have  been  many  such,  as  well 
among  us  as  among  the  barbarians,  who  can  bear  with 
those  that  reproach  Venus  that,  being  coupled  and  pres- 
ent with  Love,  she  becomes  a hindrance  of  friendship'? 
Whereas  any  sober  and  considerate  person  may  rather  re- 
vile the  company  of  male  with  male,  and  justly  call  it  in- 
temperance and  lasciviousness, 


304 


OF  LOVE. 


A vile  affront  to  Nature,  no  effect 

Of  lovely  Venus  or  of  chaste  respect. 

And  therefore,  as  for  those  that  willingly  prostitute  their 
bodies,  we  look  upon  them  to  be  the  most  wicked  and  flagi- 
tious persons  in  the  world,  void  of  fidelity,  neither  endued 
with  modesty  nor  any  thing  of  friendship ; and  but  too 
truly  and  really,  according  to  Sophocles, 

They  who  ne’er  had  such  friends  as  these, 

Believe  their  blessing  double  ; 

And  they  that  have  them,  pray  the  Gods 
To  rid  them  of  the  trouble.* 

And  as  for  those  who,  not  being  by  nature  lewd  and  wicked, 
were  circumvented  and  forced  to  prostitute  themselves, 
there  are  no  men  whom  these  always  look  upon  with  greater 
suspicion  and  more  perfect  hatred  than  those  that  deluded 
and  flattered  them  into  so  vile  an  act,  and  they  bitterly 
revenge  themselves  when  they  find  an  opportunity.  For 
Crateas  killed  Archelaus,  who  had  rid  him  in  his  youth ; 
and  Pytholaus  slew  Alexander  of  Pherae.  Periander  ty- 
rant of  the  Ambraciotes  asked  his  minion,  whether  he  were 
not  yet  with  child ; which  the  lad  took  so  heinously  that 
he  stabbed  him. 

On  the  other  hand,  among  women  that  are  married,  these 
are  but  the  beginnings  of  friendship,  as  it  were,  a com- 
municating and  imparting  of  great  and  sacred  mysteries. 
The  pleasure  of  coition  is  the  least  thing ; but  the  honor, 
the  submission  to  mutual  love  and  fidelity  which  daily 
germinates  from  this,  convince  us  that  neither  the  Delphi- 
ans  raved,  who  gave  the  name  of  Anna  (union)  to  Venus, 
nor  that  Homer  was  in  an  error,  who  called  the  conjunction 
of  man  and  woman  by  the  name  of  friendship  ; but  that 
Solon  was  a lawgiver  the  most  experienced  in  conjugal 
affairs,  who  decreed  that  a husband  should  lie  with  his 
wife  thrice  a month  at  least,  — not  for  pleasure’s  sake,  but 


* Soph.  Frag.  778. 


OF  LOVE. 


305 


that,  as  cities  renew  their  treaties  one  with  another  at  such 
a time,  so  the  alliance  of  matrimony  might  be  renewed  by 
this  enjoyment,  after  the  jars  which  may  have  arisen  in  the 
mean  time.  But  you  will  say,  there  are  many  men  in  love 
with  women  that  act  amiss  and  furiously.  But  are  there 
not  more  enormities  committed  by  those  that  are  enamored 
upon  boys  1 

So  often  as  these  eyes  of  mine  behold 
That  beardless  youth,  that  smooth  and  lovely  boy, 

I faint  and  fall ; then  wish  I him  to  hold 
Within  mine  arms,  and  so  to  die  with  joy ; 

And  that  on  tomb  were  set,  where  I do  lie, 

An  epigram,  mine  end  to  testify. 

But  though  there  is  this  raging  passion  after  boys,  as  well 
as  a dotage  upon  women,  yet  can  neither  be  said  to  be  truly 
love.  And  therefore  it  is  an  absurdity  to  aver  that  women 
are  not  capable  even  of  other  virtues.  For  why  speak  of 
so  many  signals,  of  their  chastity,  prudence,  justice,  and 
fidelity,  when  we  find  others  no  less  eminent  for  their  forti- 
tude, resolution,  and  magnanimity  ; after  all  which,  to  tax 
them  of  being  naturally  incapable  of  friendship  only  — not 
to  mention  the  other  virtues  — is  a hard  case.  For  they 
are  naturally  lovers  of  their  children,  affectionate  to  their 
husbands  ; and  this  same  natural  affection  of  theirs,  like  a 
fertile  soil,  as  it  is  capable  of  friendship,  so  is  no  less  plia- 
ble to  persuasion,  nor  less  accompanied  with  all  the  graces. 
But  as  poetry,  adapting  to  speech  the  conditements  of  mel- 
ody, measure,  and  rhythm,  renders  the  wholesome  and  in- 
structive part  of  it  so  much  the  more  moving,  and  the 
noxious  part  so  much  the  more  apt  to  corrupt  the  mind ; 
so,  Nature  having  adorned  a woman  with  the  charms  of 
beauty  and  persuasive  language,  a lascivious  woman  makes 
use  of  these  perfections  to  please  herself  and  deceive  others, 
but  in  a modest  and  sober  woman  they  work  wonders 
towards  the  gaining  and  fixing  the  good  will  and  favor  of 
her  husband.  Therefore  Plato  exhorted  Xenocrates,  oth- 


VOL.  IV. 


20 


306 


OF  LOVE. 


erwise  generous  and  brave,  but  very  morose  in  his  humor, 
to  sacrifice  to  the  Graces  ; but  he  would  have  exhorted  a 
virtuous  and  modest  woman  to  sacrifice  to  Love,  for  his 
propitious  favor  to  her  marriage,  in  ordering  it  so  that  her 
behavior  may  prove  a sufficient  charm  to  keep  her  husband 
at  home,  . . . and  that  he  may  not  ramble  after  other 
women,  and  then  be  forced  to  exclaim,  as  in  the  comedy, 

Curse  to  this  rage  of  mine,  so  given  to  roam  ; 

What  a good  wife  do  I abuse  at  home  ! 

For  in  wedlock  to  love  is  a far  greater  blessing  than  to  be 
beloved ; since  it  preserves  and  keeps  people  from  falling 
into  many  errors,  nay,  all  those  that  corrupt  and  ruin 
matrimony. 

24.  As  for  those  passionate  affections  which  at  the  be- 
ginning of  conjugal  love  raise  certain  fits,  which  are  some- 
what sharp  and  biting,  most  fortunate  Zeuxippus,  I would 
not  have  you  fear  them,  like  an  ulcer  or  scarification. 
Though  perhaps  it  would  not  be  amiss,  if  it  should  cost 
you  some  small  wound  to  be  joined  to  a virtuous  woman, 
like  trees  that  grow  together  when  grafted  by  incision  upon 
a proper  stock.  The  beginning  of  conception  itself  is  a 
kind  of  exulceration ; for  there  can  be  no  mixture  of 
things  that  are  not  affected  reciprocally  one  by  the  other. 
The  very  mathematical  rudiments  do  not  a little  perplex 
little  children  at  the  first,  and  philosophy  troubles  the 
brains  of  young  beginners  ; but  this  corroding  humor  is 
not  lasting,  either  to  these  or  to  lovers.  Insomuch  that  a 
man  would  think  that  love  at  first  resembled  the  mixture 
of  two  liquors,  which,  when  once  they  begin  to  incor- 
porate, by  their  ebullition  discover  some  little  disgusts  ; 
for  so  love  at  the  beginning  bubbles  up  with  a kind  of 
effervency,  till  being  settled  and  purified  it  acquires  a firm 
and  stable  constitution.  For  this  indeed  is  properly  that 
kind  of  mixture  which  is  called  a thorough  mixture  ; 
whereas  the  love  of  other  friends,  conversing  and  living 


OF  LOVE. 


307 


together,  is  like  the  touches  and  interweavings  of  Epi- 
curus’s atoms,  subject  to  raptures  and  separations,  but  can 
never  compose  such  a union  as  proceeds  from  love  assist- 
ing conjugal  society.  For  neither  are  the  pleasures  received 
from  any  other  source  so  great,  nor  the  benefits  conferred 
on  others  so  lasting,  nor  is  the  glory  and  beauty  of  any 
other  friendship  so  noble  and  desirable, 

As  when  the  man  and  wife  at  hoard  and  bed 

Under  one  roof  a life  of  concord  lead.* 

Moreover,  it  is  a thing  warranted  by  law ; while  Nature 
shows  us  that  even  the  Gods  themselves  stood  in  need  of 
love  for  the  sake  of  common  procreation.  Thus  the  poets 
tell  us  that  earth  is  in  love  with  the  showers,  and  heaven 
with  the  earth  ; and  the  natural  philosophers  are  of  opinion 
that  the  sun  is  in  love  with  the  moon,  that  they  copulate 
every  month,  and  that  the  moon  conceives  by  virtue  of  that 
conjunction.  And  it  would  of  necessity  follow  that  the 
earth,  which  is  the  common  mother  of  all  mankind,  of  all 
animals,  and  of  all  manner  of  plants,  would  one  day  cease 
and  be  extinguished,  should  that  same  ardent  love  and 
desire  infused  by  the  God  forsake  matter,  and  matter  cease 
to  pursue  and  lust  after  the  principles  and  motions  of  gene- 
ration. 

But  that  we  may  not  seem  to  wander  too  far  or  spend 
our  time  in  trifles,  you  yourselves  are  not  ignorant  that 
these  pederasties  are  by  many  said  to  be  the  most  uncer- 
tain and  least  durable  things  in  the  world,  and  that  they  are 
derided  by  those  that  make  use  of  them,  who  affirm  that 
the  love  of  boys,  like  an  egg,  may  be  destroyed  by  a 
hair ; j*  and  the  lovers  themselves  are  like  the  wandering 
Scythians,  who,  having  spent  their  spring  in  flowery  and 
verdant  pastures,  presently  dislodge  from  thence,  as  out  of 
an  enemy’s  country.  And  Bion  the  Sophister  was  yet 
more  sharp  and  satirical,  when  he  called  the  beards  of 

* Odyss.  VI.  183.  t That  is,  by  the  sprouting  of  the  beard.  (G.) 


308 


OF  LOVE. 


young  and  beautiful  striplings  by  the  names  of  Harmodii 
and  Aristogitons  (i.e.  tyrant-killers),  since  by  that  budding 
show  of  manhood  their  lovers  are  delivered  from  their 
pleasant  tyranny.  But  these  imputations  are  not  justly 
charged  upon  true  lovers.  Elegant  therefore  was  that 
which  was  said  by  Euripides.  For  as  he  was  clasping  and 
embracing  the  fair  Agatho,  after  the  down  began  to  sprout 
forth  upon  his  chin,  he  cried  that  the  very  autumn  of 
lovely  youths  was  pleasing  and  delightful.  But  I say  more 
than  this,  that  the  love  of  virtuous  women  does  not  decay 
with  the  wrinkles  that  appear  upon  their  faces,  but  re- 
mains and  endures  to  their  graves  and  monuments.  Then 
again,  we  shall  find  but  few  male  couples  of  true  lovers, 
but  thousands  of  men  and  women  conjoined  together  in 
wedlock,  who  have  reciprocally  and  inviolably  observed  a 
community  of  affection  and  loyalty  to  the  end  of  their 
lives.  I shall  instance  only  one  example,  which  happened 
in  our  time,  during  the  reign  of  Caesar  Vespasian. 

25.  Julius,  who  was  the  first  that  occasioned  the  revolt 
in  Galatia,  among  many  other  confederates  in  the  rebellion 
had  one  Sabinus,  a young  gentleman  of  no  mean  spirit, 
and  for  fame  and  riches  inferior  to  none.  But  having 
undertaken  a very  difficult  enterprise,  they  miscarried  ; and 
therefore  expecting  nothing  but  death  by  the  hand  of  jus- 
tice, some  of  them  killed  themselves,  others  made  their 
escapes  as  well  as  they  could.  As  for  Sabinus,  he  had  all 
the  opportunities  that  could  be  to  save  himself  by  flying 
to  the  barbarians  ; but  he  had  married  a lady,  the  best  of 
women,  which  they  called  by  the  name  of  Empone,  as 
much  as  to  say  a lieroess.  This  woman  it  was  not  in  his 
power  to  leave,  neither  could  he  carry  her  conveniently 
alons:  with  him.  Having  therefore  in  the  country  certain 
Vaults  or  cellars  under  ground,  where  he  had  hid  his 
treasures  and  movables  of  greatest  value,  which  were  only 
known  to  two  of  his  freed  bondmen,  he  dismissed  all  the 


OF  LOVE. 


309 


rest  of  his  servants,  as  if  he  had  intended  to  poison  him- 
self. And  taking  along  with  him  his  two  faithful  and  trusty 
servants,  he  hid  himself  in  one  of  the  vaults,  and  sent 
another  of  his  enfranchised  attendants,  whose  name  was 
Martalius,  to  tell  his  wife  that  her  husband  had  poisoned 
himself  and  that  the  house  and  his  corpse  were  both  burnt 
together,  designing  by  the  lamentation  and  unfeigned  grief 
of  his  wife  to  make  the  report  of  his  death  the  more 
easily  believed  ; which  fell  out  according  to  his  wish.  For 
the  lady,  so  soon  as  she  heard  the  news,  threw  herself 
upon  the  floor,  and  continued  for  three  days  together  with- 
out meat  or  drink,  making  the  most  bitter  outcries,  and 
bewailing  her  loss  with  all  the  marks  of  a real  and  un- 
feigned anguish ; which  Sabinus  understanding,  and  fear- 
ing her  sorrow  might  prevail  with  her  to  lay  violent  hands 
upon  herself,  he  ordered  the  same  Martalius  to  tell  her 
that  he  was  yet  alive  and  lay  hid  in  such  a place ; how- 
ever, that  she  should  for  a while  continue  her  mourning, 
and  be  sure  so  to  counterfeit  her  grief  that  she  should  not 
be  discovered.  And  indeed  in  all  other  things  the  lady 
acted  her  part  so  well,  and  managed  her  passion  to  that 
degree,  that  no  woman  could  do  it  better.  But  having 
still  a longing  desire  to  see  her  husband,  she  went  to  him 
in  the  night  and  returned  again  so  privately  that  nobody 
took  any  notice  of  her.  And  thus  she  continued  keeping 
him  company  for  seven  months  together,  that  it  might  be 
said  to  differ  very  little  from  living  in  hell  itself.  Where 
after  she  had  so  strangely  disguised  Sabinus  with  a false 
head  of  hair,  and  such  odd  sort  of  habit,  that  it  was  im- 
possible for  him  to  be  known,  she  carried  him  to  Rome 
along  with  her  undiscovered  to  several  that  met  him.  But 
not  being  able  to  obtain  his  pardon,  she  returned  with  him 
back  to  his  den,  and  for  many  years  lived  with  him  under 
ground  ; only  between  whiles  she  went  to  the  city,  and 
there  showed  herself  in  public  to  several  ladies,  her  friends 


310 


OF  LOVE. 


and  familiar  acquaintance.  But  that  which  was  the  most 
incredible  of  all  things,  she  so  ordered  her  business  that 
none  of  the  ladies  perceived  her  being  with  child,  though 
she  bathed  at  the  same  time  with  them.  For  such  is  the 
nature  of  that  same  ointment  wherewith  the  women  anoint 
their  hair  to  make  it  of  a red-golden  color,  that  by  its  fat- 
ness and  oiliness  it  plumps  and  swells  up  the  flesh  of  the 
body,  and  brings  it  up  to  an  embonpoint.  So  that  the 
lady,  no  less  liberal  of  her  ointment  than  diligent  to  chafe 
and  rub  her  body  limb  by  limb,  by  the  proportionable 
rising  and  swelling  of  her  flesh  in  every  part,  concealed 
the  swelling  of  her  belly.  And  when  she  came  to  be 
delivered,  she  endured  the  pains  of  her  child-bearing  alone 
by  herself,  like  a lioness,  hiding  herself  in  her  den  with  her 
husband ; and  there,  as  I may  say,  she  bred  up  in  private 
her  two  male  whelps.  For  at  that  time  she  was  delivered 
of  two  boys,  of  which  there  was  one  who  was  slain  in 
Egypt  y the  other,  whose  name  was  also  Sabinus,  was  but 
Very  lately  with  us  at  Delphi. 

For  this  reason  Caesar  put  the  lady  to  death  ; but  dearly 
paid  for  the  murder  by  the  utter  extirpation  of  his  whole 
posterity,  which  in  a short  time  after  was  utterly  cut  olf 
from  the  face  of  the  earth.  For  during  his  whole  reign, 
there  was  not  a more  cruel  and  savage  act  committed ; 
neither  was  there  any  other  spectacle  which  in  all  proba- 
bility the  Gods  and  Daemons  more  detested,  or  any  from 
which  they  more  turned  away  their  eyes  in  abomination 
of  the  sight.  Besides,  she  abated  the  compassion  of  the 
spectators  by  the  stoutness  of  her  behavior  and  the  gran- 
deur of  her  utterance,  than  which  there  was  nothing  that 
more  exasperated  Vespasian ; when,  despairing  of  her 
husband’s  pardon,  she  did  as  it  were  challenge  the  emperor 
to  exchange  her  life  for  his,  telling  him  withal,  that  she 
accounted  it  a far  greater  pleasure  to  live  in  darkness  under 
ground  as  she  had  done,  than  to  reign  in  splendor  like 
him. 


OF  LOVE. 


311 


26.  Here,  as  my  father  told  me,  ended  the  discourse 
concerning  Love  in  the  neighborhood  of  Thespiae  ; at  what 
time  they  saw  one  of  Pisias’s  friends,  by  name  Diogenes, 
coming  at  a good  round  pace  towards  them  ; to  whom  when 
Soclarus,  while  he  was  yet  at  a distance,  cried  out,  No 
tidings  of  war,  Diogenes,  I hope?  No,  no,  said  he,  that 
ne’er  can  be  at  a wedding ; and  therefore  mend  your  pace, 
for  the  nuptial  sacrifice  stays  only  for  your  coming.  All 
the  rest  of  the  company  were  exceeding  glad,  only  Zeuxip- 
pus  asked  whether  Pisias  were  still  angry.  On  the  con- 
trary, said  Diogenes,  as  he  before  opposed  the  match,  so 
now  he  was  the  first  to  approve  what  Ismenodora  had 
done  ; and  at  the  same  time,  putting  on  a garland  upon  his 
head  and  throwing  a white  nuptial  robe  about  his  shoulders, 
he  is  to  march  before  all  the  company  through  the  market- 
place, to  give  thanks  to  the  God  of  Love. 

Well  done,  by  Jupiter,  come  away,  come  away  then, 
cried  my  father,  that  we  may  laugh  and  be  merry  with  our 
friend,  and  adore  the  Deity.  For  there  is  no  doubt  that  he 
is  propitiously  present  with  his  favor  and  approbation. 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


I. 

In  Haliartus,  which  is  a city  of  Boeotia,  lived  a young 
damsel  of  surpassing  beauty,  whose  name  was  Aristoclia, 
the  daughter  of  Theophanes.  This  lady  was  courted  by 
Straton  an  Orchomenian,  and  Callisthenes  of  Haliartus ; 
but  Straton  was  the  more  wealthy  of  the  two,  and  more 
enamored  of  the  virgin.  For  he  had  seen  her  bathing 
herself  in  the  fountain  of  Hercyne,  which  is  in  Lebadea, 
against  the  time  that  she  was  to  bear  the  sacred  basket  in 
honor  of  Jupiter  the  King.  But  the  virgin  herself  had  a 
greater  affection  for  Callisthenes,  for  that  he  Avas  more 
nearly  allied  to  her.  In  this  case,  her  father  Theophanes, 
not  knowing  well  Avhat  to  do  (for  he  Avas  afraid  of  Straton, 
who  had  the  advantage  both  of  noble  birth  and  riches 
above  all  the  rest  of  the  Boeotians),  resolved  to  refer  the 
choice  to  the  oracle  of  Trophonius.  On  the  other  side, 
Straton  (for  he  Avas  made  believe  by  some  of  the  virgin’s 
familiar  acquaintance  that  his  mistress  had  the  greatest 
kindness  for  him)  earnestly  desired  to  refer  the  matter  to  the 
election  of  the  virgin  herself.  But  when  Theophanes  put 
the  question  to  his  daughter  in  a great  assembly  of  all  the 
friends  of  all  parties,  it  fell  out  that  the  damsel  preferred 
Callisthenes.  Thereupon  it  presently  appeared  in  Straton’s 
countenance  Iioav  much  he  Avas  disgusted  at  the  indignity 
he  had  received.  However,  tAVO  days  after,  he  came  to 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


313 


Theophanes  and  Callisthenes,  requesting  the  continuance 
of  their  friendship,  notwithstanding  that  some  Daemon 
had  envied  him  the  happiness  of  his  intended  marriage. 
They  so  well  approved  his  proposal,  that  they  invited  him 
to  the  wedding  and  the  nuptial  feast.  But  he  in  the  mean 
time  having  mustered  together  a great  number  of  his 
friends,  together  with  a numerous  troop  of  his  own  ser- 
vants, whom  he  secretly  dispersed  and  disposed  up  and 
down  in  places  proper  for  his  purpose,  watched  his  oppor- 
tunity so  well  that,  as  the  damsel  was  going  down,  accord- 
ing to  the  custom  of  the  country,  to  the  fountain  called 
Cissoessa,  there  to  pay  her  offerings  to  the  Nymphs  before 
her  wedding-day,  he  and  his  accomplices  rushing  out  of 
their  ambuscade  seized  upon  the  virgin,  whom  Straton  held 
fast  and  pulled  to  himself.  On  the  other  side,  Callisthenes, 
with  those  that  were  about  him,  as  it  is  easy  to  be  believed, 
flew  with  all  speed  to  her  relief ; and  in  this  fatal  contest, 
while  the  one  tugged  and  the  other  hauled,  the  unhappy 
damsel  perished.  As  for  Callisthenes,  he  was  never  seen 
any  more  ; whether  he  laid  violent  hands  upon  himself,  or 
whether  it  were  that  he  left  Boeotia  as  a voluntary  exile ; 
for  no  man  could  give  any  account  of  him  afterwards. 
And  as  for  Straton,  he  slew  himself  before  the  eyes  of  all 
upon  the  dead  body  of  the  unfortunate  virgin. 


II. 

A certain  great  person  whose  name  was  Phido,  design- 
ing to  make  himself  lord  of  the  whole  Peloponnesus,  and 
more  especially  desirous  that  Argos,  being  his  native 
country,  should  be  the  metropolis  of  all  the  rest,  resolved 
to  reduce  the  Corinthians  under  his  subjection.  To  this 
purpose  he  sent  to  them  to  demand  a levy  of  a thousand 
young  gentlemen,  the  most  valiant  and  the  chiefest  in  the 


314 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


prime  of  their  age  in  the  whole  city.  Accordingly  they 
sent  him  a thousand  young  sparks,  brisk  and  gallant,  un- 
der the  leading  of  Dexander,  whom  they  chose  to  be  their 
captain.  But  Phido,  designing  nothing  more  than  the 
massacre  of  these  gentlemen,  to  the  end  he  might  the  more 
easily  make  himself  master  of  Corinth  when  it  should  be 
enfeebled  by  so  great  a loss  (as  being  by  its  situation  the 
chief  bulwark  to  guard  the  entrance  into  Peloponnesus), 
imparted  this  contrivance  of  his  to  several  of  his  confidants, 
in  which  number  was  one  whose  name  was  Abro  ; who, 
having  been  formerly  acquainted  with  Dexander,  and  famil- 
iarly entertained  by  him,  discovered  the  whole  conspiracy 
to  his  friend  in  acknowledgment  of  his  kindness.  By 
which  means  the  thousand,  before  they  fell  into  the  ambus- 
cade, retreated  and  got  safe  to  Corinth.  Phido  thus  disap- 
pointed made  all  the  inquiry  imaginable,  to  find  out  who  it 
was  that  had  betrayed  and  discovered  his  design.  Which 
Abro  understanding  fled  to  Corinth  with  his  wife  and  all 
his  family,  and  settled  himself  in  Melissus,  a certain  village 
in  the  territory  of  the  Corinthians.  There  he  begat  a son, 
whom  he  named  Melissus  from  the  name  of  the  place 
where  he  was  born.  The  son  of  this  Melissus  was 
Actaeon,  the  loveliest  and  most  modest  of  all  the  striplings 
of  his  age.  For  which  reason  there  were  several  that  fell 
in  love  with  him,  but  none  with  so  much  ardor  as  Archias, 
being  of  the  race  of  the  Heraclidae,  and  for  wealth  and 
authority  the  greatest  person  in  all  Corinth.  This  Archias, 
when  he  found  that  no  fair  means  and  persuasions  would 
prevail  upon  the  young  lad,  resolved  to  ravish  him  away 
by  force  ; to  which  purpose  he  invited  himself  to  Melissus’s 
house,  as  it  were  to  make  merry,  accompanied  with  a great 
number  of  his  friends  and  servants,  and  by  their  assistance 
he  made  an  attempt  to  carry  away  the  son  by  violence. 
But  the  father  and  his  friends  opposing  the  rape,  and  the 
neighbors  coming  in  to  the  rescue  of  the  child,  poor 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


315 


Actaeon,  between  the  one  and  the  other,  was  pulled  and 
hauled  to  death  ; and  Archias  with  his  company  departed. 
Upon  this,  Melissus  carried  the  murdered  body  of  his  son 
into  the  market-place  of  Corinth,  and  there,  exposing  him 
to  public  view,  demanded  justice  to  be  done  upon  the  mur- 
derers. But  finding  that  the  Corinthians  only  pitied  his 
condition,  without  taking  any  farther  notice  of  the  matter, 
he  returned  home,  and  waited  for  the  grand  assembly  of 
the  Greeks  at  the  Isthmus.  At  what  time,  getting  up  to 
the  very  top  of  Neptune’s  temple,  he  exclaimed  against 
the  whole  race  of  the  Bacchiadae,  and  after  he  had  made 
a public  relation  of  the  good  service  which  his  father  Abro 
had  done  the  Corinthians,  he  invoked  the  vengeance  of 
the  Gods,  and  presently  threw  himself  headlong  among  the 
rocks.  Soon  after  the  Corinthians  being  plagued  with  a 
most  terrible  drought,  upon  which  ensued  a violent  famine, 
they  sent  to  the  oracle,  to  know  by  what  means  they  might 
be  delivered  from  their  calamity.  To  whom  the  Deity 
made  answer,  that  it  was  Neptune’s  wrath,  which  would 
not  cease  till  they  had  revenged  the  death  of  Actaeon. 
Archias,  hearing  this  (for  he  was  one  of  those  that  were 
sent  to  the  oracle),  never  returned  again  to  Corinth,  but 
sailing  into  Sicily,  built  there  the  city  of  Syracuse  ; where, 
after  he  was  become  the  father  of  two  daughters,  Ortygia 
and  Syracusa,  he  Avas  treacherously  slain  by  Telephus, 
Avhom  he  had  preternaturally  abused  in  his  youth,  and 
who,  having  the  command  of  a ship,  sailed  along  with 
him  into  Sicily. 


III. 

A certain  poor  man,Scedasus  by  name,  lived  at  Leuctra, 
a small  village  in  the  territory  of  the  Thespians,  and  had 
tAvo  daughters,  Hippo  and  Miletia,  or  as  others  say,  Theano 


316 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


and  Euxippe.  This  Scedasus  was  a very  good  man,  and, 
to  the  extent  of  his  fortune,  very  hospitable  to  strangers. 
This  was  the  reason  that  most  readily  and  gladly  he  enter- 
tained two  young  gentlemen  of  Sparta,  that  came  to  lodge 
at  his  house ; who,  falling  in  love  with  the  virgins,  were 
yet  so  overawed  by  the  kindness  that  Scedasus  had  showed 
them,  that  they  durst  not  make  any  rude  attempt  for  that 
time.  The  next  morning  therefore  they  went  directly  to 
the  city  of  Delphi,  whither  they  were  journeying,  where 
after  they  had  consulted  the  oracle  touching  such  ques- 
tions as  they  had  to  put,  they  returned  homeward,  and 
travelling  through  Boeotia,  stopped  again  at  Scedasus’s 
house,  who  happened  at  that  time  not  to  be  at  Leuctra. 
However,  his  daughters,  according  to  that  education  to 
which  their  father  had  accustomed  them,  gave  the  same 
entertainment  to  the  strangers  as  if  their  father  had  been 
at  home.  But  such  was  the  perfidious  ingratitude  of  these 
guests,  that  finding  the  virgins  alone,  they  ravished  and  by 
force  deflowered  the  damsels ; and,  which  was  worse,  per- 
ceiving them  lamenting  to  excess  the  undeserved  injury 
they  had  received,  the  ravishers  murdered  them,  and  after 
they  had  thrown  their  bodies  into  a well,  went  their  ways. 
Soon  after  Scedasus,  returning  home,  missed  both  his 
daughters,  but  all  things  else  he  found  safe  and  in  order, 
as  he  left  them  ; which  put  him  into  such  a quandary, 
that  he  knew  not  what  to  say  or  do,  till  instructed  by  a 
little  bitch,  that  several  times  in  a day  came  Avhining  and 
fawning  upon  him  and  then  returned  to  the  well,  he  be- 
gan to  suspect  what  he  found  to  be  true  ; and  so  he  drew  up 
the  dead  bodies  of  his  daughters.  Moreover,  being  then 
informed  by  his  neighbors,  that  they  had  seen  the  two 
Lacedaemonian  gentlemen  which  he  had  entertained  some 
time  before  go  into  bis  house,  he  guessed  them  to  be  the 
persons  who  had  committed  the  fact,  for  that  they  would  be 
always  praising  the  virgins  when  they  lodged  there  before, 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


317 


and  telling  their  father  what  happy  men  they  would  be  that 
should  have  the  good  fortune  to  marry  them.  Thereupon 
away  he  went  to  Lacedaemon,  with  a resolution  to  make 
his  complaint  to  the  Ephori  ; but  being  benighted  in  the 
territory  of  Argos,  he  put  into  a public  house,  where  he 
found  another  old  man  of  the  city  of  Oreus,  in  the  province 
of  Histiaea ; whom  when  he  heard  sighing  and  cursing 
the  Lacedaemonians,  Scedasus  asked  him  what  injury  the 
Lacedaemonians  had  done  him.  In  answer  to  which,  the 
old  man  gave  him  this  account : I am,  said  he,  a subject  to 
the  Lacedaemonians,  by  whom  Aristodemus  was  sent  to 
Oreus  to  he  governor  of  that  place,  where  he  committed 
several  outrages  and  savage  enormities.  Among  the  rest, 
being  fallen  in  love  with  my  son,  when  he  could  by  no 
fair  means  procure  his  consent,  he  endeavored  to  carry  him 
away  by  main  force  out  of  the  wrestling-place.  But  the 
president  of  the  exercises  opposing  him,  with  the  assist- 
ance of  several  of  the  young  men,  Aristodemus  was  con- 
strained to  retire  ; hut  the  next  day,  having  provided  a 
galley  to  be  in  readiness,  he  ravished  away  my  son,  and 
sailing  from  Oreus  to  the  opposite  continent,  endeavored, 
when  he  had  the  boy  there,  to  abuse  his  body ; and  be- 
cause the  lad  refused  to  submit  to  his  lust,  cut  the  child’s 
throat.  Upon  his  return  he  made  a great  feast  at  Oreus, 
to  which  he  invited  all  his  friends.  In  the  mean  while, 
I being  soon  informed  of  the  sad  accident,  presently  went 
and  interred  the  body ; and  having  so  done,  I made 
haste  to  Sparta,  and  preferred  my  complain  to  the  Ephori, 
but  they  gave  no  answer,  nor  took  any  notice  of  the 
matter. 

Scedasus,  having  heard  this  relation,  remained  very 
much  dejected,  believing  he  should  have  no  better  suc- 
cess. However,  in  his  turn,  he  gave  an  account  to  the 
stranger  of  his  own  sad  mischance  ; which  when  he  had 
done,  the  stranger  advised  him  not  to  complain  to  the 


318 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


Ephori,  but  to  return  to  his  own  country,  and  erect  a 
monument  for  his  two  daughters.  But  Scedasus,  not 
liking  this  advice,  went  to  Sparta,  made  his  case  known 
to  the  Ephori,  and  demanded  justice  ; who  taking  no  notice 
of  his  complaint,  away  he  went  to  the  Kings ; but  they  as 
little  regarding  him,  he  applied  himself  to  every  particular 
citizen,  and  recommended  to  them  the  sadness  of  his  con- 
dition. At  length,  when  he  saw  nothing  would  do,  he  ran 
through  the  city,  stretching  forth  his  hands  to  the  sun  and 
stamping  on  the  ground  with  his  feet,  and  called  upon  the 
Furies  to  revenge  his  cause  ; and  when  he  had  done  all  he 
could,  in  the  last  place  slew  himself.  But  afterwards  the 
Lacedaemonians  dearly  paid  for  their  injustice.  For  be- 
ing at  that  time  lords  of  all  Greece,  while  all  the  chiefest 
cities  of  that  spacious  region  were  curbed  by  their  garri- 
sons, Epaminondas  the  Theban  was  the  first  that  threw  off 
their  yoke,  and  cut  the  throats  of  the  garrison  that  lay  in 
Thebes.  Upon  which,  the  Lacedaemonians  making  war 
upon  the  revolters,  the  Thebans  met  them  at  Leuctra,  con- 
fident of  success  from  the  name  of  the  place ; for  that 
formerly  they  had  been  there  delivered  from  slavery,  at 
what  time  Amphictyon,  being  driven  into  exile  by  Sthene- 
lus,  came  to  the  city  of  Thebes,  and  finding  them  tributa- 
ries to  the  Chalcidians,  after  he  had  slaiu  Chalcodon  king 
of  the  Euboeans,  eased  them  altogether  of  that  burthen. 
In  like  manner  it  happened  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
were  vanquished  not  far  from  the  monument  of  Scedasus’s 
daughters.  It  is  reported  also,  that  before  the  fight,  Pe- 
lopidas  being  then  one  of  the  Theban  generals,  and  trou- 
bled by  reason  of  some  certain  signs  that  seemed  to  por- 
tend some  ill  event  in  the  battle,  Scedasus  appeared  to  him 
in  a dream  and  bade  him  be  of  good  courage,  for  that  the 
Lacedaemonians  were  come  to  Leuctra,  to  receive  the  just 
vengeance  which  they  deserved  from  him  and  his  daugh- 
ters ; only  the  ghost  advised  him,  the  day  before  he  en- 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


319 


countered  the  Lacedaemonians,  to  sacrifice  a white  colt, 
which  he  should  find  ready  for  him  close  by  his  daughters’ 
sepulchre.  Whereupon  Pelopidas,  Avhile  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians yet  lay  encamped  at  Tegea,  sent  certain  persons  to 
examine  the  truth  of  the  matter  ; and  finding  by  the  in- 
habitants thereabouts  that  every  thing  agreed  with  his 
dream,  he  advanced  with  his  army  boldly  forward,  and 
won  the  field. 


IV. 

Phocus  was  a Boeotian  by  birth  (for  he  was  born  in  the 
city  of  Clisas),  the  father  of  Callirrhoe,  who  was  a virgin 
of  matchless  beauty  and  modesty,  and  courted  by  thirty 
young  gentlemen,  the  prime  of  the  Boeotian  nobility. 
Phocus  therefore,  seeing  so  many  suitors  about  her,  still 
pretended  one  excuse  or  other  to  put  off  her  marriage, 
afraid  lest  some  force  or  other  should  be  put  upon  her. 
At  length,  when  he  could  hold  out  no  longer,  the  gentlemen 
being  offended  at  his  dilatory  answers,  he  desired  them  to 
refer  it  to  the  Pythian  Deity  to  make  the  choice.  But  this 
the  gentlemen  took  so  heinously,  that  they  fell  upon  Phocus 
and  slew  him.  In  this  combustion  and  tumult,  the  virgin 
making  her  escape  fled  into  the  country,  and  was  as  soon 
pursued  by  the  young  sparks ; but  lighting  upon  certain 
country  people  that  were  piling  up  their  wheat  in  a barn, 
by  their  assistance  she  saved  herself.  For  the  countrymen 
hid  her  in  the  corn,  so  that  they  who  were  in  chase  of  her 
passed  her  by.  The  virgin  thus  preserved  kept  herself 
close  till  the  general  assembly  of  all  the  Boeotians  ; and 
then  coming  to  Coronea,  she  there  sat  as  a suppliant  before 
the  altar  of  Itonian  Minerva,  and  there  gave  a full  relation 
of  the  villany  and  murder  committed  by  her  several  suitors, 
discovering  withal  the  names  of  the  persons,  and  places  of 


320 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


their  abode.  The  Boeotians  commiserating  the  virgin 
were  no  less  incensed  against  the  young  gentlemen ; who, 
having  notice  of  what  had  passed,  fled  to  Orchomenus,  but 
being  shut  out  by  the  citizens,  made  their  escape  to  Hip- 
potae,  a village  near  to  Helicon,  seated  between  Thebes  and 
Coronea,  where  they  were  received  and  protected.  Thither 
the  Thebans  sent  to  have  the  murderers  of  Phocus  de- 
livered up ; which  the  inhabitants  refusing  to  do,  they 
marched  against  the  town  with  a good  force  of  other 
Boeotians  under  the  leading  of  Phoedus,  then  the  chief 
ruler  of  Thebes.  And  laying  siege  to  it  (for  it  was  a 
strong  place),  at  last  they  took  it  for  want  of  water ; and 
in  the  first  place  having  apprehended  all  the  murderers, 
they  stoned  them  to  death  ; then  they  condemned  the  in- 
habitants to  perpetual  slavery,  broke  down  the  walls, 
ruined  the  houses,  and  divided  the  land  between  the  The- 
bans and  Coroneans.  The  report  goes,  that  the  night  be- 
fore ITippotae  was  taken,  there  was  a voice  heard  from 
Helicon  several  times  uttering  these  words,  I am  come ; 
and  that  when  the  thirty  rivals  heard  it,  they  knew  it  to  be 
the  voice  of  Phocus.  It  was  said,  moreover,  that  the  very 
day  the  rivals  were  stoned,  the  monument  of  the  old  man 
which  was  erected  in  Clisas  was  covered  with  drops  of 
saffron.  And  as  Phoedus,  the  governor  and  general  of  the 
Thebans,  was  upon  his  march  homeward  from  the  siege, 
news  was  brought  him  that  his  wife  had  brought  him  a 
daughter,  which  for  the  good  omen’s  sake  he  called  by  the 
name  of  Nicostrate. 


V. 

Alcippus  was  a Lacedaemonian  by  birth,  who  marrying 
Damocrita  became  the  father  of  two  daughters.  This 
Alcippus,  being  a person  that  always  advised  the  city  for 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOYE.  321 

the  best,  and  one  that  was  always  ready  to  serve  his  coun- 
trymen upon  all  occasions,  was  envied  by  a contrary  fac- 
tion, that  continually  accused  him  to  the  Ephori  as  one  that 
endeavored  to  subvert  the  ancient  laws  and  constitutions 
of  the  city.  At  length  the  Ephori  banished  the  husband, 
who  being  condemned  forsook  the  city ; but  when  Damo- 
crita  and  his  daughters  would  fain  have  followed  him,  they 
would  not  permit  them  to  stir.  Moreover,  they  confiscated 
his  estate,  to  deprive  his  daughters  of  their  portions.  Nay, 
more  than  this,  when  there  were  some  that  courted  the 
daughters  for  the  sake  of  their  father’s  virtue,  his  enemies 
obtained  a decree  whereby  it  was  forbid  that  any  man 
should  make  love  to  the  young  ladies,  cunningly  alleging 
that  the  mother  had  often  prayed  to  the  Gods  to  favor  her 
daughters  with  speedy  Avedlock,  to  the  end  they  might  the 
sooner  bring  forth  children  to  be  revenged  of  the  injury 
done  their  father.  Damocrita  thus  beset,  and  in  a strait 
on  every  side,  stayed  till  the  general  festival,  when  the 
women,  together  with  their  daughters,  servants,  and  little 
children,  feast  in  public  together  ; on  which  day,  the  wives 
of  the  magistrates  and  persons  in  dignity  feast  all  night  in 
a spacious  hall  by  themselves.  But  then  it  was  that  Da- 
mocrita, with  a sword  girt  about  her,  and  taking  her  daugh- 
ters with  her,  went  in  the  night-time  to  the  temple ; and 
watching  her  opportunity,  when  the  women  were  all  busy 
in  the  great  hall  performing  the  mysteries  of  the  solemnity, 
after  all  the  ways  and  passages  were  stopped  up,  she 
fetched  the  wood  that  was  ready  prepared  for  the  sacrifices 
appertaining  to  the  festival,  and  piled  it  against  the  doors 
of  the  room,  and  so  set  fire  to  it.  All  was  then  in  a hurry, 
and  the  men  came  crowding  in  vain  to  help  their  wives ; 
but  then  it  was  that  Damocrita  slew  her  daughters,  and 
upon  their  dead  bodies  herself.  Thus  the  Lacedaemonians, 
not  knowing  upon  whom  to  wreak  their  anger,  were  forced 

to  be  contented  with  only  throwing  the  dead  bodies  of  the 

21 


VOL.  IV. 


322 


FIVE  TRAGICAL  HISTORIES  OF  LOVE. 


mother  and  the  daughters  without  the  confines  of  their 
territories.  For  which  barbarous  act  of  theirs,  the  Deity 
being  highly  offended  plagued  the  Lacedaemonians,  as 
their  histories  record,  with  that  most  dreadful  earthquake, 
so  remarkable  to  posterity. 


A DISCOURSE  TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 


1.  Plato,  being  desired  by  the  Cyreneans  to  prescribe  to 
them  good  laws  and  to  settle  their  government,  refused  to 
do  it,  saying  that  it  was  a hard  matter  to  give  them  any 
law  whilst  they  enjoyed  so  much  prosperity,  since  nothing 
is  so  fierce,  arrogant,  and  untamable,  as  a man  that  thinks 
himself  to  be  in  a happy  condition.  Wherefore  it  is  very 
difficult  to  give  counsel  to  princes  in  matters  of  govern- 
ment ; for  they  fear  to  receive  advice  as  a thing  seeming  to 
command  them,  lest  the  force  of  reason  should  seem  to 
lessen  their  power,  by  obliging  it  to  submit  to  truth.  And 
they  consider  not  the  saying  of  Theopompus,  king  of 
Sparta,  who,  being  the  first  in  that  country  that  joined 
the  Ephori  with  the  Kings,  was  reproached  by  his  wife, 
because  by  this  means  he  would  leave  the  kingdom  to  his 
children  less  than  he  found  it ; to  whom  he  replied,  that 
he  should  render  it  so  much  the  greater,  the  firmer  it  was. 
For,  by  holding  the  reins  of  government  somewhat  loose, 
he  avoided  envy  and  danger ; nevertheless,  since  he  per- 
mitted the  stream  of  his  power  to  flow  so  freely  into  other 
channels,  what  he  gave  to  them  must  needs  be  a loss  to 
himself.  Though  philosophy  possessing  a prince  as  his 
assistant  and  keeper,  by  taking  away  the  dangerous  part  of 
fulness  of  power  (as  if  it  were  fulness  of  body),  leaves 
the  sound  part. 

2.  But  many  kings  and  princes  foolishly  imitate  those 
unskilful  statuaries  Avho  think  to  make  their  images  look 


324 


A DISCOURSE 


great  and  fierce  if  they  make  them  much  straddling,  with 
distended  arms,  and  open  mouth.  After  the  same  manner 
they,  by  the  grave  tone  of  their  voice,  stern  countenance, 
morose  behavior,  and  living  apart  from  all  society,  would 
affect  a kind  of  majestic  grandeur,  not  unlike  those  statues 
that  without  seem  to  be  of  an  heroic  and  divine  form,  but 
within  are  filled  with  nothing  but  earth,  stone  and  lead ; — 
with  this  only  difference,  that  the  weight  of  these  massy 
bodies  renders  them  stable  and  unmovable  ; whereas  un- 
learned princes,  by  their  internal  ignorance,  are  often 
shaken  and  overthrown,  and  in  regard  they  do  not  build 
their  power  on  a true  basis  and  foundation,  they  fall  to- 
gether with  it.  For,  as  it  is  necessary  at  first  that  the  rule 
itself  should  be  right  and  straight,  before  those  things  that 
are  applied  to  it  can  be  rectified  and  made  like  unto  it ; so 
a potentate  ought  in  the  first  place  to  learn  how  to  govern 
his  own  passions  and  to  endue  his  mind  with  a tincture  of 
princely  virtues,  and  afterwards  to  make  his  subjects  con- 
formable to  his  example.  For  it  is  not  the  property  of  one 
that  is  ready  to  fall  himself  to  hinder  another  from  trip- 
ping, nor  of  one  that  is  rude  and  illiterate  to  instruct  the 
ignorant ; neither  can  a person  govern  that  is  under  no 
government.  But  most  men,  being  deceived  by  a false 
opinion,  esteem  it  the  chiefest  good  in  ruling  to  be  subject 
to  no  authority ; and  thus  the  Persian  king  accounted 
all  his  servants  and  slaves  except  his  wife,  whose  master 
he  ought  more  especially  to  have  been. 

3.  Who  then  shall  have  power  to  govern  a prince'? 
The  law,  without  doubt ; which  (as  Pindar  saith)  is  the 
king  of  mortal  and  immortal  beings ; which  is  not  written 
without  in  books  nor  engraven  on  wood  or  stone,  but  is  a 
clear  reason  imprinted  in  the  heart,  always  residing  and 
watching  therein,  and  never  suffering  the  mind  to  be  with- 
out government.  The  king  of  Persia  indeed  commanded 
one  of  his  lords  that  lay  in  the  same  chamber  to  attend 


TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 


325 


him  every  morning,  and  to  sound  these  words  in  his  ears  : 
Arise,  O king  ! and  take  care  of  those  affairs  and  duties 
that  Oromasdes  requires  of  thee.  But  a wise  and  prudent 
prince  hath  such  a monitor  within  his  breast  as  always 
prompts  and  admonishes  him  to  the  same  effect.  It  was  a 
saying  of  Polemon,  that  Love  was  the  minister  of  the  Gods, 
appointed  to  take  care  of  the  education  of  youth  ; but  it 
might  be  more  truly  affirmed,  that  princes  are  the  admin- 
istrators of  the  divine  power,  for  the  safety  and  protection 
of  mankind,  to  distribute  part  of  those  goods  that  God  be- 
stows on  men,  and  to  reserve  part  for  themselves. 

Dost  thou  behold  the  vast  and  azure  sky, 

How  in  its  liquid  arms  the  earth  doth  lie  1 * 

The  air  indeed  disperses  the  first  principles  of  convenient 
seeds,  but  the  earth  causeth  them  to  spring  forth  ; some 
grow  and  thrive  by  the  means  of  moderate  and  refreshing 
showers,  some  delight  in  gentle  breezes  of  wind,  and  some 
are  cherished  by  the  influences  of  the  moon  and  stars  ; 
but  it  is  the  sun  that  perfects  and  beautifies  all,  inspiring 
them  with  the  principle  of  mutual  sympathy  and  love. 
Nevertheless,  all  these  so  many  and  so  great  benefits,  that 
are  the  effects  of  the  divine  munificence  and  liberality, 
cannot  be  enjoyed  or  duly  made  use  of,  without  a law,  jus- 
tice, and  a prince ; for  justice  is  the  end  of  the  law,  the 
law  is  the  prince’s  work,  and  the  prince  is  the  image  of 
God,  that  disposeth  all  things.  He  doth  not  stand  in  need 
of  a Phidias,  a Polycletus,  or  a Myro ; but  by  the  practice 
of  virtue  makes  himself  most  like  the  divine  nature,  and 
becomes  a most  delectable  object  to  God  and  man.  For 
as  God  hath  placed  the  sun  and  moon  in  heaven,  as  mani- 
fest tokens  of  his  power  and  glory,  so  the  majesty  of  a 
prince  is  resplendent  on  earth,  as  he  is  his  representative 
and  vicegerent, 

Who  doth  like  God  most  righteous  laws  dispense.! 

* Eurip.  Frag.  935.  t Odyss.  XIX.  109. 


326 


A DISCOURSE 


I 


I 


I mean  such  a one  as  believes  that  the  likeness  of  God  is 
found  in  wisdom  and  understanding,  not  in  the  sceptre,  the 
thunderbolt,  or  the  trident,  with  which  symbols  of  Deity 
some  have  vainly  caused  themselves  to  be  carved  or  paint- 
ed, thereby  exposing  their  egregious  folly  to  the  world,  in 
affecting  that  which  they  are  not  able  to  attain  to.  For 
God  cannot  but  be  incensed  against  those  that  presume  to 
imitate  him  in  producing  thunder,  lightnings,  and  sun- 
beams ; but  if  any  strive  to  emulate  his  goodness  and 
mercy,  being  well  pleased  with  their  endeavors,  he  will 
assist  them,  and  will  endue  them  with  his  order,  justice, 
truth,  and  gentleness,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more 
sacred  and  pure,  — not  fire,  not  light,  nor  the  course  of 
the  sun,  not  the  rising  and  setting  of  the  stars,  nor  even 
eternity  and  immortality  itself.  For  God  is  not  only  happy 
by  reason  of  the  duration  of  his  being,  but  because  of  the 
excellency  of  his  virtue ; this  is  properly  divine  and  tran- 
scendent, and  that  is  also  good  which  is  governed  by  it. 

4.  Anaxarchus  endeavoring  to  comfort  Alexander,  who 
was  very  much  afflicted  for  the  murder  he  had  committed 
on  the  person  of  Clitus,  told  him,  that  justice  and  right 
sat  as  assistants  by  the  throne  of  Jupiter,  so  that  whatso- 
ever was  done  by  a king  might  be  accounted  lawful  and 
just ; but  by  this  means  he  indiscreetly  prevented  his  re- 
pentance, and  encouraged  him  to  attempt  the  committing 
the  like  crimes  again.  But  if  we  may  be  permitted  to 
guess  at  these  matters,  Jupiter  hath  not  Justice  for  an  as- 
sessor or  counsellor,  but  is  himself  Justice  and  Bight,  and 
the  original  and  perfection  of  all  laws.  Therefore  the 
ancients  devised  and  taught  these  things,  that  they  might 
thereby  show  that  even  Jupiter  himself  could  not  rule  well 
without  Justice  ; for  she  is  (according  to  Hesiod)  a pure  and 
undefiled  virgin,  and  the  companion  of  Modesty,  Eeverence, 
Chastity,  and  Simplicity ; hence  kings  are  called  “ rever- 
ent,” for  they  ought  to  be  most  reverent  who  fear  least. 


TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 


327 


But  a prince  ought  to  be  more  afraid  of  doing  than  of  suf- 
fering ill ; for  the  former  is  the  cause  of  the  other  ; and 
this  is  a noble  and  generous  sort  of  fear,  well  becoming  a 
prince,  to  be  solicitous  lest  any  harm  should  befall  his  sub- 
jects unawares : 

As  faithful  dogs,  surprised  with  sudden  fear, 

When  once  they  see  the  savage  beasts  appear, 

Not  of  themselves,  but  of  their  flocks  take  care.* 

Epaminondas,  when  on  a certain  festival  day  the  Thebans 
gave  themselves  up  wholly  to  drinking  and  carousing,  went 
about  alone  and  viewed  the  arsenal  and  the  walls  of  the 
city,  saying,  that  he  was  sober  and  vigilant  that  others 
might  have  liberty  to  be  drunk  and  to  sleep.  And  Cato 
at  Utica,  when  he  had  called  together  by  proclamation  all 
his  soldiers  that  had  escaped  the  slaughter  to  the  seaside, 
caused  them  to  embark  in  ships ; and  having  prayed  for 
their  prosperous  voyage,  returned  home  and  killed  him- 
self, leaving  an  example  to  princes,  whom  they  ought  to 
fear  and  what  they  ought  to  contemn.  On  the  other  hand, 
Clearchus,  king  of  Pontus,  creeping  into  a chest,  slept 
therein  like  a snake.  And  Aristodemus  lay  with  his  con- 
cubine in  a bed  placed  in  an  upper  room  over  a trap-door, 
her  mother  removing  the  ladder  as  soon  as  they  were  got 
up,  and  bringing  it  again  in  the  morning.  How  then, 
think  you,  did  he  fear  to  be  seen  in  the  theatre,  in  the 
judgment-hall,  in  the  court,  or  at  a feast,  who  had  turned 
his  bed-chamber  into  a prison?  For  indeed  good  princes 
are  possessed  with  fear  for  their  subjects,  but  tyrants  with 
fear  of  them  ; insomuch  that  their  timorousness  increaseth 
with  their  power,  since  the  more  people  they  have  under 
their  dominion,  so  much  the  more  objects  they  see  of  dread 
and  terror. 

5.  Neither  is  it  probable  or  convenient  (as  some  philos- 
ophers affirm)  that  God  should  be  mingled  together  with 


* II.  X.  183. 


328 


A DISCOURSE 


matter  that  is  altogether  passive,  and  with  things  obnox- 
ious to  innumerable  necessities,  chances,  and  mutations  ; 
but  to  us  he  seems  to  be  placed  somewhere  above  with  the 
eternal  nature  that  always  operates  after  the  same  man- 
ner ; and  proceeding  (as  Plato  saith)  on  sacred  foundations, 
according  to  nature,  he  brings  his  works  to  perfection. 
And  as  he  hath  placed  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  as  a clear 
image  of  his  most  sacred  and  glorious  essence,  in  which, 
as  in  a mirror,  he  exhibits  himself  to  the  contemplation  of 
wise  men ; so  in  like  manner,  the  splendor  of  justice  that 
appears  in  some  cities  is  a kind  of  representation  of  the 
divine  wisdom,  which  happy  and  prudent  persons  describe 
by  the  help  of  philosophy,  conforming  themselves  to  those 
things  which  are  of  a most  sublime  and  excellent  nature. 
It  is  certain  that  this  disposition  of  mind  cannot  be  at- 
tained but  by  the  doctrine  of  philosophy ; otherwise  we 
shall  lie  under  the  same  circumstances  as  Alexander,  who 
seeing  Diogenes  at  Corinth,  and  being  astonished  at  his 
ingenuity  and  majestic  gravity,  let  fall  this  expression : 
If  I were  not  Alexander,  I would  choose  to  be  Diogenes. 
For  being  almost  oppressed  with  the  weight  of  his  own 
grandeur  and  power,  which  are  the  impediments  of  virtue 
and  ease,  he  seemed  to  envy  the  happiness  of  a threadbare 
cloak  and  pouch,  with  which  the  Cynic  rendered  himself 
as  invincible  as  he  could  be  with  all  his  armor,  horses,  and 
pikes.  However,  he  had  an  opportunity  to  philosophize 
and  to  become  Diogenes  in  his  mind,  though  he  remained 
Alexander  in  his  outward  state  and  condition,  and  he  might 
more  easily  be  Diogenes,  because  he  was  Alexander  ; for- 
asmuch as  to  keep  the  vessel  of  his  prosperous  fortune 
steady,  which  was  tossed  with  the  winds  and  waves,  he 
stood  in  need  of  a good  quantity  of  ballast  and  of  a skil- 
ful pilot. 

6.  Amongst  the  mean  and  inferior  sort  of  people,  folly 
mingled  with  weakness  is  destitute  of  an  ability  to  do  mis- 


TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 


329 


chief ; and  the  mind  is  vexed  and  distracted  by  it,  as  a 
distempered  brain  is  with  troublesome  dreams,  insomuch 
that  it  hath  not  strength  enough  to  execute  what  it  desires. 
But  power  joined  with  a corrupt  and  depraved  inclination 
adds  the  fuel  of  madness  to  the  fire  of  the  passions.  So 
true  is  that  saying  of  Dionysius,  who  declared,  that  he 
then  chiefly  enjoyed  his  authority,  when  he  speedily  per- 
formed what  he  designed.  But  herein  lies  the  greatest 
danger,  lest  he  that  is  able  to  do  all  things  that  he  desires 
should  desire  those  things  that  he  ought  not : 

The  word’s  no  sooner  said,  but  th’  act  is  done.* 

Vice,  being  furnished  with  wheels  by  power,  sets  all  the 
faculties  of  the  soul  in  a violent  fermentation ; of  anger  it 
makes  murder,  of  love  adultery,  and  of  covetousness  the 
confiscation  of  other  men’s  goods. 

The  word’s  no  sooner  said,  — 

but  the  offender  is  executed  ; a suspicion  arises,  — the 
accused  person  is  put  to  death.  And  as  naturalists  affirm, 
that  the  lightning  breaks  forth  after  the  thunder  as  the 
blood  follows  the  wound,  but  is  seen  first,  since  whilst  the 
ear  expects  the  sound  the  eye  discerns  the  light ; so  under 
some  governments  the  punishments  precede  the  accusation, 
and  the  condemnation  prevents  the  proving  of  the  crime. 
Under  such  circumstances, 

No  human  soul  such  license  can  withstand,  — 

As  anchors  strive  in  vain  to  hold  in  sand, 

unless  this  exorbitant  power  be  restrained  and  kept  within 
its  due  bounds  by  the  force  of  sound  reason.  Therefore  a 
prince  ought  to  imitate  the  sun,  which  being  come  to  its 
greatest  height  in  the  northern  signs,  moves  slowest,  where- 
by he  renders  his  course  the  more  safe. 

7.  For  it  is  not  possible  that  the  vices  and  faults  of  per- 
sons in  authority  can  be  concealed  in  obscurity.  But  as 


* II.  XIX.  242. 


330 


A DISCOURSE  TO  AN  UNLEARNED  PRINCE. 


people  that  are  troubled  with  the  falling-sickness,  if  they 
walk  about  in  a high  place,  are  seized  with  a giddiness  in 
the  head  and  a dimness  in  the  sight,  which  are  the  usual 
symptoms  of  that  disease  ; so  Fortune,  when  she  hath  a 
little  exalted  illiterate  and  foolish  men  with  riches,  glory, 
or  authority,  suddenly  hastens  their  ruin.  And  as  amongst 
empty  vessels  it  cannot  easily  be  discerned  which  are  whole 
and  which  are  leaky,  but  by  the  pouring  in  of  any  liquor ; 
so  corrupt  and  exulcerated  minds,  after  the  infusion  of 
power,  are  not  able  to  contain  it,  but  immediately  overflow 
with  concupiscence,  anger,  arrogance,  and  folly.  And  what 
need  is  there  of  mentioning  these  particulars,  since  the 
least  faults  and  miscarriages  of  renowned  and  famous  men 
lie  under  the  lash  of  slander  and  calumny  1 Cimon  was 
accused  for  being  too  much  addicted  to  the  drinking  of 
wine,  Scipio  was  blamed  for  delighting  in  immoderate 
sleep,  and  Lucullus  for  making  too  liberal  and  costly  en- 
tertainments. . . . 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


1.  The  style,  O Alexander,  of  Herodotus,  as  being  sim- 
ple, free,  and  easily  suiting  itself  to  its  subject,  has  de- 
ceived many ; but  more,  a persuasion  of  his  dispositions 
being  equally  sincere.  For  it  is  not  only  (as  Plato  says) 
an  extreme  injustice,  to  make  a show  of  being  just  when 
one  is  not  so ; but  it  is  also  the  highest  malignity,  to  pre- 
tend to  simplicity  and  mildness  and  be  in  the  mean  time 
really  most  malicious.  Now  since  he  principally  exerts 
his  malice  against  the  Boeotians  and  Corinthians,  though 
without  sparing  any  other,  I think  myself  obliged  to  de-  I 
fend  our  ancestors  and  the  truth  against  this  part  of  his 
writings,  since  those  who  would  detect  all  his  other  lies 
and  fictions  would  have  need  of  many  books.  But,  as 
Sophocles  has  it,  the  face  of  persuasion  is  prevalent,  espe- 
cially when  delivered  in  good  language,  and  such  as  has 
power  to  conceal  both  the  other  absurdities  and  the  ill- 
nature  of  the  writer.  King  Philip  told  the  Greeks  who 
revolted  from  him  to  Titus  Quinctius,  that  they  had  got  a 
more  polished,  but  a longer-lasting  yoke.  So  the  malice 
of  Herodotus  is  indeed  more  polite  and  delicate  than  that 
of  Theopompus,  yet  it  pinches  closer,  and  makes  a more 
severe  impression,  — not  unlike  to  those  winds  which, 
blowing  secretly  through  narrow  chinks,  are  sharper  than 
those  that  are  more  diffused.  Now  it  seems  to  me  very 
convenient  to  delineate,  as  it  were,  in  a rough  draught, 


332 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


those  signs  and  marks  that  distinguish  a malicious  narra- 
tion from  a candid  and  unbiassed  one,  applying  afterwards 
every  point  we  shall  examine  to  such  as  appertain  to  them. 

2.  First  then,  whoever  in  relating  a story  shall  use  the 
most  odious  terms  when  gentler  expressions  might  do  as 
well,  is  not  to  be  esteemed  impartial,  but  an  enjoyer  of  his 
own  fancy,  in  putting  the  worst  construction  on  things ; as 
if  any  one,  instead  of  saying  Nicias  is  too  much  given  to 
superstition,  should  call  him  fanatic,  or  should  accuse 
Cleon  of  presumption  and  madness  rather  than  of  incon- 
siderateness in  speech. 

3.  Secondly,  when  a writer,  catching  hold  of  a fault 
which  has  no  reference  to  his  story,  shall  draw  it  into  the 
relation  of  such  affairs  as  need  it  not,  extending  his  narra- 
tive with  circumlocutions,  only  that  he  may  insert  a man’s 
misfortune,  offence,  or  discommendable  action,  it  is  mani- 
fest that  he  delights  in  speaking  evil.  Therefore  Thucy- 
dides would  not  clearly  relate  the  faults  of  Cleon,  which 
were  very  numerous ; and  as  for  Hyperbolus  the  orator, 
having  touched  at  him  in  a word  and  called  him  an  ill 
man,  he  let  him  go.  Philistus  also  passed  over  all  those 
outrages  committed  by  Dionysius  on  the  barbarians  which 
had  no  connection  with  the  Grecian  affairs.  For  the  ex- 
cursions and  digressions  of  history  are  principally  allowed 
for  fables  and  antiquities,  and  sometimes  also  for  enco- 
miums. But  he  who  makes  reproaches  and  detractions  an 
addition  to  his  discourse  seems  to  incur  the  tragedian’s 
curse  on  the  “ collector  of  men’s  calamities.” 

4.  Now  the  opposite  to  this  is  known  to  every  one,  as 
the  omitting  to  relate  some  good  and  laudable  action, 
which,  though  it  may  seem  not  to  be  reprehensible,  yet  is 
then  done  maliciously  when  the  omission  happens  in  a 
place  that  is  pertinent  to  the  history.  For  to  praise  un- 
willingly is  so  far  from  being  more  civil  than  to  dispraise 
willingly,  that  it  is  perhaps  rather  more  uncivil. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


333 


5.  Tlie  fourth  sign  of  a partial  disposition  in  writing  of 
history  I take  to  be  this : When  a matter  is  related  in  two 
or  more  several  manners,  and  the  historian  shall  embrace 
the  worst.  Sophisters  indeed  are  permitted,  for  the  obtain- 
ing either  of  profit  or  reputation,  to  undertake  the  defence 
of  the  worst  cause  ; for  they  neither  create  any  firm  belief 
of  the  matter,  nor  yet  do  they  deny  that  they  are  often 
pleased  in  maintaining  paradoxes  and  making  incredible 
things  appear  probable.  But  an  historian  is  then  just, 
when  he  asserts  such  things  as  he  knows  to  be  true,  and 
of  those  that  are  uncertain  reports  rather  the  better  than 
the  worse.  Nay,  there  are  many  writers  who  wholly  omit 
the  worse.  Thus  Ephorus  ivrites  of  Themistocles,  that  he 
was  acquainted  with  the  treason  of  Pausanias  and  his 
negotiations  with  the  King’s  lieutenants,  but  that  he  neither 
consented  to  it,  nor  hearkened  to  Pausanias’s  proffers  of 
making  him  partaker  of  his  hopes ; and  Thucydides  left 
the  whole  matter  out  of  his  story,  as  judging  it  to  be 
false. 

6.  Moreover,  in  things  confessed  to  have  been  done,  but 
for  doing  which  the  cause  and  intention  is  unknown,  he 
who  casts  his  conjectures  on  the  worst  side  is  partial  and 
malicious.  Thus  do  the  comedians,  who  affirm  the  Pelo- 
ponnesian war  to  have  been  kindled  by  Pericles  for  the 
love  of  Aspasia  or  the  sake  of  Phidias,  and  not  through 
any  desire  of  honor,  or  ambition  of  pulling  down  the 
Peloponnesian  pride  and  giving  place  in  nothing  to  the 
Lacedaemonians.  For  those  who  suppose  a bad  cause  for 
laudable  works  and  commendable  actions,  endeavoring  by 
calumnies  to  insinuate  sinister  suspicions  of  the  actor  when 
they  cannot  openly  discommend  the  act,  — as  they  that 
impute  the  killing  of  Alexander  the  tyrant  by  Theba  not 
to  any  magnanimity  or  hatred  of  vice,  but  to  a certain 
feminine  jealousy  and  passion,  and  those  that  say  Cato 
slew  himself  for  fear  Caesar  should  put  him  to  a more 


334 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


shameful  death,  — such  as  these  are  manifestly  in  the 
highest  degree  envious  and  malicious. 

7.  An  historical  narration  is  also  more  or  less  guilty  of 
malice,  according  as  it  relates  the  manner  of  the  action ; 
as  if  one  should  be  said  to  have  performed  an  exploit 
rather  by  money  than  valor,  as  some  affirm  of  Philip ; or 
else  easily  and  without  any  labor,  as  it  is  said  of  Alexander ; 
or  else  not  by  prudence,  but  by  Fortune,  as  the  enemies  of 
Timotheus  painted  cities  falling  into  his  nets  as  he  lay 
sleeping.  For  they  undoubtedly  diminish  the  greatness 
and  beauty  of  the  actions,  who  deny  the  performers  of 
them  to  have  done  them  generously,  industriously,  vir- 
tuously, and  by  themselves. 

8.  Moreover,  those  who  will  directly  speak  ill  of  any 
one  incur  the  reproach  of  moroseness,  rashness,  and  mad- 
ness, unless  they  keep  within  measure.  But  they  who 
send  forth  calumnies  obliquely,  as  if  they  were  shooting 
arrows  out  of  corners,  and  then  stepping  back  think  to 
conceal  themselves  by  saying  they  do  not  believe  what  they 
most  earnestly  desire  to  have  believed,  whilst  they  disclaim 
all  malice,  condemn  themselves  also  of  farther  disingen- 
uity. 

9.  Next  to  these  are  they  who  with  their  reproaches 
intermix  some  praises,  as  did  Aristoxenus,  who,  having 
termed  Socrates  unlearned,  ignorant,  and  libidinous,  added, 
Yet  was  he  free  from  injustice.  For,  as  they  who  flatter 
artificially  and  craftily  sometimes  mingle  light  reprehen- 
sions with  their  many  and  great  praises,  joining  this  liberty 
of  speech  as  a sauce  to  their  flattery ; so  malice,  that  it 
may  gain  belief  to  its  accusations,  adds  also  praise. 

10.  We  might  here  also  reckon  up  more  notes;  but 
these  are  sufficient  to  let  us  understand  the  nature  and 
manners  of  Herodotus. 

11.  First  therefore,  — beginning,  as  the  proverb  is,  with 
Vesta,  — whereas  all  the  Grecians  affirm  Io,  daughter  to 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


335 


Inaclius,  to  have  been  worshipped  with  divine  honor  by 
the  barbarians,  and  by  her  glory  to  have  left  her  name  to 
many  seas  and  principal  passages,  and  to  have  given  a 
source  and  original  to  most  noble  and  royal  families  ; this 
famous  author  says  of  her,  that  she  gave  herself  to  certain 
Phoenician  merchants,  having  been  not  unwillingly  deflow- 
ered by  a mariner,  and  fearing  lest  she  should  be  found  by 
her  friends  to  be  with  child.*  And  he  belies  the  Phoeni- 
cians as  having  delivered  these  things  of  her,  and  says 
that  the  Persian  stories  testify  of  her  being  carried  away 
by  the  Phoenicians  with  other  women. f Presently  after, 
he  gives  sentence  on  the  bravest  and  greatest  exploits  of 
Greece,  saying  that  the  Trojan  war  was  foolishly  under- 
taken for  an  ill  woman.  For  it  is  manifest,  says  he,  that 
had  they  not  been  willing  they  had  never  been  ravished. $ 
Let  us  then  say,  that  the  Gods  also  acted  foolishly,  in 
inflicting  their  indignation  on  the  Spartans  for  abusing  the 
daughters  of  Scedasus  the  Leuctrian,  and  in  punishing 
Ajax  for  the  violation  of  Cassandra.  For  it  is  manifest,  if 
we  believe  Herodotus,  that  if  they  had  not  been  willing 
they  had  never  been  defiled.  And  yet  he  himself  said  that 
Aristomenes  was  taken  alive  by  the  Spartans ; and  the 
same  afterwards  happened  to  Philopoemen,  commander  of 
the  Achaeans ; and  the  Carthaginians  took  Regulus,  the 
consul  of  the  Romans ; than  whom  there  are  not  easily  to 
be  found  more  valiant  and  warlike  men.  Nor  is  it  to  be 
wondered,  since  even  leopards  and  tigers  are  taken  alive 
by  men.  But  Herodotus  blames  the  poor  women  that 
have  been  abused  by  violence,  and  patronizes  their  rav- 
ishers. 

12.  Nay,  he  is  so  favorable  to  the  barbarians,  that, 
acquitting  Busiris  of  those  human  sacrifices  and  that 
slaughter  of  his  guests  for  which  he  is  accused,  and  attrib- 
uting by  his  testimony  to  the  Egyptians  much  religion  and 

* Herod.  I.  5.  t Herod.  I.  1.  I Herod.  I.  4. 


336 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


justice,  he  endeavors  to  cast  that  abominable  wickedness 
and  those  impious  murders  on  the  Grecians.  For  in  his 
Second  Book  he  says,  that  Menelaus,  having  received 
Helen  from  Proteus  and  having  been  honored  by  him  with 
many  presents,  showed  himself  a most  unjust  and  wicked 
man  ; for  wanting  a fair  wind  to  set  sail,  he  found  out  an 
impious  device,  and  having  taken  two  of  the  inhabitants’ 
boys,  consulted  their  entrails ; for  which  villany  being 
hated  and  persecuted,  he  fled  with  his  ships  directly  into 
Libya.*  From  what  Egyptian  this  story  proceeds,  I know 
not.  For,  on  the  contrary,  many  honors  are  even  at  this 
day  given  by  the  Egyptians  both  to  Helen  and  Menelaus. 

13.  The  same  Herodotus,  that  he  may  still  be  like  him- 
self, says  that  the  Persians  learned  the  defiling  of  the  male 
sex  from  the  Greeks. j*  And  yet  how  could  the  Greeks 
have  taught  this  impurity  to  the  Persians,  amongst  whom, 
as  is  confessed  by  almost  all,  boys  had  been  castrated  before 
ever  they  arrived  in  the  Grecian  seas  1 He  writes  also, 
that  the  Greeks  were  instructed  by  the  Egyptians  in  their 
pomps,  solemn  festivals,  and  worship  of  the  twelve  Gods  ; 
that  Melampus  also  learned  of  the  Egyptians  the  name  of 
Dionysus  (or  Bacchus)  and  taught  it  the  other  Greeks  ; 
that  the  mysteries  likewise  and  rites  of  Ceres  were  brought 
out  of  Egypt  by  the  daughters  of  Danaus ; and  that  the 
Egyptians  were  wont  to  beat  themselves  and  make  great 
lamentation,  but  yet  he  himself  would  not  tell  the  names 
of  their  Deities,  but  concealed  them  in  silence.  As 
to  Hercules  and  Bacchus,  whom  the  Egyptians  named 
Gods,  and  the  Greeks  very  aged  men,  he  nowhere  feels 
such  scruples  and  hesitation ; although  he  places  also  the 
Egyptian  Hercules  amongst  the  Gods  of  the  second  rank, 
and  Bacchus  amongst  those  of  the  third,  as  having  had 
some  beginning  of  their  being  and  not  being  eternal,  and 
yet  he  pronounces  those  to  be  Gods ; but  to  the  Greek 

* See  Herod.  II.  45.  t Herod.  I.  135. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


337 


Bacchus  and  Hercules,  as  having  been  mortal  and  being 
now  demi  gods,  he  thinks  we  ought  to  perform  anniver- 
sary solemnities,  but  not  to  sacrifice  to  them  as  to  Gods. 
The  same  also  he  said  of  Pan,  overthrowing  the  most  ven- 
erable and  purest  sacrifices  of  the  Greeks  by  the  proud 
vanities  and  mythologies  of  the  Egyptians.* 

14.  Nor  is  this  impious  enough  ; but  moreover,  deriving 
the  pedigree  of  Hercules  from  Perseus,  he  says  that  Perseus 
was  an  Assyrian,  as  the  Persians  affirm.  “ But  the  leaders,” 
says  he,  “ of  the  Dorians  may  appear  to  be  descended  in  a 
right  line  from  the  Egyptians,  reckoning  their  ancestors 
from  before  Danae  and  Acrisius.”f  Here  he  has  wholly 
passed  by  Epaphus,  Io,  Iasus,  and  Argus,  being  ambitious 
not  only  to  make  the  other  Herculeses  Egyptians  and 
Phoenicians,  but  to  carry  this  also,  whom  himself  affirms 
to  have  been  the  third,  out  of  Greece  to  the  barbarians. 
But  of  the  ancient  learned  writers,  neither  Homer,  nor 
Hesiod,  or  Archilochus,  nor  Pisander,  nor  Stesichorus,  nor 
Aleman,  nor  Pindar,  makes  any  mention  of  the  Egyptian 
or  the  Phoenician  Hercules,  but  all  acknowledge  this  our 
own  Boeotian  and  Argive  Hercules. 

15.  Now  of  the  seven  sages,  whom  he  calls  Sophisters, 
he  affirms  Thales  to  have  been  a barbarian,  descended  of 
the  Phoenicians. X Speaking  ill  also  of  the  Gods  under 
the  person  of  Solon,  he  has  these  words : “ Thou,  O 
Croesus,  askest  me  concerning  human  affairs,  who  know 
that  every  one  of  the  Deities  is  envious  arid  tumultuous.”  § 
Thus  attributing  to  Solon  what  himself  thinks  of  the  Gods, 
he  joins  malice  to  blasphemy.  Having  made  use  also  of 
Pittacus  in  some  trivial  matters,  not  worth  the  mentioning, 
he  has  passed  over  the  greatest  and  gallantest  action  that 
was  ever  done  by  him.  For  when  the  Athenians  and 

* For  the  passages  referred  to  in  this  chapter,  see  Herod.  II.  48-51,  145,  146, 
171. 

t Herod.  VI.  53,  54.  1 Herod.  I.  170.  § Herod.  I.  32. 

vol.  iv.  22 


338 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


Mitylenaeans  were  at  war  about  Sigaeum,  Phrynon,  the 
Athenian  general,  challenging  whoever  would  come  forth 
to  a single  combat,  Pittacus  advanced  to  meet  him,  and 
catching  him  in  a net,  slew  that  stout  and  giant-like  man ; 
for  which  when  the  Mitylenaeans  offered  him  great  presents, 
darting  his  javelin  as  far  as  he  could  out  of  his  hand,  he 
desired  only  so  much  ground  as  he  should  reach  with  that 
throw ; and  the  place  is  to  this  day  called  Pittacium.  Now 
what  does  Herodotus,  when  he  comes  to  this?  Instead 
of  Pittacus’s  valiant  act,  he  tells  us  the  fight  of  Alcaeus 
the  poet,  who  throwing  away  his  arms  ran  out  of  the 
battle ; by  thus  not  writing  of  honorable  deeds  and  not 
passing  over  such  as  are  dishonorable,  he  gives  his 
testimony  to  those  who  say,  that  from  one  and  the  same 
malice  proceed  both  envy  and  a rejoicing  at  other  men’s 
harms.* 

16.  After  this,  he  accuses  of  treason  the  Alcmaeonidae, 
who  showed  themselves  generous  men,  and  delivered  their 
country  from  tyranny.*)*  He  says,  that  they  received  Pisis- 
tratus  after  his  banishment  and  got  him  called  home,  on 
condition  he  should  marry  the  daughter  of  Megacles  ; but 
the  damsel  saying  to  her  mother,  Do  you  see,  mother,  how 
I am  not  known  by  Pisistratus  according  to  nature  ? the 
Alcmaeonidae  were  so  offended  at  this  villany,  that  they 
expelled  the  tyrant. 

17.  Now  that  the  Lacedaemonians  might  have  no  less 
share  of  his  malice  than  the  Athenians,  behold  how  he 
bespatters  Othryadas,  the  man  most  admired  and  honored 
by  them.  “ He  only,”  says  Herodotus,  “ remaining  alive 
of  the  three  hundred,  and  ashamed  to  return  to  Sparta, 
his  companions  being  lost,  slew  himself  on  the  spot  at 
Thyreae.”  J For  having  before  said  the  victory  was  doubt- 
ful on  both  sides,  he  here,  by  making  Othryadas  ashamed, 
witnesses  that  the  Lacedaemonians  were  vanquished.  For 

* Herod.  V.  95.  t Herod.  I.  61.  J Herod.  I.  82. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


339 


it  was  shameful  for  him  to  survive,  if  conquered  ; but  glo- 
rious, if  conqueror. 

18.  I pass  by  now,  that  having  represented  Croesus  as 
foolish,  vain-glorious,  and  ridiculous  in  all  things,  he  makes 
him,  when  a prisoner,  to  have  taught  and  instructed  Cyrus, 
who  seems  to  have  excelled  all  other  kings  in  prudence, 
virtue,  and  magnanimity.*  Having  testified  of  the  same 
Croesus  nothing  else  that  was  commendable,  but  his  hon- 
oring the  Gods  with  many  and  great  oblations,  he  shows 
that  very  act  of  his  to  have  been  the  most  impious  of  all. 
For  he  says,  that  he  and  his  brother  Pantoleon  contended 
for  the  kingdom  while  their  father  was  yet  alive  ; and  that 
Croesus,  having  obtained  the  crown,  caused  a companion 
and  familiar  friend  of  Pantoleon’s  to  be  torn  in  pieces  in  a 
fulling-mill,  and  sent  presents  to  the  Gods  from  his  estate,  f 
Of  Heioces  also,  the  Median,  who  by  virtue  and  justice 
obtained  the  government,  he  says  that  he  got  it  not  by 
real  but  pretended  justice.  J 

19.  But  I let  pass  the  barbarian  examples,  since  he  has 
offered  us  plenty  enough  in  the  Grecian  affairs.  He  says, 
that  the  Athenians  and  most  other  Ionians  were  so  ashamed 
of  that  name  that  they  wholly  refused  to  be  called  Ionians  ; 
and  that  those  who  esteemed  themselves  the  noblest  among 
them,  and  who  had  set  forth  from  the  very  Prytaneum  of 
Athens,  begat  children  on  barbarian  wives  whose  parents, 
husbands,  and  former  children  they  had  slain  ; that  the 
women  had  therefore  made  a law  among  themselves,  con- 
firmed it  by  oath,  and  delivered  it  to  be  kept  by  their 
daughters,  never  to  eat  with  their  husbands,  nor  to  call 
any  of  them  by  his  name ; and  that  the  present  Milesians 
are  descended  from  these  women.  Having  afterwards 
added  that  those  are  true  Ionians  who  celebrate  the  feast 
called  Apaturia ; they  all,  says  he,  keep  it  except  the 

* Herod.  I.  155,  156,  207,  208.  t Herod.  I.  92. 

J Herod.  I.  96. 


340 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


Ephesians  and  Colophonians.*  In  this  manner  does  he 
deprive  these  two  states  of  their  nobility. 

20.  He  says  moreover,  that  the  Cumaeans  and  Mity- 
lenaeans  agreed  with  Cyrus  to  deliver  up  to  him  for  a 
price  Pactyas,  who  had  revolted  from  him.  I know  not 
indeed,  says  he,  for  how  much  ; since  it  is  not  certain  what 
it  was.  Well  done  ! — not  to  know  what  it  was,  and  yet  to 
cast  such  an  infamy  on  a Grecian  city,  as  if  he  had  an 
assured  knowledge  ! He  says  farther,  that  the  Chians 
took  Pactyas,  who  was  brought  to  them  out  of  the  temple 
of  Minerva  Poliuchus  (or  Guardianess  of  the  city),  and 
delivered  him  up,  having  received  the  city  Atarneus  for 
their  recompense.  And  yet  Charon  the  Lampsacenian,  a 
more  ancient  writer,  relating  this  matter  concerning  Pac- 
tyas, charges  neither  the  Mitylenaeans  nor  the  Chians  with 
any  such  impious  action.  These  are  his  very  words  : “ Pac- 
tyas, hearing  that  the  Persian  army  drew  near,  fled  first 
to  Mitylene,  then  to  Chios,  and  there  fell  into  the  hands 
of  Cyrus.”  f 

21.  Our  author  in  his  Third  Book,  relating  the  expedi- 
tion of  the  Lacedaemonians  against  the  tyrant  Poly  crates, 
affirms,  that  the  Samians  think  and  say  that  the  Spartans, 
to  recompense  them  for  their  former  assistance  against  the 
Messenians,  both  brought  back  the  Samians  that  were  ban- 
ished, and  made  war  on  the  tyrant ; but  that  the  Lacedae- 
monians deny  this,  and  say,  they  undertook  this  design  not 
to  help  or  deliver  the  Samians,  but  to  punish  them  for 
having  taken  away  a cup  sent  by  them  to  Croesus,  and  be- 
sides, a breastplate  sent  them  by  Amasis.  X And  yet  we 
know  that  there  was  not  at  that  time  any  city  so  desirous 
of  honor,  or  such  an  enemy  to  tyrants,  as  Sparta.  For 
what  breastplate  or  cup  was  the  cause  of  their  driving  the 
Cypselidae  out  of  Corinth  and  Ambracia,  Lygdamis  out  of 

* Herod.  I.  143-148.  t See  Herod.  I.  .157,  &c. 

t Herod.  III.  47,  48. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


341 


Naxos,  the  children  of  Pisistratus  out  of  Athens,  Aeschines 
out  of  Sicyon,  Symmachus  out  of  Thasus,  Aulis  out  of 
Phocis,  and  Aristogenes  out  of  Miletus  ; and  of  their  over- 
turning the  domineering  powers  of  Thessaly,  pulling  down 
Aristomedes  and  Angelus  by  the  help  of  King  Leotychides  1 
— which  facts  are  elsewhere  more  largely  described.  Now, 
if  Herodotus  says  true,  they  were  in  the  highest  degree 
guilty  both  of  malice  and  folly,  when,  denying  a most  hon- 
orable and  most  just  cause  of  their  expedition,  they  con- 
fessed that  in  remembrance  of  a former  injury,  and  too 
highly  valuing  an  inconsiderable  matter,  they  invaded  a 
miserable  and  afflicted  people. 

22.  Now  perhaps  he  gave  the  Lacedaemonians  this 
stroke,  as  directly  falling  under  his  pen ; but  the  city  of 
Corinth,  which  was  wholly  out  of  the  course  of  his  story, 
he  has  dragged  in  — going  out  of  his  way  (as  they  say)  to 
seize  upon  it  — and  has  bespattered  it  with  a most  filthy 
crime  and  most  shameful  calumny.  “ The  Corinthians,” 
says  he,  “ studiously  forwarded  this  expedition  of  the  Lace- 
daemonians to  Samos,  as  having  themselves  also  been  for- 
merly affronted  by  the  Samians.  The  matter  was  this. 
Per iander  tyrant  of  Corinth  sent  three  hundred  boys,  sons 
to  the  principal  men  of  Corcyra,  to  King  Alyattes,  to  be 
gelt.  These,  going  ashore  in  the  island  of  Samos,  were 
by  the  Samians  taught  to  sit  as  suppliants  in  the  temple  of 
Diana,  where  they  preserved  them,  setting  before  them  for 
their  food  sesame  mixed  with  honey.  This  our  author 
calls  an  affront  put  by  the  Samians  on  the  Corinthians,  who 
therefore  instigated  the  Lacedaemonians  against  them,  to 
wit,  because  the  Samians  had  saved  three  hundred  children 
of  the  Greeks  from  being  unmanned.  By  attributing  this 
villany  to  the  Corinthians,  he  makes  the  city  more  wicked 
than  the  tyrant.  He  indeed  was  revenging  himself  on 
those  of  Corcyra  who  had  slain  his  son  ; but  what  had  the 
Corinthians  suffered,  that  they  should  punish  the  Samians 


342 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


for  putting  an  obstacle  to  so  great  a cruelty  and  wicked- 
ness ? — and  this,  after  three  generations,  reviving  the 
memory  of  an  old  quarrel  for  the  sake  of  that  tyranny, 
which  they  found  so  grievous  and  intolerable  that  they  are 
still  endlessly  abolishing  all  the  monuments  and  marks  of 
it,  though  long  since  extinct.  Such  then  was  the  injury 
done  by  the  Samians  to  the  Corinthians.  Now  what  a 
kind  of  punishment  was  it  the  Corinthians  would  have  in- 
flicted on  them  ] Had  they  been  indeed  angry  with  the 
Samians,  they  should  not  have  incited  the  Lacedaemonians, 
but  rather  diverted  them  from  their  Avar  against  Polycrates, 
that  the  Samians  might  not  by  the  tyrant’s  overthrow  re- 
cover liberty,  and  be  freed  from  their  slavery.  But  (what 
is  most  to  be  observed)  Avhy  Avere  the  Corinthians  so  of- 
fended Avith  the  Samians,  that  desired  indeed  but  Avere  not 
able  to  save  the  Corcyraeans’  children,  and  yet  Avere  not 
displeased  Avith  the  Cnidians,  who  both  preserved  them  and 
restored  them  to  their  friends Nor  indeed  have  the 
Corcyraeans  any  great  esteem  for  the  Samians  on  this  ac- 
count ; but  of  the  Cnidians  they  preserve  a grateful  memo- 
ry, having  granted  them  several  honors  and  privileges,  and 
made  decrees  in  their  favor.  For  these,  sailing  to  Samos, 
drove  away  Periander’s  guards  from  the  temple,  and  tak- 
ing the  children  aboard  their  ships,  carried  them  safe  to 
Corcyra ; as  it  is  recorded  by  Antenor  the  Cretan,  and  hy 
Dionysius  the  Chalcidian  in  his  foundations.  Now  that 
the  Spartans  undertook  not  this  Avar  on  any  design  of  pun- 
ishing the  Samians,  but  to  savre  them  by  delivering  them 
from  the  tyrant,  Ave  have  the  testimony  of  the  Samians 
themselves.  For  they  affirm  that  there  is  in  Samos  a 
monument  erected  at  the  public  charge,  and  honors  there 
done  to  Archias  a Spartan,  avIio  fell  fighting  valiantly  in 
that  quarrel ; for  which  cause  also  his  posterity  still  keep  a 
familiar  and  friendly  correspondence  Avith  the  Samians,  as 
Herodotus  himself  witnesses. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


343 


23.  In  his  Fifth  Book,  he  says,  that  Clisthenes,  one  of 
the  best  and  noblest  men  in  Athens,  persuaded  the  priestess 
Pythia  to  be  a false  prophetess,  and  always  to  exhort  the 
Lacedaemonians  to  free  Athens  from  the  tyrants  ; calum- 
niating this  most  excellent  and  just  action  by  the  imputation 
of  so  great  a wickedness  and  imposture,  and  taking  from 
Apollo  the  credit  of  that  true  and  good  prophecy,  beseem- 
ing even  Themis  herself,  who  is  also  said  to  have  joined 
with  him.  He  says  farther,  that  Isagoras  prostituted  his 
wife  to  Cleomenes,  who  came  to  her  A Then,  as  his  man- 
ner is,  to  gain  credit  by  mixing  some  praises  with  his  re- 
proaches, he  says  : Isagoras  the  son  of  Tisander  was  of  a 
noble  family,  but  I cannot  tell  the  original  of  it ; his  kins- 
men, however,  sacrifice  to  the  Carian  Jupiter. j*  O this 
pleasant  and  cunning  scoffer  of  a writer,  who  thus  disgrace- 
fully sends  Isagoras  to  the  Carians,  as  it  were  to  the  ravens. 
As  for  Aristogiton,  he  puts  him  not  forth  at  the  back  door, 
but  thrusts  him  directly  out  of  the  gate  into  Phoenicia, 
saying  that  he  had  his  original  from  the  Gephyraeans,  and 
that  the  Gephyraeans  were  not,  as  some  think,  Euboeans 
or  Eretrians,  but  Phoenicians,  as  himself  has  learned  by 
report.  £ And  since  he  cannot  altogether  take  from  the 
Lacedaemonians  the  glory  of  having  delivered  the  Athe- 
nians from  the  tyrants,  he  endeavors  to  cloud  and  disgrace 
that  most  honorable  act  by  as  foul  a passion.  For  he  says, 
they  presently  repented  of  it,  as  not  having  done  well,  in 
that  they  had  been  induced  by  spurious  and  deceitful  ora- 
cles to  drive  the  tyrants,  who  were  their  allies  and  had 
promised  to  put  Athens  into  their  hands,  out  of  their  coun- 
try, and  had  restored  the  city  to  an  ungrateful  people.  He 
adds,  that  they  were  about  to  send  for  Hippias  from  Si- 
geum,  and  bring  him  back  to  Athens  ; but  that  they  were 
opposed  by  the  Corinthians,  Sosicles  telling  them  how 
much  the  city  of  Corinth  had  suffered  under  the  tyranny 

* Herod.  V.  63,  70.  t Herod.  V.  66.  J Herod.  V.  68. 


344 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


of  Cypselus  and  Periander.*  And  yet  there  was  no  out- 
rage of  Periander’s  more  abominable  and  cruel  than  his 
sending  the  three  hundred  children  to  be  emasculated,  for 
the  delivering  and  saving  of  whom  from  that  contumely, 
the  Corinthians,  he  says,  were  angry  and  bore  a grudge 
against  the  Samians,  as  having  put  an  affront  upon  them. 
With  so  much  repugnance  and  contradiction  is  that  malice 
of  his  discourse  filled,  which  on  every  occasion  insinuates 
itself  into  his  narrations. 

24.  After  this,  relating  the  action  of  Sardis,  he,  as  much 
as  in  him  lies,  diminishes  and  discredits  the  matter ; being 
so  audacious  as  to  call  the  ships  which  the  Athenians  sent 
to  the  assistance  of  the  Ionians,  who  had  revolted  from  the 
King,  the  beginning  of  evils,,  because  they  endeavored  to 
deliver  so  many  and  so  great  Grecian  cities  from  the  bar- 
barians, f As  to  the  Eretrians,  making  mention  of  them 
only  by  the  way,  he  passes  over  in  silence  a great,  gallant, 
and  memorable  action  of  theirs.  For  when  all  Ionia  was 
in  a confusion  and  uproar,  and  the  King’s  fleet  drew  nigh, 
they,  going  forth  to  meet  him,  overcame  in  a sea-fight  the 
Cyprians  in  the  Pamphylian  Sea.  Then  turning  back  and 
leaving  their  ships  at  Ephesus,  they  invaded  Sardis  and 
besieged  Artaphernes,  who  was  fled  into  the  castle,  that  so 
they  might  raise  the  siege  of  Miletus.  And  this  indeed 
they  effected,  causing  the  enemies  to  break  up  their  camp 
and  remove  thence  in  a wonderful  fright,  and  then  seeing 
themselves  in  danger  to  be  oppressed  by  a multitude,  re- 
tired. This  not  only  others,  but  Lysanias  of  Mallus  also 
in  his  history  of  Eretria  relates,  thinking  it  convenient,  if 
for  no  other  reason,  yet  after  the  taking  and  destruction  of 
the  city,  to  add  this  valiant  and  heroic  act.  But  this  writer 
of  ours  says,  they  were  defeated,  and  pursued  even  to  their 
ships  by  the  barbarians  ; though  Charon  the  Lampsacenian 
has  no  such  thing,  but  writes  thus,  word  for  word:  “The 

* Herod.  V.  90,  91. 


t Herod.  Y.  97. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


345 


Athenians  set  forth  with  twenty  galleys  to  the  assistance 
of  the  Ionians,  and  going  to  Sardis,  took  all  thereabouts, 
except  the  King’s  wall ; which  having  done,  they  returned 
to  Miletus.” 

25.  In  his  Sixth  Book,  our  author,  discoursing  of  the 
Plataeans,  — how  they  gave  themselves  to  the  Lacedae- 
monians, who  exhorted  them  rather  to  have  recourse  to  the 
Athenians,  who  were  nearer  to  them  and  no  bad  defenders, 
— adds,  not  as  a matter  of  suspicion  or  opinion,  but  as  a 
thing  certainly  known  by  him,  that  the  Lacedaemonians 
gave  the  Plataeans  this  advice,  not  so  much  for  any  good 
will,  as  through  a desire  to  find  work  for  the  Athenians  by 
engaging  them  with  the  Boeotians.*  If  then  Herodotus  is 
not  malicious,  the  Lacedaemonians  must  have  been  both 
fraudulent  and  spiteful ; and  the  Athenians  fools,  in  suffer- 
ing themselves  to  be  thus  imposed  on ; and  the  Plataeans 
were  brought  into  play,  not  for  any  good-will  or  respect, 
but  as  an  occasion  of  war. 

26.  He  is  farther  manifestly  convinced  of  belying  the 
Lacedaemonians,  when  he  says  that,  whilst  they  expected 
the  full  moon,  they  failed  of  giving  their  assistance  to  the 
Athenians  at  Marathon.  For  they  not  only  made  a thou- 
sand other  excursions  and  fights  at  the  beginning  of  the 
month,  without  staying  for  the  full  moon  ; but  wanted  so 
little  of  being  present  at  this  very  battle,  which  was  fought 
the  sixth  day  of  the  month  Boedromion,  that  at  their  com- 
ing they  found  the  dead  still  lying  in  the  field.  And  yet 
he  has  written  thus  of  the  full  moon:  “It  was  impossible 
for  them  to  do  these  things  at  that  present,  being  unwilling 
to  break  the  law ; for  it  was  the  ninth  day  of  the  month, 
and  they  said,  they  could  not  go  forth  on  the  ninth  day,  the 
orb  of  the  moon  being  not  yet  full.  And  therefore  they 
stayed  for  the  full  moon.”  f But  thou,  O Herodotus,  trans- 
ferest  the  full  moon  from  the  middle  to  the  beginning  of 

* Herod.  YI.  108.  t Herod.  VI.  106. 


346 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


the  month,  and  at  the  same  time  confoundest  the  heavens, 
days,  and  all  things ; and  yet  thou  dost  pretend  to  be  the 
historian  of  Greece ! 

And  professing  to  write  more  particularly  and  carefully 
of  the  affairs  of  Athens,  thou  dost  not  so  much  as  say  a 
word  of  that  solemn  procession  which  the  Athenians  even 
at  this  day  send  to  Agrae,  celebrating  a feast  of  thanks- 
giving to  Hecate  for  their  victory.  But  this  helps  Herodo- 
tus to  refel  the  crime  with  which  he  is  charged,  of  having 
flattered  the  Athenians  for  a great  sum  of  money  he  re- 
ceived of  them.  For  if  he  had  rehearsed  these  things  to 
them,  they  would  not  have  omitted  or  neglected  to  notice 
that  Philippides,  when  on  the  ninth  he  called  the  Lacedae- 
monians to  the  fight,  must  have  come  from  it  himself,  since 
(as  Herodotus  says)  he  went  in  two  days  from  Athens  to 
Sparta ; unless  the  Athenians  sent  for  their  allies  to  the 
fight  after  their  enemies  were  overcome.  Indeed  Diyllus 
the  Athenian,  none  of  the  most  contemptible  as  an  histo- 
rian, says,  that  he  received  from  Athens  a present  of  ten 
talents,  Anytus  proposing  the  decree.  Moreover  Herodo- 
tus, as  many  say,  has  in  relating  the  fight  at  Marathon 
derogated  from  the  credit  of  it,  by  the  number  he  sets  down 
of  the  slain.  For  it  is  said  that  the  Athenians  made  a vow 
to  sacrifice  so  many  kids  to  Diana  Agrotera,  as  they  should 
kill  barbarians  ; but  that  after  the  fight,  the  number  of  the 
dead  appearing  infinite,  they  appeased  the  Goddess  by 
making  a decree  to  immolate  five  hundred  to  her  every 
year. 

27.  But  letting  this  pass,  let  us  see  what  was  done  after 
the  fight.  “ The  barbarians,”  says  he,  “ retiring  back  with 
the  rest  of  their  ships,  and  taking  the  Eretrian  slaves  out 
of  the  island,  where  they  had  left  them,  doubled  the  point 
of  Sunium,  desiring  to  prevent  the  Athenians  before  they 
could  gain  the  city.  The  Athenians  suspected  this  to  have 
been  done  by  a plot  of  the  Alcmaeonidae,  who  by  agree- 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


347 


ment  showed  a shield  to  the  Persians  when  they  were  got 
into  their  ships.  They  therefore  doubled  the  cape  of  Su- 
nium.”  * Let  ns  in  this  place  take  no  notice  of  his  calling 
the  Eretrians  slaves,  who  showed  as  much  courage  and 
gallantry  in  this  war  as  any  other  of  the  Grecians,  and 
suffered  things  unworthy  their  virtue.  Nor  let  us  insist 
much  on  the  calumny  with  which  he  defames  the  Alcmae- 
onidae,  some  of  whom  were  both  the  greatest  families  and 
noblest  men  of  the  city.  But  the  greatness  of  the  victory 
itself  is  overthrown,  and  the  end  of  that  so  celebrated 
action  comes  to  nothing,  nor  does  it  seem  to  have  been  a 
fight  or  any  great  exploit,  but  only  a light  skirmish  with 
the  barbarians,  as  the  envious  and  ill-willers  affirm,  if  they 
did  not  after  the  battle  fly  away,  cutting  their  cables  and 
giving  themselves  to  the  wind,  to  carry  them  as  far  as 
might  be  from  the  Attic  coast,  but  having  a shield  lifted 
up  to  them  as  a signal  of  treason,  made  straight  with  their 
fleet  for  Athens,  in  hope  to  surprise  it,  and  having  at 
leisure  doubled  the  point  of  Sunium,  were  discovered 
above  the  port  Phalerum,  so  that  the  chief  and  most  illus- 
trious men,  despairing  to  save  the  city,  would  have  be- 
trayed it.  For  a little  after,  acquitting  the  Alcmaeonidae, 
he  charges  others  with  the  treason.  “ For  the  shield  in- 
deed was  shown,  nor  can  it  be  denied,”  says  he,  as  if  he 
had  seen  it  himself.  But  this  could  no  way  be,  since  the 
Athenians  obtained  a solid  victory ; and  if  it  had  been 
done,  it  could  not  have  been  seen  by  the  barbarians,  flying 
in  a hurry  amidst  wounds  and  arrows  into  their  ships, 
and  leaving  every  one  the  place  with  all  possible  speed. 
But  when  he  again  pretends  to  excuse  the  Alcmaeonidae 
of  those  crimes  which  he  first  of  all  men  objected  against 
them,  and  speaks  thus:  “I  cannot  believe  that  the  Alc- 
maeonidae by  agreement  would  ever  have  lifted  up  a shield 
to  the  Persians,  and  have  brought  the  Athenians  under  the 

* Herod.  VI.  115,  121-124. 


348 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


power  of  the  barbarians  and  Hippias  ; ” I am  reminded 
of  a certain  proverbial  saying,  — Stop  and  be  caught,  crab, 
and  I’ll  let  you  go.  For  why  art  thou  so  eager  to  catch 
him,  if  thou  wilt  let  him  go  Avben  be  is  caught?  Thus 
you  first  accuse,  then  apologize ; and  you  write  calumnies 
against  illustrious  men,  which  again  you  refute.  And  you 
discredit  yourself ; for  you  heard  no  one  but  yourself  say 
that  the  Alcmaeonidae  lifted  up  a shield  to  the  vanquished 
and  flying  barbarians.  And  in  those  very  things  which 
you  allege  for  the  Alcmaeonidae,  you  show  yourself  a syco- 
phant. For  if,  as  here  you  write,  the  Alcmaeonidae  were 
more  or  no  less  enemies  to  tyrants  than  Callias,  the  son  of 
Phaenippus  and  father  of  Hipponicus,  where  will  you 
place  their  conspiracy,  of  which  you  write  in  your  First 
Book,  that  assisting  Pisistratus  they  brought  him  back 
from  exile  to  the  tyranny  and  would  not  have  driven 
him  away  till  he  was  accused  of  unnaturally  abusing  his 
wife  ? Such  then  are  the  repugnances  of  these  things  ; 
and  by  his  intermixing  the  praises  of  Callias,  the  son  of 
Phaenippus,  amidst  the  crimes  and  suspicions  of  the  Alc- 
maeonidae, and  joining  to  him  his  son  Hipponicus,  who 
was  (as  Herodotus  himself  says)  one  of  the  richest  men  in 
Athens,  he  confesses  that  he  brought  in  Callias  not  for  any 
necessity  of  the  story,  but  to  ingratiate  himself  and  gain 
favor  with  Hipponicus. 

28.  Now,  whereas  all  know  that  the  Argives  denied  not 
to  enter  into  the  common  league  of  the  Grecians,  though 
they  thought  not  fit  to  follow  and  be  under  the  command 
of  the  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  their  mortal  enemies, 
and  that  this  was  no  otherways,  our  author  subjoins  a most 
malicious  cause  for  it,  writing  thus : “ When  they  saw 
they  were  comprised  by  the  Greeks,  knowing  that  the 
Lacedaemonians  would  not  admit  them  into  a share  of  the 
command,  they  requested  it,  that  they  might  have  a pre- 
tence to  lie  still.”  “ And  of  this,”  he  says,  “ the  Argive 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


349 


ambassadors  afterwards  put  Artaxerxes  in  mind,  when 
they  attended  him  at  Susa,  and  the  King  said,  he  esteemed 
no  city  more  his  friend  than  Argos.”  Then  adding,  as  his 
manner  is,  to  cover  the  matter,  he  says : “ Of  these  things 
I know  nothing  certainly  ; but  this  I know,  that  all  men 
have  faults,  and  that  the  worst  things  were  not  done  by 
the  Argives  ; but  I must  tell  such  things  as  are  reported, 
though  I am  not  bound  to  believe  them  all ; and  let  this 
be  understood  of  all  my  narrations.  For  it  is  farther  said 
that  the  Argives,  when  they  were  not  able  to  sustain  the 
war  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  called  the  Persians  into 
Greece,  willing  to  suffer  any  thing  rather  than  the  present 
trouble.”  * Therefore,  as  himself  reports  the  Ethiopian  to 
have  said  of  the  ointment  and  purple,  “ Deceitful  are  the 
beauties,  deceitful  the  garments  of  the  Persians,”  f may  not 
any  one  say  also  of  him,  Deceitful  are  the  phrases,  deceit- 
ful the  figures  of  Herodotus’s  speeches ; as  being  per- 
plexed, unsound,  and  full  of  ambiguities  For  as  painters 
set  off  and  render  more  eminent  the  luminous  part  of  their 
pictures  by  adding  shadows,  so  he  by  his  denials  extends 
his  calumnies,  and  by  his  dubious  speeches  makes  his  sus- 
picions take  deeper  impression.  If  the  Argives  joined  not 
with  the  other  Greeks,  but  stood  out  through  an  emula- 
tion of  the  Lacedaemonians’  command  and  valor,  it  cannot 
be  denied  but  that  they  acted  in  a manner  not  beseeming 
their  nobility  and  descent  from  Hercules.  For  it  had  been 
more  honorable  for  the  Argives  under  the  rule  of  Siphnians 
and  Cythnians  to  have  defended  the  Grecian  liberty,  than 
contending  with  the  Spartans  for  superiority  to  have 
avoided  so  many  and  such  signal  combats.  And  if  it  was 
they  who  brought  the  Persians  into  Greece,  because  their 
war  against  the  Lacedaemonians  succeeded  ill,  how  came 
it  to  pass,  that  they  did  not  at  the  coming  of  Xerxes  openly 
join  themselves  to  the  Persians  ? Or  if  they  would  not 

* Herod.  VII.  148-152.  t Herod.  III.  22. 


350 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


figlit  under  the  King,  why  did  they  not,  being  left  at  home, 
make  incursions  into  Laconia,  or  again  attempt  Thyreae, 
or  by  some  other  way  disturb  and  infest  the  Lacedaemo- 
nians \ For  they  might  have  greatly  damaged  the  Gre- 
cians, by  hindering  the  Spartans  from  going  with  so  great 
an  army  to  Plataea. 

29.  But  in  this  place  indeed  he  has  highly  magnified  the 
Athenians  and  pronounced  them  the  saviors  of  Greece, 
doing  herein  rightly  and  justly,  if  he  had  not  intermixed 
many  reproaches  with  their  praises.  But  now,  when  he 
says  * that  (had  it  not  been  for  the  Athenians)  the  Lace- 
daemonians would  have  been  betrayed  by  the  other  Greeks, 
and  then,  being  left  alone  and  having  performed  great 
exploits,  they  would  have  died  generously;  or  else,  having 
before  seen  that  the  Greeks  were  favoring  the  Medes, 
they  Avould  have  made  terms  with  Xerxes ; it  is  manifest, 
he  speaks  not  these  things  to  the  commendation  of  the 
Athenians,  but  he  praises  the  Athenians  that  he  may  speak 
ill  of  all  the  rest.  For  how  can  any  one  now  be  angry 
with  him  for  so  bitterly  and  intemperately  upbraiding  the 
Thebans  and  Phocians  at  every  turn,  when  he  charges  even 
those  who  exposed  themselves  to  all  perils  for  Greece  with 
a treason  which  was  never  acted,  but  which  (as  he  suspects) 
might  have  been  acted.  Nay,  of  the  Lacedaemonians  them- 
selves, he  makes  it  doubtful  whether  they  would  have  fallen 
in  the  battle  or  have  yielded  to  the  enemy,  distrusting  the 
proofs  of  their  valor  which  were  shown  at  Thermopylae ; 
— and  these  indeed  were  slight ! 

30.  After  this,  when  he  declares  the  shipwreck  that  be- 
fell the  King’s  fleet,  and  how,  an  infinite  mass  of  wealth 
being  cast  away,  Aminocles  the  Magnesian,  son  of  Cresines, 
was  greatly  enriched  by  it,  having  gotten  an  immense 
quantity  of  gold  and  silver ; he  could  not  so  much  as  let 
this  pass  without  snarling  at  it.  “ For  this  man,”  says  he, 

* Herod.  Vn.  139. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


351 


“ who  had  till  then  been  none  of  the  most  fortunate,  by 
wrecks  became  exceeding  rich  ; for  the  misfortune  he  had 
in  killing  his  son  much  afflicted  his  mind.”  * This  indeed 
is  manifest  to  every  one,  that  he  brought  this  golden  treas- 
ure and  this  wealth  cast  up  by  the  sea  into  his  history,  that 
he  might  make  way  for  the  inserting  Aminocles’s  killing 
his  son. 

31.  Now  Aristophanes  the  Boeotian  wrote,  that  He- 
rodotus demanded  money  of  the  Thebans  but  received 
none,  and  that  going  about  to  discourse  and  reason  with 
the  young  men,  he  was  prohibited  by  the  magistrates 
through  their  clownishness  and  hatred  of  learning ; of 
which  there  is  no  other  argument.  But  Herodotus  bears 
witness  to  Aristophanes,  whilst  he  charges  the  Thebans 
with  some  things  falsely,  with  others  ignorantly,  and  with 
others  as  hating  them  and  having  a quarrel  with  them. 
For  he  affirms  that  the  Thessalians  at  first  upon  necessity 
inclined  to  the  Persians, f in  which  he  says  the  truth;  and 
prophesying  of  the  other  Grecians  that  they  would  betray 
the  Lacedaemonians,  he  added,  that  they  would  not  do  it 
willingly,  but  upon  necessity,  one  city  being  taken  after 
another.  But  he  does  not  allow  the  Thebans  the  same 
plea  of  necessity,  although  they  sent  to  Tempe  five  hun- 
dred men  under  the  command  of  Mnamias,  and  to  Ther- 
mopylae as  many  as  Leonidas  desired,  who  also  alone  with 
the  Thespians  stood  by  him,  the  rest  leaving  him  after  he 
was  surrounded.  But  when  the  barbarian,  having  pos- 
sessed himself  of  the  avenues,  was  got  into  their  confines, 
and  Demaratus  the  Spartan,  favoring  in  right  of  hospital- 
ity Attaginus,  the  chief  of  the  oligarchy,  had  so  wrought 
that  he  became  the  King’s  friend  and  familiar,  whilst  the 
other  Greeks  were  in  their  ships,  and  none  came  on  by 

* Herod.  VII.  190.  Most  scholars  interpret  this  passage  of  Herodotus  to  mean 
that  some  accident  destroyed  one  or  more  of  the  children  of  Aminocles.  (G.) 

t Herod.  VII.  172. 


352 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


land ; then  at  last  being  forsaken  did  they  accept  conditions 
of  peace,  to  which  they  were  compelled  by  great  necessity. 
For  they  had  neither  the  sea  and  ships  at  hand,  as  had  the 
Athenians  ; nor  did  they  dwell  far  off,  as  the  Spartans,  who 
inhabited  the  most  remote  parts  of  Greece ; but  were  not 
above  a day  and  half’s  journey  from  the  Persian  army,  whom 
they  had  already  with  the  Spartans  and  Thespians  alone 
resisted  at  the  entrance  of  the  straits,  and  were  defeated. 

But  this  writer  is  so  equitable,  that  having  said,  “ The 
Lacedaemonians,  being  alone  and  deserted  by  their  allies, 
would  perhaps  have  made  a composition  with  Xerxes,” 
he  yet  abuses  the  Thebans,  who  were  driven  to  the  same 
act  by  the  same  necessity.  But  when  he  could  not  wholly 
obliterate  this  most  great  and  glorious  act  of  the  Thebans, 
yet  went  he  about  to  deface  it  with  a most  vile  imputation 
and  suspicion,  writing  thus : “ The  confederates  who  had 
been  sent  returned  back,  obeying  the  commands  of  Leon- 
idas ; there  remained  only  with  the  Lacedaemonians  the 
Thespians  and  the  Thebans:  of  these,  the  Thebans  stayed 
against  their  wills,  for  Leonidas  retained  them  as  hostages  ; 
but  the  Thespians  most  willingly,  as  they  said  they  would 
never  depart  from  Leonidas  and  those  that  were  with 
him.”  * Does  he  not  here  manifestly  discover  himself  to 
have  a peculiar  pique  and  hatred  against  the  Thebans,  by 
the  impulse  of  which  he  not  only  falsely  and  unjustly 
calumniated  the  city,  but  did  not  so  much  as  take  care  to 
render  his  contradiction  probable,  or  to  conceal,  at  least 
from  a few  men,  his  being  conscious  of  having  knowingly 
contradicted  himself?  For  having  before  said  that  Leonidas, 
perceiving  his  confederates  not  to  be  in  good  heart  nor  pre- 
pared to  undergo  danger,  wished  them  to  depart,  he  a little 
after  adds  that  the  Thebans  were  against  their  wills  de- 
tained by  him ; whereas,  if  he  had  believed  them  inclined 
to  the  Persians,  he  should  have  driven  them  away  though 


* Herod.  VII.  222. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


353 


they  had  been  willing  to  tarry.  For  if  he  thought  that 
those  who  were  not  brisk  would  be  useless,  to  what  pur- 
pose was  it  to  mix  among  his  soldiers  those  that  were  sus- 
pected ? Nor  was  the  king  of  the  Spartans  and  general  of 
all  Greece  so  senseless  as  to  think  that  four  hundred  armed 
Thebans  could  be  detained  as  hostages  by  his  three  hun- 
dred, especially  the  enemy  being  both  in  his  front  and  rear. 
For  though  at  first  he  might  have  taken  them  along  with 
him  as  hostages  ; it  is  certainly  probable  that  at  last,  having 
no  regard  for  him,  they  would  have  gone  away  from  him, 
and  that  Leonidas  would  have  more  feared  his  being  en- 
compassed by  them  than  by  the  enemy.  Furthermore, 
would  not  Leonidas  have  been  ridiculous,  to  have  sent 
away  the  other  Greeks,  as  if  by  staying  they  should  soon 
after  have  died,  and  to  have  detained  the  Thebans,  that 
being  himself  about  to  die,  he  might  keep  them  for  the 
Greeks?  For  if  he  had  indeed  carried  them  along  with 
him  for  hostages,  or  rather  for  slaves,  he  should  not  have 
kept  them  with  those  that  were  at  the  point  of  perishing, 
but  have  delivered  them  to  the  Greeks  that  went  away. 
There  remained  but  one  cause  that  might  be  alleged  for 
Leonidas’s  unwillingness  to  let  them  go,  to  wit,  that  they 
might  die  with  him ; and  this  our  historian  himself  has 
taken  aAvay,  writing  thus  of  Leonidas’s  ambition  : “ Leon- 
idas considering  these  things,  and  desirous  that  this  glory 
might  redound  to  the  Spartans  alone,  sent  away  his  confed- 
erates rather  for  this  than  because  they  differed  in  their 
opinions.”  * For  it  had  certainly  been  the  height  of  folly 
to  keep  his  enemies  against  their  wills,  to  be  partakers  of 
that  glory  from  which  he  drove  away  his  confederates. 
But  it  is  manifest  from  the  effects,  that  Leonidas  suspected 
not  the  Thebans  of  insincerity,  but  esteemed  them  to  be 
his  steadfast  friends.  For  he  marched  with  his  army  into 
Thebes,  and  at  his  request  obtained  that  which  was  never 

* Herod.  VII.  220. 

23 


VOL.  IV. 


354 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


granted  to  any  other,  to  sleep  within  the  temple  of  Her- 
cules ; and  the  next  morning  he  related  to  the  Thebans  the 
vision  that  had  appeared  to  him.  For  he  imagined  that  he 
saw  the  most  illustrious  and  greatest  cities  of  Greece  irregu- 
larly tost  and  floating  up  and  down  on  a very  stormy  and 
tempestuous  sea ; that  Thebes,  being  carried  above  all 
the  rest,  was  lifted  up  on  high  to  heaven,  and  suddenly 
after  disappeared.  And  this  indeed  had  a resemblance  of 
those  things  which  long  after  befell  that  city. 

32.  Now  Herodotus,  in  his  narration  of  that  fight,  hath 
obscured  also  the  bravest  act  of  Leonidas,  saying  that  they 
all  fell  in  the  straits  near  the  hill.*  But  the  affair  was 
otherwise  managed.  For  when  they  perceived  by  night 
that  they  were  encompassed  by  the  barbarians,  they 
marched  straight  to  the  enemies’  camp,  and  got  very  near 
the  King’s  pavilion,  with  a resolution  to  kill  him  and  leave 
their  lives  about  him.  They  came  then  to  his  tent,  killing 
or  putting  to  flight  all  they  met ; but  when  Xerxes  was 
not  found  there,  seeking  him  in  that  vast  camp  and  wan- 
dering about,  they  were  at  last  with  much  difficulty  slain 
by  the  barbarians,  who  surrounded  them  on  every  side. 
What  other  acts  and  sayings  of  the  Spartans  Herodotus 
has  omitted,  we  will  write  in  the  Life  of  Leonidas  ; yet  that 
hinders  not  but  we  may  here  set  down  also  some  few. 
Before  Leonidas  went  forth  to  that  war,  the  Spartans  ex- 
hibited to  him  funeral  games,  at  which  the  fathers  and 
mothers  of  those  that  went  along  with  him  "were  specta- 
tors. Leonidas  himself,  when  one  said  to  him,  You  lead 
very  few  with  you  to  the  battle,  answered,  There  are  many 
to  die  there.  When  his  wife,  at  his  departure,  asked  him 
what  commands  he  had  for  her ; he,  turning  to  her,  said, 
I command  you  to  marry  good  men,  and  bring  them  good 
children.  After  he  was  enclosed  by  the  enemy  at  Ther- 
mopylae, desiring  to  save  two  that  were  related  to  him,  he 


* Herod.  VII.  225. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


355 


gave  one  of  them  a letter  and  sent  him  away ; but  he  re- 
jected it,  saying  angrily,  I followed  you  as  a soldier,  not 
as  a post.  The  other  he  commanded  on  a message  to  the 
magistrates  of  Sparta ; but  he,  answering  by  his  act,  took 
his  shield,  and  stood  up  in  his  rank.  Who  would  not 
have  blamed  another  that  should  have  omitted  these  things  1 
But  he  who  has  collected  and  recorded  the  fart  of  Amasis, 
the  coming  of  the  thief's  asses,  and  the  giving  of  bottles, 
and  many  such  like  things,  cannot  seem  to  have  omitted 
these  gallant  acts  and  these  remarkable  sayings  by  negli- 
gence and  oversight,  but  as  bearing  ill-will  and  being  un- 
just to  some. 

33.  He  says  that  the  Thebans,  being  at  the  first  with 
the  Greeks,  fought  compelled  by  necessity.*  For  belike 
not  only  Xerxes,  hut  Leonidas  also,  had  Avhipsters  follow- 
ing his  camp,  by  whom  the  Thebans  were  scourged  and 
forced  against  their  wills  to  fight.  And  what  more  sav- 
age libeller  could  be  found  than  Herodotus,  when  he  says 
that  they  fought  upon  necessity,  who  might  have  gone 
away  and  fled,  and  that  they  inclined  to  the  Persians, 
whereas  not  one  came  in  to  help  them.  After  this,  he 
writes  that,  the  rest  making  to  the  hill,  the  Thebans  sepa- 
rated themselves  from  them,  lifted  up  their  hands  to  the 
barbarian,  and  coming  near,  cried  with  a most  true  voice, 
that  they  had  favored  the  Persians,  had  given  earth  and 
water  to  the  King,  that  now  being  forced  by  necessity  they 
were  come  to  Thermopylae,  and  that  they  were  innocent 
of  the  King’s  wound.  Having  said  these  things,  they  ob- 
tained quarter ; for  they  had  the  Thessalians  for  wit- 
nesses of  all  they  said.  Behold,  how  amidst  the  barbarians’ 
exclamations,  tumults  of  all  sorts,  flights  and  pursuits,  their 
apology  was  heard,  the  witnesses  examined ; and  the  Thes- 
salians, in  the  midst  of  those  that  were  slain  and  trodden 
under  foot,  all  being  done  in  a very  narrow  passage,  pat- 


* Herod.  VII.  233. 


356 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


ronized  the  Thebans,  to  wit,  because  the  Thebans  had  but 
a little  before  driven  away  them,  who  were  possessed  of 
all  Greece  as  far  as  Thespiae,  having  conquered  them  in 
a battle,  and  slain  their  leader  Lattamyas  ! For  thus  at 
that  time  stood  matters  between  the  Boeotians  and  the 
Thessalians,  without  any  friendship  or  good-will.  But  yet 
how  did  the  Thebans  escape,  the  Thessalians  helping  them 
with  their  testimonies'?  Some  of  them,  says  he,  were 
slain  by  the  barbarians ; many  of  them  were  by  command 
of  Xerxes  marked  with  the  royal  mark,  beginning  with 
their  leader  Leontiades.  Now  the  captain  of  the  Thebans 
at  Thermopylae  wTas  not  Leontiades,  but  Anaxander,  as 
both  Aristophanes,  out  of  the  Commentaries  of  the  Magis- 
trates, and  Nicander  the  Colophonian  have  taught  us.  Nor 
did  any  man  before  Herodotus  know  that  the  Thebans 
were  stigmatized  by  Xerxes  ; for  otherwise  this  would 
have  been  an  excellent  plea  for  them  against  his  calumny, 
and  this  city  might  well  have  gloried  in  these  marks,  that 
Xerxes  had  punished  Leonidas  and  Leontiades  as  his 
greatest  enemies,  having  outraged  the  body  of  the  one 
when  he  was  dead,  and  caused  the  other  to  be  tormented 
whilst  living.  But  as  to  a man  who  makes  the  barbarian’s 
cruelty  against  Leonidas  when  dead  a sign  that  he  hated 
him  most  of  all  men  when  living*  and  yet  says  that  the 
Thebans,  though  favoring  the  Persians,  were  stigmatized 
by  them  at  Thermopylae,  and  having  been  thus  stigma- 
tized, again  cheerfully  took  their  parts  at  Plataea,  it  seems 
to  me  that  such  a man  — like  that  Hippoclides  f who  stood 
on  his  head  upon  a table  and  gesticulated  with  his  legs 
— would  dance  away  the  truth  and  exclaim,  Herodotus 
cares  not  for  that. 

34.  In  the  Eighth  Book  our  author  says,  that  the 
Greeks  being  frighted  designed  to  fly  from  Artemisium 
into  Greece,  and  that,  being  requested  by  the  Euboeans  to 

t See  Herod.  VI.  126-130. 


* Herod.  VII.  238. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


357 


stay  a little  till  tliey  could  dispose  of  tlieir  wives  and  fam- 
ilies, they  regarded  them  not,  till  such  time  as  Themisto- 
cles,  having  taken  money  of  them,  divided  it  between 
Eurybiades  and  Adimantus,  the  captain  of  the  Corinthians, 
and  that  then  they  stayed  and  had  a sea-fight  with  the  bar- 
barians.* Yet  Pindar,  who  was  not  a citizen  of  any  of 
the  confederate  cities,  but  of  one  that  was  suspected  to 
take  part  with  the  Medians,  having  made  mention  of  Ar- 
temisium,  brake  forth  into  this  exclamation : “ This  is  the 
place  where  the  sons  of  the  Athenians  laid  the  glorious 
foundation  of  liberty.”  But  Herodotus,  by  whom,  as  some 
will  have  it,  Greece  is  honored,  makes  that  victory  a Avork 
of  bribery  and  theft,  saying  that  the  Greeks,  deceived  by 
their  captains,  Avho  had  to  that  end  taken  money,  fought 
against  their  wills.  Nor  does  he  here  put  an  end  to  his 
malice.  All  men  in  a manner  confess  that,  although  the 
Greeks  got  the  better  at  sea,  they  nevertheless  abandoned 
Artemisium  to  the  barbarians  after  they  had  received  the 
news  of  the  overthrow  at  Thermopylae.  For  it  was  to  no 
purpose  for  them  to  stay  there  and  keep  the  sea,  the  Avar 
being  already  within  Thermopylae,  and  Xerxes  having 
possessed  himself  of  the  avenues.  But  Herodotus  makes 
the  Greeks  contriving  to  fly  before  they  heard  any  thing  of 
Leonidas’s  death.  For  thus  he  says  : “ But  they  having 
been  ill-treated,  and  especially  the  Athenians,  half  of 
whose  ships  Avere  sorely  shattered,  consulted  to  take  their 
flight  into  Greece.”!  But  let  him  be  permitted  so  to  name 
(or  rather  reproach)  this  retreat  of  theirs  before  the  fight ; 
but  having  before  called  it  a flight,  he  both  noAv  styles  it  a 
flight,  and  will  again  a little  after  term  it  a flight ; so  bit- 
terly does  he  adhere  to  this  Avord  “ flight.”  “ Presently 
after  this,”  says  he,  “ there  came  to  the  barbarians  in  the 
pinnace  a man  of  Ilestiaea,  Avho  acquainted  them  with  the 
flight  of  the  Grecians  from  Artemisium.  They,  because 

* Herod.  VIII.  4.  t Herod.  VIII.  18. 


358 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


the  thing  seemed  incredible,  kept  the  messenger  in  cus- 
tody, and  sent  forth  some  light  galleys  to  discover  the 
truth.”  * But  what  is  this  you  say  \ That  they  fled  as 
conquered,  whom  the  enemies  after  the  fight  could  not  be- 
lieve to  have  fled,  as  having  got  much  the  better  \ Is  then 
this  a fellow  fit  to  be  believed  when  he  writes  of  any  man 
or  city,  who  in  one  word  deprives  Greece  of  the  victory, 
throws  down  the  trophy,  and  pronounces  the  inscriptions 
they  had  set  up  to  Diana  Proseoa  ( Eastward-looking ) to  be 
nothing  but  pride  and  vain  boasting  ? The  tenor  of  the 
inscription  was  as  follows  : 

When  Athens  youth  had  in  a naval  fight 
All  Asia’s  forces  on  this  sea  o’erthrown, 

And  all  the  Persian  army  put  to  flight, 

Than  which  a greater  scarce  was  ever  known, 

To  show  how  much  Diana  they  respected, 

This  trophy  to  her  honor  they  erected. 

Moreover,  not  having  described  any  order  of  the  Greeks, 
nor  told  us  what  place  every  city  of  theirs  held  during  the 
sea-fight,  he  says  that  in  this  retreat,  which  he  calls  their 
flight,  the  Corinthians  sailed  first  and  the  Athenians  last.f 
35.  He  indeed  ought  not  to  have  too  much  insulted  over 
the  Greeks  that  took  part  with  the  Persians,  who,  being 
by  others  thought  a Thurian,  reckons  himself  among  the 
Halicarnassians,  who,  being  Dorians  by  descent,  went  with 
their  wives  and  children  to  the  war  against  the  Greeks. 
But  he  is  so  far  from  giving  first  an  account  of  the  straits 
they  were  in  who  revolted  to  the  Persians,  that,  having  re- 
lated how  the  Thessalians  sent  to  the  Phocians,  who 
were  their  mortal  enemies,  and  promised  to  preserve  their 
country  free  from  all  damage  if  they  might  receive  from 
them  a reward  of  fifty  talents,  he  writ  thus  of  the  Phocians : 
“ For  the  Phocians  were  the  only  people  in  these  quarters 
who  inclined  not  to  the  Persians,  and  that,  as  far  as  I upon 
due  consideration  can  find,  for  no  other  reason  but  because 


* Herod.  VIII.  23. 


t Herod.  VIII.  21. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


359 


they  hated  the  Thessalians  ; for  if  the  Thessalians  had 
been  affected  to  the  Grecian  affairs,  I suppose  the  Phocians 
would  have  joined  themselves  to  the  Persians.”  And  yet 
a little  after  he  will  say,  that  thirteen  cities  of  the  Phocians 
were  burned  by  the  barbarians,  their  country  laid  waste, 
and  the  temple  which  was  in  Abae  set  on  fire,  and  all  of 
both  sexes  put  to  the  sword,  except  those  that  by  flight 
escaped  to  Parnassus.*  Nevertheless,  he  puts  those  who 
suffered  all  extremities  rather  than  lose  their  honesty  in 
the  same  rank  with  those  who  most  affectionately  sided 
with  the  Persians.  And  when  he  could  not  blame  the 
Phocians’  actions,  he  sat  at  his  desk  devising  false  causes 
and  framing  suspicions  against  them,  and  bidding  us  judge 
them  not  by  what  they  did,  but  by  what  they  would  have 
done  if  the  Thessalians  had  not  taken  the  same  side,  as  if 
they  had  been  shut  out  from  treason  because  they  found 
the  place  already  occupied  by  others ! Now  if  any  one, 
going  about  to  excuse  the  revolt  of  the  Thessalians  to  the 
Persians,  should  say  that  they  would  not  have  done  it  but 
for  the  hatred  they  bare  the  Phocians,  — whom  when  they 
saw  joined  to  the  Greeks,  they  against  their  inclinations 
followed  the  party  of  the  Persians,  — would  not  such  a one 
be  thought  most  shamefully  to  flatter,  and  for  the  sake  of 
others  to  pervert  the  truth,  by  feigning  good  causes  for 
evil  actions'?  Indeed,  I think,  he  would.  Why  then 
would  not  he  be  thought  openly  to  calumniate,  who  says 
that  the  Phocians  chose  the  best,  not  for  the  love  of  virtue, 
but  because  they  saw  the  Thessalians  on  the  contrary  side  ? 
For  neither  does  he  refer  this  device  to  other  authors,  as 
he  is  elsewhere  wont  to  do,  but  says  that  himself  found  it 
out  by  conjecture.  He  should  therefore  have  produced 
certain  arguments,  by  which  he  was  persuaded  that  they, 
who  did  things  like  the  best,  followed  the  same  counsels 
with  the  worst.  For  what  he  alleges  of  their  enmities  is 

* Herod.  VIII.  30-33.  Compare  IX.  17. 


360 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


ridiculous.  For  neither  did  the  difference  between  the 
Aeginetans  and  the  Athenians,  nor  that  between  the  Chal- 
cidians  and  the  Eretrians,  nor  yet  that  between  the  Corin- 
thians and  the  Megarians,  hinder  them  from  fighting 
together  for  Greece.  Nor  did  the  Macedonians,  their  most 
bitter  enemies,  divert  the  Thessalians  from  their  friendship 
with  the  barbarians,  by  joining  the  Persian  party  them- 
selves. For  the  common  danger  did  so  bury  their  private 
grudges,  that  banishing  their  other  passions,  they  applied 
their  minds  either  to  honesty  for  the  sake  of  virtue,  or  to 
profit  through  the  impulse  of  necessity.  And  indeed,  after 
that  necessity  which  compelled  them  to  obey  the  Persians 
was  over,  they  returned  again  to  the  Greeks,  as  Lacrates 
the  Spartan  has  openly  testified  of  them.  And  Herodotus, 
as  constrained  to  it,  in  his  relation  of  the  affairs  at  Plataea, 
confessed  that  the  Phocians  took  part  with  the  Greeks.* 

36.  Neither  ought  it  to  seem  strange  to  any,  if  he  thus 
bitterly  inveighs  against  the  unfortunate  ; since  he  reckons 
amongst  enemies  and  traitors  those  who  were  present  at 
the  engagement,  and  together  with  the  other  Greeks  haz- 
arded their  safety.  For  the  Naxians,  says  he,  sent  three 
ships  to  the  assistance  of  the  barbarians ; but  Democritus, 
one  of  their  captains,  persuaded  the  others  to  take  the 
party  of  the  Greeks. f So  unable  be  is  to  praise  without 
dispraising,  that  if  he  commends  one  man  he  must  con- 
demn a whole  city  or  people.  But  in  this  there  give  testi- 
mony against  him,  of  the  more  ancient  writers  Hellanicus, 
and  of  the  later  Epliorus,  one  of  which  says  that  the 
Naxians  came  with  six  ships  to  aid  the  Greeks,  and  the 
other  with  five.  And  Herodotus  convinces  himself  of 
having  feigned  these  things.  For  the  writers  of  the 
Naxian  annals  say,  that  they  had  before  beaten  back 
Megabates,  who  came  to  their  island  with  two  hundred 
ships,  and  after  that  had  put  to  flight  the  general  Datis, 

t Herod.  VIII.  46. 


* Herod.  IX.  31. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


361 


who  had  set  their  city  on  fire.  Now  if,  as  Herodotus  has 
elsewhere  said,  the  barbarians  burned  their  city  so  that 
the  men  were  glad  to  save  themselves  by  flying  into  the 
mountains,  most  surely  had  they  just  cause  rather  to  send 
aid  to  the  destroyers  of  their  country  than  to  help  the 
protectors  of  the  common  liberty.  But  that  he  framed 
this  lie  not  so  much  to  honor  Democritus,  as  to  cast  infamy 
on  the  Naxians,  is  manifest  from  his  omitting  and  wholly 
passing  over  in  silence  the  valiant  acts  then  performed  by 
Democritus,  of  which  Simonides  gives  us  an  account  in 
this  epigram : 

When  as  the  Greeks  at  sea  the  Medes  did  meet, 

And  had  near  Salamis  a naval  fight, 

Democritus  as  third  led  up  the  fleet, 

Charging  the  enemy  with  all  his  might ; 

He  took  five  of  their  ships,  and  did  another, 

Which  they  had  taken  from  the  Greeks,  recover. 

37.  But  why  should  any  one  be  angry  with  him  about 
the  Naxians1?  If  we  have,  as  some  say,  antipodes  inhab- 
iting the  other  hemisphere,  I believe  that  they  also  have 
heard  of  Themistocles  and  his  counsel,  which  he  gave  to 
the  Greeks,  to  fight  a naval  battle  before  Salamis,  after 
which,  the  barbarian  being  overcome,  he  built  in  Melite  a 
temple  to  Diana  the  Counsellor.  This  gentle  writer,  en- 
deavoring, as  much  as  in  him  lies,  to  deprive  Themistocles 
of  the  glory  of  this,  and  transfer  it  to  another,  writes  thus 
word  for  word : “ Whilst  things  were  thus,  Mnesiphilus, 
an  Athenian,  asked  Themistocles,  as  he  was  going  aboard 
his  ship,  what  had  been  resolved  on  in  council.  And  being 
answered,  that  it  was  decreed  the  ships  should  be  brought 
back  to  Isthmus,  and  a battle  fought  at  sea  before  Pelopon- 
nesus ; he  said,  If  then  they  remove  the  navy  from  Salamis, 
you  will  no  longer  be  fighting  for  one  country ; for  they 
will  return  every  one  to  his  own  city.  Wherefore,  if  there 
be  any  way  left,  go  and  endeavor  to  break  this  resolution ; 
and,  if  it  be  possible,  persuade  Eurybiades  to  change  his 


362 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


mind  and  stay  here.”  Then  adding  that  this  advice  pleased 
Themistocles,  who,  without  making  any  reply,  went  straight 
to  Eurybiades,  he  has  these  very  expressions  : “ And  sitting 
by  him  he  related  what  he  had  heard  from  Mnesiphilus, 
feigning  as  if  it  came  from  himself,  and  adding  other 
things.”*  You  see  how  he  accuses  Themistocles  of  disin- 
genuity  in  arrogating  to  himself  the  counsel  of  Mnesi- 
philus. 

38.  And  deriding  the  Greeks  still  further,  he  says,  that 
Themistocles,  who  was  called  another  Ulysses  for  his  wis- 
dom, was  so  blind  that  he  could  not  foresee  what  was  fit 
to  be  done ; hut  that  Artemisia,  who  was  of  the  same  city 
with  Herodotus,  without  being  taught  by  any  one,  but  by 
her  own  consideration,  said  thus  to  Xerxes : “ The  Greeks 
will  not  long  be  able  to  hold  out  against  you,  but  you  will 
scatter  them,  and  they  will  flee  to  their  own  cities  ; nor  is 
it  probable,  if  you  march  your  army  by  land  to  Pelopon- 
nesus, that  they  will  sit  still,  or  take  care  to  fight  at  sea 
for  the  Athenians.  But  if  you  make  haste  to  give  them  a 
naval  battle,  I fear  lest  your  fleets  receiving  damage  may 
prove  also  very  prejudicial  to  your  land-forces.”  f Cer- 
tainly Herodotus  wanted  nothing  but  verses  to  make  Arte- 
misia another  Sibyl,  so  exactly  prophesying  of  things  to 
come.  Therefore  Xerxes  also  delivered  his  sons  to  her  to 
be  carried  to  Ephesus ; for  he  had  (it  seems)  forgot 
to  bring  women  with  him  from  Susa,  if  indeed  the  boys 
wanted  a train  of  female  attendants. 

39.  But  it  is  not  our  design  to  search  into  the  lies  of 
Herodotus ; we  only  make  enquiry  into  those  which  he 
invented  to  detract  from  the  glory  of  others.  He  says  : “ It 
is  reported  by  the  Athenians  that  Adimantus,  captain  of  the 
Corinthians,  when  the  enemies  were  now  ready  to  join 
battle,  was  struck  with  such  fear  and  astonishment  that  he 
fled ; not  thrusting  his  ship  backward  by  the  stern,  or  lei- 

* Herod.  VIII.  57,  58. 


t Herod.  VIII.  68. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


363 


surely  retreating  through  those  that  were  engaged,  but 
openly  hoisting  up  his  sails,  and  turning  the  heads  of  all 
his  vessels.  And  about  the  farther  part  of  the  Salaminian 
coast,  he  was  met  by  a pinnace,  out  of  which  one  spake 
thus  to  him : Thou  indeed,  Adimantus,  fliest,  having  be- 
trayed the  Grecians ; yet  they  overcome,  and  according  to 
their  desires  have  the  better  of  their  enemies.”  * This 
pinnace  was  certainly  let  down  from  heaven.  For  Avhat 
should  hinder  him  from  erecting  a tragical  machine,  who 
by  his  boasting  excelled  the  tragedians  in  all  other  things  ? 
Adimantus  then  crediting  him  (he  adds)  “ returned  to  the 
fleet,  when  the  business  was  already  done.”  “This  re- 
port,” says  he,  “ is  believed  by  the  Athenians  ; but  the  Cor- 
inthians deny  it,  and  say,  they  were  the  first  at  the  sea-fight, 
for  which  they  have  the  testimony  of  all  the  other  Greeks.” 
Such  is  this  man  in  many  other  places.  He  spreads  differ- 
ent calumnies  and  accusations  of  different  men,  that  he 
may  not  fail  of  making  some  one  appear  altogether  wicked. 
And  it  has  succeeded  well  with  him  in  this  place  ; for  if 
the  calumny  is  believed,  the  Corinthians  — if  it  is  not,  the 
Athenians  — are  rendered  infamous.  But  in  truth  the  Athe- 
nians did  not  belie  the  Corinthians,  but  he  hath  belied  them 
both.  Certainly  Thucydides,  bringing  in  an  Athenian  am- 
bassador contesting  with  a Corinthian  at  Sparta,  and  glori- 
ously boasting  of  many  things  about  the  Persian  war  and 
the  sea-fight  at  Salamis,  charges  not  the  Corinthians  with 
any  crime  of  treachery  or  leaving  their  station.  Nor  was 
it  likely  the  Athenians  should  object  any  such  thing  against 
Corinth,  when  they  saw  her  engraven  in  the  third  place 
after  the  Lacedaemonians  and  themselves  on  those  spoils 
which,  being  taken  from  the  barbarians,  were  consecrated 
to  the  Gods.  And  in  Salamis  they  had  permitted  them  to 
bury  the  dead  near  the  city,  as  being  men  who  had  behaved 
themselves  gallantly,  and  to  write  over  them  this  elegy : 

* Herod.  VIII.  94. 


364 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


Well-watered  Corinth,  stranger,  was  our  home; 

Salamis,  Ajax’s  isle,  is  now  our  grave  ; 

Here  Medes  and  Persians  and  Phoenician  ships 
We  fought  and  routed,  sacred  Greece  to  save. 

And  their  honorary  sepulchre  at  the  Isthmus  has  on  it  this 
epitaph : 

When  Greece  upon  the  point  of  danger  stood, 

We  fell,  defending  her  with  our  life-blood.* 

Moreover,  on  the  offerings  of  Diodorus,  one  of  the  Corin- 
thian sea-captains,  reserved  in  the  temple  of  Latona,  there 
is  this  inscription  : 

Diodorus’s  seamen  to  Latona  sent 

These  arms,  of  hostile  Medes  the  monument. 

And  as  for  Adimantus  himself,  against  whom  Herodotus 
frequently  inveighs, — saying,  that  he  was  the  only  captain 
who  went  about  to  fly  from  Artemisium,  and  would  not 
stay  the  fight,  — behold  in  how  great  honor  he  is  : 

Here  Adimantus  rests  : the  same  was  he. 

Whose  counsels  won  for  Greece  the  crown  of  liberty. 

For  neither  is  it  probable,  that  such  honor  would  have  been 
shown  to  a coward  and  a traitor  after  his  decease  ; nor 
would  he  have  dared  to  give  his  daughters  the  names  of 
Nausinica,  Acrothinius,  and  Alexibia,  and  his  son  that  of 
Aristeas,  if  he  had  not  performed  some  illustrious  and 
memorable  action  in  that  fight.  Nor  is  it  credible  that 
Herodotus  was  ignorant  of  that  which  could  not  be  un- 
known even  to  the  meanest  Carian,  that  the  Corinthian 
women  alone  made  that  glorious  and  divine  prayer,  by 
which  they  besought  the  Goddess  Venus  to  inspire  their 
husbands  with  a love  of  fighting  against  the  barbarians. 
For  it  was  a thing  divulged  abroad,  concerning  which  Si- 
monides made  an  epigram  to  be  inscribed  on  the  brazen 
image  set  up  in  that  temple  of  Venus  which  is  said  to  have 
been  founded  by  Medea,  when  she  desired  the  Goddess,  as 

* The  versions  of  this  epigram  and  of  the  last  two  in  this  chapter  are  taken  from 
Burges’s  Greek  Anthology.  (G.) 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


365 


some  affirm,  to  deliver  her  from  loving  her  husband  Jason, 
or,  as  others  say,  to  free  him  from  loving  Thetis.  The 
tenor  of  the  epigram  follows : 

For  those  who,  fighting  on  their  country’s  side, 

Opposed  th’  imperial  Mede’s  advancing  tide, 

We,  votaresses,  to  Cythera  pray’d; 

Th’  indulgent  power  vouchsafed  her  timely  aid, 

And  kept  the  citadel  of  Hellas  free 
From  rude  assaults  of  Persia’s  archery. 

These  things  he  should  rather  have  written  and  recorded, 
than  have  inserted  Aminocles’s  killing  of  his  son. 

40.  After  he  had  abundantly  satisfied  himself  with  the 
accusations  brought  against  Themistocles,  — of  whom  he 
says  that,  unknown  to  the  other  captains,  he  incessantly 
robbed  and  spoiled  the  islands,  — # he  at  length  openly 
takes  away  the  crown  of  victory  from  the  Athenians,  and 
sets  it  on  the  head  of  the  Aeginetans,  writing  thus : “The 
Greeks  having  sent  the  first-fruits  of  their  spoils  to  Delphi, 
asked  in  general  of  the  God,  whether  he  had  a sufficient 
part  of  the  booty  and  were  contented  with  it.  He  answered, 
that  he  had  enough  of  all  the  other  Greeks,  but  not  of  the 
Aeginetans  ; for  he  expected  a donary  of  them,  as  having 
won  the  greatest  honor  in  the  battle  at  Salamis.”  f See 
here  how  he  attributes  not  his  fictions  to  the  Scythians,  to 
the  Persians,  or  to  the  Egyptians,  as  Aesop  did  his  to  the 
ravens  and  apes ; but  using  the  very  person  of  the  Pyth- 
ian Apollo,  he  takes  from  Athens  the  chief  honor  of  the 
battle  at  Salamis.  And  the  second  place  in  honor  being 
given  to  Themistocles  at  the  Isthmus  by  all  the  other  cap- 
tains, — every  one  of  which  attributed  to  himself  the  first 
degree  of  valor,  but  gave  the  next  to  Themistocles,  — and 
the  judgment  not  coming  to  a determination,  when  he 
should  have  reprehended  the  ambition  of  the  captains,  he 
said,  that  all  the  Greeks  weighed  anchor  from  thence 


* Herod.  VIII.  112. 


t Herod.  VIII.  122. 


366 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


through  envy,  not  being  willing  to  give  the  chief  honor  of 
the  victory  to  Themistocles.* 

41.  In  his  ninth  and  last  book,  having  nothing  left  to 
vent  his  malice  on  but  the  Lacedaemonians  and  their  glo- 
rious action  against  the  barbarians  at  Plataea,  he  writes, 
that  the  Spartans  at  first  feared  lest  the  Athenians  should 
suffer  themselves  to  be  persuaded  by  Mardonius  to  forsake 
the  other  Greeks  ; but  that  now,  the  Isthmus  being  fortified, 
they,  supposing  all  to  be  safe  at  Peloponnesus,  neglected 
and  slighted  the  rest,  feasting  and  making  merry  at  home, 
and  deluding  and  delaying  the  Athenian  ambassadors. f 
Plow  then  did  there  go  forth  from  Sparta  to  Plataea  a thou- 
sand and  five  men,  having  every  one  of  them  with  him 
seven  Helots  ? Or  how  came  it  that,  exposing  themselves 
to  so  many  dangers,  they  vanquished  and  overthrew  so 
many  thousand  barbarians  1 Hear  now  his  probable  cause 
of  it.  “ It  happened,”  says  he,  “ that  there  was  then  at 
Sparta  a certain  stranger  of  Tegea,  named  Chileus,  who 
had  some  friends  amongst  the  Ephori,  between  whom  and 
him  there  was  mutual  hospitality.  He  then  persuaded 
them  to  send  forth  the  army,  telling  them  that  the  fortifi- 
cation on  the  Isthmus,  by  which  they  had  fenced  in  Pelo- 
ponnesus, would  be  of  no  avail  if  the  Athenians  joined 
themselves  with  Mardonius.”  % This  counsel  then  drew 
Pausanias  with  his  army  to  Plataea ; but  if  any  private 
business  had  kept  that  Chileus  at  Tegea,  Greece  had  never 
been  victorious. 

42.  Again,  not  knowing  what  to  do  with  the  Athenians, 
he  tosses  to  and  fro  that  city,  sometimes  extolling  it,  and 
sometimes  debasing  it.  He  says  that,  contending  for  the 
second  place  with  the  Tegeatans  they  made  mention  of  the 
Heraclidae,  alleged  their  acts  against  the  Amazons,  and 
the  sepulchres  of  the  Peloponnesians  that  died  under  the 

* Herod.  VIII.  123,  124.  t Herod.  IX.  8.  See  also  VIII.  141. 

t Herod.  IX.  9. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


367 


walls  of  Cadmea,  and  at  last  ambitiously  brought  down 
their  discourse  to  the  battle  of  Marathon,  saying,  however, 
that  they  would  be  contented  with  the  command  of  the  left 
wing.*  A little  after,  he  says,  Pausanias  and  the  Spartans 
yielded  them  the  first  place,  desiring  them  to  fight  in  the 
right  wing  against  the  Persians  and  give  them  the  left,  who 
excused  themselves  as  not  skilled  in  fighting  against  the 
barbarians. f Now  it  is  a ridiculous  thing,  to  be  unwilling 
to  fight  against  an  enemy  unless  one  has  been  used  to  him. 
But  he  says  farther,  that  the  other  Greeks  being  led  by 
their  captains  to  encamp  in  another  place,  as  soon  as  they 
were  moved,  the  horse  fled  with  joy  towards  Plataea,  and 
in  their  flight  came  as  far  as  Juno’s  temple.  J In  which 
place  indeed  he  charges  them  all  in  general  with  disobedi- 
ence, cowardice,  and  treason.  At  last  he  says,  that  only 
the  Lacedaemonians  and  the  Tegeates  fought  with  the 
barbarians,  and  the  Athenians  with  the  Thebans ; equally 
defrauding  all  the  other  cities  of  their  part  in  the  honor  of 
the  victory,  whilst  he  affirms  that  none  of  them  joined  in 
the  fight,  but  that  all  of  them,  sitting  still  hard  by  in  their 
arms,  betrayed  and  forsook  those  who  fought  for  them ; 
that  the  Phliasians  and  Megarians  indeed,  when  they  heard 
Pausanias  had  got  the  better,  came  in  late,  and  falling  on 
the  Theban  horse,  were  all  cut  off ; that  the  Corinthians 
were  not  at  the  battle,  and  that  after  the  victory,  by  press- 
ing on  over  the  hills,  they  escaped  the  Theban  cavalry.  § 
For  the  Thebans,  after  the  barbarians  were  overthrown, 
going  before  with  their  horse,  affectionately  assisted  them 
in  their  flight ; to  return  them  thanks  (forsooth)  for  the 
marks  they  had  stigmatized  them  with  at  Thermopylae ! 
Now  what  rank  the  Corinthians  had  in  the  fight  at  Plataea 
against  the  barbarians,  and  how  they  performed  their  duty, 
you  may  hear  from  Simonides  in  these  verses  : 

* Herod.  IX.  26,  27.  t Herod.  IX.  46.  J Herod.  IX.  62. 

§ See  the  account  of  the  battle  of  Plataea,  Herod.  IX.  69-70. 


368 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


I’  th’  midst  were  men,  in  warlike  feats  excelling. 

Who  Ephyre,  full  of  springs,  inhabited, 

And  who  in  Corinth,  Glaucus’  city,  dwelling, 

Great  praise  by  their  great  valor  merited  ; 

Of  which  they  to  perpetuate  the  fame, 

To  th’  Gods  of  well-wrought  gold  did  offerings  frame. 

For  he  wrote  not  these  things,  as  one  that  taught  at 
Corinth  or  that  made  verses  in  honor  of  the  city,  but 
only  as  recording  these  actions  in  elegiac  verses.  But 
Herodotus,  whilst  he  desires  to  prevent  that  objection  by 
which  those  might  convince  him  of  lying  who  should  ask, 
Whence  then  are  so  many  mounts,  tombs,  and  monuments 
of  the  dead,  at  which  the  Plataeans,  even  to  this  day,  cele- 
brate funeral  solemnities  in  the  presence  of  the  Greeks  1 — 
has  charged,  unless  I am  mistaken,  a fouler  crime  than 
that  of  treason  on  their  posterity.  For  these  are  his 
words : “As  for  the  other  sepulchres  that  are  seen  in 
Plataea,  I have  heard  that  their  successors,  being  ashamed 
of  their  progenitors’  absence  from  this  battle,  erected 
every  man  a monument  for  posterity’s  sake.”*  Of  this 
treacherous  deserting  the  battle  Herodotus  was  the  only 
man  that  ever  heard.  For  if  any  Greeks  withdrew  them- 
selves from  the  battle,  they  must  have  deceived  Pausanias, 
Aristides,  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  Athenians.  Neither 
yet  did  the  Athenians  exclude  the  xleginetans  who  were 
their  adversaries  from  the  inscription,  nor  convince  the 
Corinthians  of  having  fled  from  Salamis  before  the  victory, 
Greece  bearing  witness  to  the  contrary.  Indeed  Cleadas,  a 
Plataean,  ten  years  after  the  Persian  war,  to  gratify,  as 
Plerodotus  says,  the  Aeginetans,  erected  a mount  bearing 
their  name.  Flow  came  it  then  to  pass  that  the  Athenians 
and  Lacedaemonians,  who  were  so  jealous  of  each  other 
that  they  were  presently  after  the  war  ready  to  go  to- 
gether by  the  ears  about  the  setting  up  a trophy,  did  not 
yet  repel  those  Greeks  who  fled  in  a fear  from  the  battle 


* Herod.  IX.  85. 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


369 


from  having  a share  in  the  honor  of  those  that  behaved 
themselves  valiantly,  hut  inscribed  their  names  on  the 
trophies  and  colossuses,  and  granted  them  part  of  the 
spoils  ? Lastly  they  set  up  an  altar,  on  which  was  en- 
graven this  epigram : 

The  Greeks,  by  valor  having  put  to  flight 
The  Persians  and  preserved  their  country’s  right, 

Erected  here  this  altar  which  you  see, 

To  Jove,  preserver  of  their  liberty. 

Did  Cleadas,  O Herodotus,  or  some  other,  write  this  also, 
to  oblige  the  cities  by  flattery  ? What  need  had  they  then 
to  employ  fruitless  labor  in  digging  up  the  earth,  to  make 
tombs  and  erect  monuments  for  posterity’s  sake,  when  they 
saw  their  glory  consecrated  in  the  most  illustrious  and 
greatest  donaries  ? Pausanias  indeed,  when  he  was  aspiring 
to  the  tyranny,  set  up  this  inscription  in  Delphi : 

Pausanias,  of  Greeks  the  general, 

When  he  the  Medes  in  fight  had  overthrown, 

Offered  to  Phoebus  a memorial 
Of  victory,  this  monumental  stone. 

In  which  he  gave  the  glory  to  the  Greeks,  whose  general 
he  professed  himself  to  be.  Yet  the  Greeks  not  enduring 
but  utterly  misliking  it,  the  Lacedaemonians,  sending  to 
Delphi,  caused  this  to  be  cut  out,  and  the  names  of  the 
cities,  as  it  was  fit,  to  be  engraven  instead  of  it.  Now  how 
is  it  possible  that  the  Greeks  should  have  been  offended 
that  there  was  no  mention  made  of  them  in  the  inscription, 
if  they  had  been  conscious  to  themselves  of  deserting  the 
fight1?  or  that  the  Lacedaemonians  would  have  erased  the 
name  of  their  leader  and  general,  to  insert  deserters  and 
such  as  withdrew  themselves  from  the  common  danger? 
For  it  would  have  been  a great  indignity,  that  Sophanes, 
Aeimnestus,  and  all  the  rest  who  showed  their  valor  in  that 
fight,  should  calmly  suffer  even  the  Cythnians  and  Melians 
to  be  inscribed  on  the  trophies ; and  that  Herodotus,  at- 
tributing that  fight  only  to  three  cities,  should  raze  all 

24 


VOL.  XV. 


370 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


the  rest  out  of  those  and  other  sacred  monuments  and 
donaries. 

43.  There  having  been  then  four  fights  with  the  bar- 
barians ; he  says,  that  the  Greeks  fled  from  Artemisium ; 
that,  whilst  their  king  and  general  exposed  himself  to 
danger  at  Thermopylae,  the  Lacedaemonians  sat  negligent 
at  home,  celebrating  the  Olympian  and  Carnean  feasts  ; 
and  discoursing  of  the  action  at  Salamis,  he  uses  more 
words  about  Artemisia  than  he  does  in  his  whole  narrative 
of  the  naval  battle.  Lastly,  he  says,  that  the  Greeks  sat 
still  at  Plataea,  knowing  no  more  of  the  fight,  till  it  was 
over,  than  if  it  had  been  a skirmish  between  mice  and 
frogs  (like  that  which  Pigres,  Artemisia’s  fellow-country- 
man, merrily  and  scoffingly  described  in  his  poem),  and  it 
had  been  agreed  to  fight  silently,  lest  they  should  be  heard 
by  others ; and  that  the  Lacedaemonians  excelled  not  the 
barbarians  in  valor,  but  only  got  the  better,  as  fighting 
against  naked  and  unarmed  men.  To  wit,  when  Xerxes 
himself  was  present,  the  barbarians  were  with  much  diffi- 
culty compelled  by  scourges  to  fight  with  the  Greeks  ; but 
at  Plataea,  having  taken  other  resolutions,  as  Herodotus 
says,  “ they  were  no  way  inferior  in  courage  and  strength  ; 
but  their  garments  being  without  armor  was  prejudicial  to 
them,  since  being  naked  they  fought  against  a completely 
armed  enemy.”  What  then  is  there  left  great  and  memor- 
able to  the  Grecians  of  those  fights,  if  the  Lacedaemonians 
fought  with  unarmed  men,  and  the  other  Greeks,  though 
present,  were  ignorant  of  the  battle ; if  empty  monuments 
are  set  up  everywhere,  and  tripods  and  altars  full  of  lying 
inscriptions  are  placed  before  the  Gods  ; if,  lastly,  Herodo- 
tus only  knows  the  truth,  and  all  others  that  give  any  ac- 
count of  the  Greeks  have  been  deceived  by  the  fame  of 
those  glorious  actions,  as  the  effect  of  an  admirable  prow- 
ess ? But  he  is  an  acute  writer,  his  style  is  pleasant,  there 
is  a certain  grace,  force,  and  elegancy  in  his  narrations ; 


OF  HERODOTUS’S  MALICE. 


371 


arid  he  has,  like  a musician,  pronounced  his  discourse, 
though  not  knowingly,  still  clearly  and  elegantly.  These 
things  delight,  please,  and  affect  all  men.  But  as  in  roses 
we  must  beware  of  the  venomous  flies  called  cantharides  ; 
so  must  we  take  heed  of  the  calumnies  and  envy  lying  hid 
under  smooth  and  well-couched  phrases  and  expressions, 
lest  we  imprudently  entertain  absurd  and  false  opinions 
of  the  most  excellent  and  greatest  cities  and  men  of 
Greece. 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS,  AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


LAMPRIAS,  DIADUMENUS. 

1.  Lamprias.  You,  ODiadumenus,  seem  not  much  to 
care,  if  any  one  thinks  that  you  philosophize  against  the 
common  notions ; since  you  confess  that  you  contemn  also 
the  senses,  from  whence  the  most  part  of  these  notions  in 
a manner  proceed,  having  for  their  seat  and  foundation  the 
belief  of  such  things  as  appear  to  us.  But  I beseech  you, 
with  what  speed  you  can,  either  by  reasons,  incantations, 
or  some  other  manner  of  discourse,  to  cure  me,  who  come 
to  you  full,  as  I seem  to  myself,  of  great  and  strange  per- 
turbations ; so  much  have  I been  shaken,  and  into  such  a 
perplexity  of  mind  have  I been  brought,  by  certain  Stoics, 
in  other  things  indeed  very  good  men  and  my  familiar 
friends,  but  most  bitterly  and  liostilely  bent  against  the 
Academy.  These,  for  some  few  words  modestly  spoken  by 
me,  have  (for  I will  tell  you  no  lie)  rudely  and  unkindly 
reprehended  me ; angrily  reputing  and  branding  the  ancient 
philosophers  as  sophisters  and  corrupters  of  students  of 
philosophy,  and  subverters  of  regular  doctrines  ; and  say- 
ing things  yet  more  absurd  than  these,  they  fell  a't  last 
upon  the  conceptions,  into  which  (they  maintained)  the 
Academics  had  brought  a certain  confusion  and  disturb- 
ance. At  length  one  of  them  said,  that  he  thought  it  was 
not  by  fortune,  but  by  the  providence  of  the  Gods,  that 
Chrysippus  came  into  the  world  after  Arcesilaus  and  before 
Carneades  ; of  which  the  one  was  the  author  of  the  con- 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS. 


373 


tumelies  and  injuries  done  to  custom,  and  the  other  flour- 
ished most  of  all  the  Academics.  Chrysippus  then,  coming 
between  them,  by  his  writings  against  Arcesilaus,  stopped 
also  the  way  against  the  eloquence  of  Carneades,  leaving 
indeed  many  things  to  the  senses,  as  provisions  against  a 
siege,  but  wholly  taking  away  the  trouble  about  anticipa- 
tions and  conceptions,  directing  every  one  of  them  and 
putting  it  in  its  proper  place  ; so  that  they  who  will  again 
embroil  and  disquiet  matters  should  accomplish  nothing, 
but  be  convinced  of  being  malicious  and  deceitful  sophist- 
ers.  I,  having  been  this  morning  set  on  fire  by  these  dis- 
courses, want  some  cooling  remedies  to  extinguish  and 
take  away  this  doubting,  as  an  inflammation,  out  of  my 
mind. 

2.  Diadumenus.  You  perhaps  have  suffered  the  same 
things  with  some  of  the  vulgar.  But  if  you  believe  the 
poets,  who  say  that  the  ancient  city  Sipylus  was  overthrown 
by  the  providence  of  the  Gods  when  they  punished  Tanta- 
lus, believe  also  the  companions  of  the  Stoa  saying  that 
Nature,  not  by  chance  but  by  divine  providence,  brought 
forth  Chrysippus,  when  she  had  a mind  to  turn  things  up- 
side down  and  alter  the  course  of  life ; for  which  purpose 
never  any  man  was  fitter  than  he.  But  as  Cato  said  of 
Caesar,  that  never  any  but  he  came  to  the  management  of 
public  affairs  sober  and  considerately  resolved  on  the  ruin 
of  the  state  ; so  does  this  man  seem  to  me  with  the  greatest 
diligence  and  eloquence  to  overturn  and  demolish  custom, 
as  they  who  magnify  the  man  testify,  when  they  dispute 
against  him  concerning  the  sophism  called  Pseudomenos 
(or  the  Liar).  For  to  say,  my  best  friend,  that  a conclu- 
sion drawn  from  contrary  positions  is  not  manifestly  false, 
and  again  to  say  that  some  arguments  having  true  premises 
and  true  inductions  may  yet  moreover  have  the  contrary  to 
their  conclusions  true,  what  conception  of  demonstration 
or  what  presumption  of  faith  does  it  not  overthrow  ? They 


374 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


say,  that  the  polypus  in  the  winter  gnaws  his  own  claws ; 
but  the  logic  of  Chrysippus,  taking  away  and  cutting  off 
its  own  chiefest  parts  and  principles,  — what  other  notion 
has  it  left  unsuspected  of  falsehood?  For  the  superstruc- 
tures cannot  be  steady  and  sure,  if  the  foundations  remain 
not  firm  but  are  shaken  with  so  many  doubts  and  troubles. 
But  as  those  who  have  dust  or  dirt  upon  their  bodies,  if 
they  touch  or  rub  the  filth  that  is  upon  them,  seem  rather 
to  increase  than  remove  it ; so  some  men  blame  the  Acade- 
mics, and  think  them  guilty  of  the  faults  with  which  they 
show  themselves  to  be  burdened.  For  who  do  more  per- 
vert the  common  conceptions  than  the  Stoics  ? But  if  you 
please,  let  us  leave  accusing  them,  and  defend  ourselves 
from  the  things  with  which  they  charge  us. 

3.  Lamprias.  Methinks,  Diadumenus,  I am  this  day  be- 
come a various  and  unconstant  man.  For  ere  while  I came 
dejected  and  trembling,  as  one  that  wanted  an  apology ; 
and  now  I am  changed  to  an  accuser,  and  desire  to  enjoy 
the  pleasure  of  revenge,  in  seeing  them  all  convicted  of 
philosophizing  against  the  common  conceptions  and  pre- 
sumptions, from  which  they  think  chiefly  their  doctrine  is 
derived,  whence  they  say  that  it  alone  agrees  with  Nature. 

Diadumenus.  Shall  we  then  first  attack  those  common 
and  celebrated  doctrines  of  theirs  which  themselves,  gen- 
tly admitting  their  absurdity,  style  paradoxes ; as  that  only 
wise  men  are  kings,  that  they  only  are  rich  and  fair,  they 
only  citizens  and  judges  ? Or  shall  we  send  all  this  to  the 
brokers,  as  old  decayed  frippery,  and  make  our  enquiry 
into  such  things  as  are  most  practical  and  with  the  great- 
est earnestness  delivered  by  them  ? 

Lamprias.  I indeed  like  this  best.  For  who  is  there 
that  is  not  already  full  of  the  arguments  brought  against 
those  paradoxes  ? 

4.  Diadumenus.  First  then  consider  this,  whether,  ac- 
cording to  the  common  conceptions,  they  can  be  said  to 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


375 


agree  with  Nature,  who  think  all  natural  things  indifferent, 
and  esteem  neither  health,  vigorousness  of  body,  beauty, 
nor  strength  as  desirable,  commodious,  profitable,  or  any 
way  contributary  to  the  completing  of  natural  perfection ; 
nor  believe  that  their  contraries,  as  maims,  pains,  disgraces, 
and  diseases,  are  hurtful  or  to  be  shunned'?  To  the  latter 
of  these  they  themselves  say  that  Nature  gives  us  an  ab- 
horrence, and  an  inclination  to  the  former.  Which  very 
thing  is  not  a little  repugnant  to  common  understanding, 
that  Nature  should  incline  us  to  such  things  as  are  neither 
good  nor  available,  and  avert  us  from  such  as  are  neither 
ill  nor  hurtful,  and  which  is  more,  that  she  should  render 
this  inclination  and  this  aversion  so  violent,  that  they  who 
either  possess  not  the  one  or  fall  into  the  other  detest  their 
life  with  good  reason,  and  withdraw  themselves  out  of  it. 

5.  I think  also  that  this  is  said  by  them  against  common 
sense,  that  Nature  herself  is  indifferent,  and  yet  that  it  is 
good  to  agree  with  Nature.  For  it  is  not  our  duty  either  to 
follow  the  law  or  be  persuaded  by  argument,  unless  the 
law  and  argument  be  good  and  honest.  And  this  indeed 
is  the  least  of  their  errors.  But  if,  as  Chrysippus  has 
written  in  his  First  Book  concerning  Exhortation,  a happy 
life  consists  only  in  living  according  to  virtue,  other  things 
(as  he  says)  being  nothing  to  us,  nor  co-operating  any  ways 
towards  it,  Nature  is  not  only  indifferent,  but  foolish  also 
and  stupid,  in  inclining  us  to  such  things  as  belong  nothing 
to  us ; and  we  also  are  fools  in  thinking  felicity  to  be  an 
agreeing  with  Nature,  which  draws  us  after  such  things  as 
contribute  nothing  to  happiness.  For  what  can  be  more 
agreeable  to  common  sense,  than  that,  as  desirable  things 
are  requisite  to  live  commodiously,  so  natural  things  are 
necessary  that  we  may  live  according  to  Nature  ? Now 
these  men  say  not  so ; but  having  settled  the  living  accord- 
ing to  Nature  for  their  end,  do  nevertheless  hold  those 
things  which  are  according  to  Nature  to  be  indifferent. 


376 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


6.  Nor  is  this  less  repugnant  to  common  sense,  that  an 
intelligent  and  prudent  man  should  not  be  equally  affected 
to  equal  good  things,  but  should  put  no  value  on  some, 
and  be  ready  to  undergo  and  suffer  any  thing  for  others, 
though  the  things  themselves  are  neither  greater  nor  less 
one  than  another.  For  they  say,  It  is  the  same  thing  to 
abstain  from  the  enjoyment  of  an  old  woman  that  has  one 
foot  in  the  grave,  and  . . . since  in  both  cases  we  do  what 
duty  requires.  And  yet  for  this,  as  a great  and  glorious 
thing,  they  should  be  ready  to  die  ; when  as  to  boast  of  the 
other  would  be  shameful  and  ridiculous.  And  even  Chry- 
sippus  himself  in  his  commentary  concerning  Jupiter,  and 
in  the  Third  Book  of  the  Gods,  says,  that  it  were  a poor, 
absurd,  and  impertinent  thing  to  glory  in  such  acts,  as  pro- 
ceeding from  virtue,  as  bearing  valiantly  the  stinging  of  a 
wasp,  or  abstaining  chastely  from  an  old  woman  that  lies 
a dying.  Do  not  they  then  philosophize  against  the  com- 
mon conception,  who  profess  nothing  to  be  more  commend- 
able than  those  things  which  yet  themselves  are  ashamed 
to  praise  ? For  how  can  that  be  desirable  or  to  be  ap- 
proved, which  is  worthy  neither  of  praise  nor  admiration, 
but  the  praisers  and  admirers  of  which  they  esteem  absurd 
and  ridiculous  1 

7.  And  yet  this  will  (I  suppose)  appear  to  you  more 
against  common  sense,  that  a wise  man  should  take  no 
care  whether  he  enjoys  or  not  enjoys  the  greatest  good 
things,  but  should  carry  himself  after  the  same  manner  in 
these  things,  as  in  those  that  are  indifferent  and  in  their 
management  and  administration.  For  all  of  us,  “ whoever 
we  are  that  eat  the  fruit  of  the  spacious  earth,”  judge  that 
desirable,  good,  and  profitable,  which  being  present  we 
use,  and  absent  we  want  and  desire.  But  that  which  no 
man  thinks  worth  his  concern,  either  for  his  profit  or  de- 
light, is  indifferent.  For  we  by  no  other  means  distinguish  a 
laborious  man  from  a trifler,  who  is  for  the  most  part  also 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


377 


employed  in  action,  but  that  the  one  busies  himself  in  use- 
less matters  and  indifferently,  and  the  other  in  things  com- 
modious and  profitable.  But  these  men  act  quite  contrary  ; 
for  with  them,  a wise  and  prudent  man,  being  conversant 
in  many  comprehensions  and  memories  of  comprehension, 
esteems  few  of  them  to  belong  to  him  ; and  not  caring 
for  the  rest,  he  thinks  he  has  neither  more  or  less  by  re- 
membering that  he  lately  had  the  comprehension  of  Dion 
sneezing  or  Theon  playing  at  ball.  And  yet  every  com- 
prehension in  a wise  man,  and  every  memory  having  as- 
surance and  firmness,  is  a great,  yea,  a very  great  good. 
When  therefore  his  health  fails,  when  some  organ  of  his 
senses  is  disordered,  or  when  his  wealth  is  lost,  is  a wise 
man  so  careless  as  to  think  that  none  of  these  things  con- 
cern him  ? Or  does  he,  “ when  sick,  give  fees  to  the  phy- 
sicians : for  the  gaining  of  riches  sail  to  Leucon,  governor 
in  the  Bosphorus,  or  travel  to  Idanthyrsus,  king  of  the 
Scythians,”  as  Chrysippus  says'?  And  being  deprived  of 
some  of  his  senses,  does  he  not  grow  weary  even  of  life  ? 
How  then  do  they  not  acknowledge  that  they  philosophize 
against  the  common  notions,  employing  so  much  care  and 
diligence  on  things  indifferent,  and  recking  not  whether 
they  have  or  have  not  great  good  things  ? 

8.  But  this  is  also  yet  against  the  common  conceptions, 
that  he  who  is  a man  should  not  rejoice  when  coming  from 
the  greatest  evils  to  the  greatest  goods.  Now  their  wise 
men  suffer  this.  Being  changed  from  extreme  viciousness 
to  the  highest  virtue,  and  at  the  same  time  escaping  a 
most  miserable  life  and  attaining  to  a most  happy  one,  he 
shows  no  sign  of  joy,  nor  does  this  so  great  change  lift 
him  up  or  yet  move  him,  being  delivered  from  all  infe- 
licity and  vice,  and  coming  to  a certain  sure  and  firm  per- 
fection of  virtue.  This  also  is  repugnant  to  common  sense, 
to  maintain  that  the  being  immutable  in  one’s  judgments 
and  resolutions  is  the  greatest  of  goods,  and  yet  that  he 


378 


or  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


who  has  attained  to  the  height  wants  not  this,  nor  cares 
for  it  when  he  has  it,  nay,  many  times  will  not  so  much  as 
stretch  forth  a finger  for  this  security  and  constancy,  which 
nevertheless  themselves  esteem  the  sovereign  and  perfect 
good.  Nor  do  the  Stoics  say  only  these  things,  but  they 
add  also  this  to  them,  — that  the  continuance  of  time  in- 
creases not  any  good  thing  ; but  if  a man  shall  be  wise  but 
a minute  of  an  hour,  he  will  not  be  any  way  inferior  in 
happiness  to  him  who  has  all  his  time  practised  virtue  and 
led  his  life  happily  in  it.  Yet,  whilst  they  thus  boldly 
affirm  these  things,  they  on  the  contrary  also  say,  that  a 
short-lived  virtue  is  nothing  worth  ; “ For  what  advantage 
would  the  attainment  of  wisdom  be  to  him  who  is  immedi- 
ately to  be  swallowed  up  by  the  waves  or  tumbled  down 
headlong  from  a precipice  1 What  would  it  have  bene- 
fited Lichas,  if  being  thrown  by  Hercules,  as  from  a sling 
into  the  sea,  he  had  been  on  a sudden  changed  from  vice 
to  virtue  1 ” These  therefore  are  the  positions  of  men 
who  not  only  philosophize  against  the  common  concep- 
tions but  also  confound  their  own,  if  the  having  been  but 
a little  while  endued  with  virtue  is  no  way  short  of  the 
highest  felicity,  and  at  the  same  time  nothing  worth. 

9.  Nor  is  this  the  strangest  thing  you  will  find  in  their 
doctrine ; but  their  being  of  opinion  that  virtue  and  hap- 
piness, when  present,  are  frequently  not  perceived  by  him 
who  enjoys  them,  nor  does  he  discern  that,  having  but  a 
little  before  been  most  miserable  and  foolish,  he  is  of  a 
sudden  become  wise  and  happy.  For  it  is  not  only  child- 
ish to  say  that  he  who  is  possessed  of  wisdom  is  ignorant 
of  this  thing  alone,  that  he  is  wise,  and  knows  not  that 
he  is  delivered  from  folly ; but,  to  speak  in  general,  they 
make  goodness  to  have  very  little  weight  or  strength,  if  it 
does  not  give  so  much  as  a feeling  of  it  when  it  is  present. 
For  according  even  to  them,  it  is  not  by  nature  imper- 
ceptible ; nay,  even  Chrysippus  in  his  books  of  the  End 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


379 


expressly  says  that  good  is  sensible,  and  demonstrates  it 
also,  as  lie  thinks.  It  remains  then,  that  by  its  weakness 
and  littleness  it  flies  the  sense,  when  being  present  it  is  un- 
known and  concealed  from  the  possessors.  It  were  more- 
over absurd  to  imagine  that  the  sight,  perceiving  those 
things  which  are  but  a little  whitish  or  inclining  to  white, 
should  not  discern  such  as  are  white  in  perfection ; or  that 
the  touch,  feeling  those  things  which  are  but  warm  or 
moderately  hot,  should  be  insensible  of  those  that  are  hot 
in  the  highest  degree.  And  yet  more  absurd  it  is,  that  a 
man  who  perceives  what  is  commonly  according  to  Nature 
— as  are  health  and  good  constitution  of  body  — should 
yet  be  ignorant  of  virtue  when  it  is  present,  which  them- 
selves hold  to  be  most  of  all  and  in  the  highest  degree 
according  to  Nature.  For  how  can  it  but  be  against  sense, 
to  conceive  the  difference  between  health  and  sickness,  and 
yet  so  little  to  comprehend  that  between  wisdom  and  folly 
as  to  think  the  one  to  be  present  when  it  is  gone,  and 
possessing  the  other  to  be  ignorant  that  one  has  it"?  Noav 
because  there  is  from  the  highest  progress  a change  made 
to  felicity  and  virtue,  one  of  these  two  things  must  of 
necessity  follow  ; either  that  this  progress  is  not  vice  and 
infelicity,  or  that  virtue  is  not  far  distant  from  vice,  nor 
happiness  from  misery,  but  that  the  difference  between 
good  and  evil  is  very  small  and  not  to  be  perceived  by 
sense ; for  otherwise  they  who  have  the  one  for  the  other 
could  not  be  ignorant  of  it. 

10.  Since  then  they  will  not  depart  from  any  of  these 
contrarieties,  but  confess  and  hold  them  all,  — that  those 
who  are  proceeding  towards  virtue  are  fools  and  vicious, 
that  those  who  are  become  good  and  wise  perceive  not  this 
change  in  themselves,  and  that  there  is  a great  difference 
between  folly  and  wisdom,  — they  must  surely  seem  to  you 
wonderfully  to  preserve  an  agreement  in  their  doctrines, 
and  yet  more  so  in  their  actions,  when  affirming  all  men 


380 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


who  are  not  wise  to  be  equally  wicked,  unjust,  faithless, 
and  fools,  they  on  the  other  side  abhor  and  detest  some  of 
them,  — nay,  sometimes  to  such  a degree  that  they  refuse 
even  to  speak  to  them  when  they  meet  them,  — while 
others  of  them  they  trust  with  their  money,  choose  to 
offices,  and  take  for  husbands  to  their  daughters.  Now  if 
they  say  these  things  in  jest,  let  them  smooth  their  brows  ; 
but  if  in  earnest  and  as  philosophers,  it  is  against  the  com- 
mon notions  to  reprove  and  blame  all  men  alike  in  words, 
and  yet  to  deal  with  some  of  them  as  moderate  persons 
and  with  others  as  very  wicked ; and  exceedingly  to  ad- 
mire Chrysippus,  to  deride  x\lexinus,  and  yet  to  think 
neither  of  them  more  or  less  mad  than  the  other.  “ ’Tis 
so,”  say  they ; “ but  as  he  who  is  not  above  a cubit  under 
the  superficies  of  the  sea  is  no  less  drowned  than  he  who  is 
five  hundred  fathom  deep,  so  they  that  are  coming  towards 
virtue  are  no  less  in  vice  than  those  that  are  farther 
off.  And  as  blind  men  are  still  blind,  though  they  shall 
perhaps  a little  after  recover  their  sight ; so  these  that 
have  proceeded  towards  virtue,  till  such  time  as  they  have 
attained  to  it,  continue  foolish  and  wicked.”  But  that  they 
who  are  in  the  way  towards  virtue  resemble  not  the  blind, 
but  such  as  see  less  clearly,  nor  are  like  to  those  who  are 
drowned,  but  — those  which  swim,  and  that  near  the  harbor, 
— they  themselves  testify  by  their  actions.  For  they  would 
not  use  counsellors  and  generals  and  lawgivers  as  blind 
guides,  nor  would  they  imitate  the  works  and  actions  and 
words  and  lives  of  some,  if  they  saw  them  all  equally 
drowned  in  folly  and  wickedness.  But  leaving  this,  won- 
der at  the  men  in  this  behalf,  that  they  are  not  taught  by 
their  own  examples  to  give  up  the  doctrine  that  these  men 
are  wise  being  ignorant  of  it  themselves,  and  neither  know- 
ing nor  being  sensible  that  they  are  recovered  from  being 
drowned  and  see  the  light,  and  that  being  gotten  above 
vice,  they  fetch  breath  again. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


381 


11.  This  also  is  against  common  sense,  that  it  should  be 
convenient  for  a man  who  has  all  good  things,  and  wants 
nothing  requisite  to  felicity  and  happiness,  to  make  away 
himself ; and  much  more  this,  that  for  him  who  neither 
has  nor  ever  shall  have  any  good  thing,  but  who  is  and 
ever  shall  be  accompanied  with  all  adversities,  difficulties, 
and  mishaps,  it  should  not  be  fitting  to  quit  this  life  unless 
some  of  the  indifferent  things  befall  him.  These  laws  are 
enacted  in  the  Stoa ; and  by  these  they  incite  many  wise 
men  to  kill  themselves,  as  if  they  would  be  thereby  more 
happy ; and  they  restrain  many  foolish  men,  as  if  it  were 
fitting  for  them  to  live  on  in  wretchedness.  Although  the 
wise  man  is  fortunate,  blessed,  every  way  happy,  secure, 
and  free  from  danger ; but  the  vicious  and  foolish  man  is 
“ full,  as  I may  say,  of  evils,  so  that  there  is  not  room  to 
put  them  in ; ” and  yet  they  think  that  continuing  in  life 
is  fit  for  the  latter,  and  departing  out  of  it  for  the  former. 
And  not  without  cause,  says  Chrysippus,  for  we  are  not  to 
measure  life  by  good  things  or  evil,  but  by  those  that  are 
according  to  Nature.  In  this  manner  do  they  maintain 
custom,  and  philosophize  according  to  the  common  con- 
ceptions. What  do  you  say  ? — that  he  who  enters  upon 
a deliberation  of  life  and  death  has  no  right  to  consider 

What  good  or  ill  in  his  own  house  there  is ; 

or  to  weigh,  as  in  a balance,  what  things  have  the  greatest 
sign  of  serving  to  felicity  or  infelicity ; but  must  argue 
whether  he  should  live  or  die  from  those  things  which  are 
neither  profitable  nor  prejudicial,  and  follow  such  prin- 
ciples and  sentences  as  command  the  choosing  of  a life 
full  of  all  things  to  be  avoided,  and  the  shunning  of  one 
which  wants  nothing  of  all  those  things  that  are  desirable  ? 
For  though  it  is  an  absurd  thing,  friend  Lamprias,  to  shun 
a life  in  which  there  is  .no  evil,  it  is  yet  more  absurd,  if 
any  one  should  leave  what  is  good  because  he  is  not  pos- 


382 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


sessed  of  what  is  indifferent,  as  these  men  do  who  leave 
present  felicity  and  virtue  for  want  of  riches  and  health 
which  they  have  not. 

Saturnian  Jove  from  Glaucus  took  his  wits, 

when  he  went  about  to  change  his  suit  of  golden  armor 
for  a brazen  one,  and  to  give  what  was  worth  a hundred 
oxen  for  that  which  was  worth  but  nine.  And  yet  the 
brazen  armor  was  no  less  useful  for  fight  than  the  golden ; 
whereas  beauty  and  health  of  body,  as  the  Stoics  say,  con- 
tribute not  the  least  advantage  as  regards  happiness.  And 
yet  they  seek  health  in  exchange  for  wisdom.  For  they 
say,  it  would  well  enough  have  become  Heraclitus  and 
Pherecydes  to  have  parted  with  their  virtue  and  wisdom, 
if  the  one  of  them  could  have  thereby  been  freed  from  his 
lousy  disease,  and  the  other  from  his  dropsy ; and  if  Circe 
had  used  two  sorts  of  magical  drinks,  one  to  make  wise 
men  fools,  and  the  other  to  make  fools  wise,  Ulysses  would 
rather  have  drunk  that  of  folly,  than  have  changed  his 
shape  for  the  form  of  a beast,  though  having  with  it  wis- 
dom, and  consequently  also  happiness.  And,  they  say, 
wisdom  itself  dictates  to  them  these  things,  exhorting  them 
thus : Let  me  go,  and  value  not  my  being  lost,  if  I must 
be  carried  about  in  the  shape  of  an  ass.  But  this,  some 
will  say,  is  an  ass-like  wisdom  which  teacheth  thus ; if 
indeed  to  be  wise  and  enjoy  felicity  is  good,  and  to  wear 
the  shape  of  an  ass  is  indifferent.  They  say,  there  is  a 
nation  of  the  Ethiopians  where  a dog  reigns,  is  called  king, 
and  has  all  regal  honors  and  services  done  to  him ; but 
men  execute  the  offices  of  magistrates  and  governors  of 
cities.  Do  not  the  Stoics  act  in  the  very  same  manner? 
They  give  the  name  and  appearance  of  good  to  virtue, 
saying  that  it  alone  is  desirable,  profitable,  and  available  ; 
but  in  the  mean  time  they  act  these  things,  they  philoso- 
phize, they  live  and  die,  as  at  the  command  of  things  indif- 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


383 


ferent.  And  yet  none  of  the  Ethiopians  kill  that  dog ; 
but  he  sits  in  state,  and  is  revered  by  all.  But  these  men 
destroy  and  corrupt  their  virtue,  that  they  may  obtain 
health  and  riches. 

12.  But  the  corollary  which  Chrysippus  himself  has 
given  for  a conclusion  to  his  doctrines  seems  to  free  us 
from  the  trouble  of  saying  any  thing  more  about  it.  For 
there  being,  says  he,  in  Nature  some  things  good,  some 
things  bad,  and  some  things  between  them  both,  which  we 
call  indifferent ; there  is  no  man  but  would  rather  have 
the  good  than  the  indifferent,  and  the  indifferent  than  the 
bad.  And  of  this  we  call  the  Gods  to  witness,  begging  of 
them  by  our  prayers  principally  the  possession  of  good 
things,  and  if  that  may  not  be,  deliverance  from  evil  ; not 
desiring  that  which  is  neither  good  nor  bad  instead  of 
good,  but  willing  to  have  it  instead  of  evil.  But  this  man, 
changing  Nature  and  inverting  its  order,  removes  the 
middle  out  of  its  own  place  into  the  last,  and  brings  back 
the  last  into  the  middle,  — not  unlike  to  those  tyrants  who 
give  the  first  place  to  the  wicked,  — and  he  gives  us  a law, 
first  to  seek  the  good,  and  secondly  the  evil , and  lastly  to 
judge  that  worst  which  is  neither  good  nor  evil ; as  if  any 
one  should  place  infernal  things  next  to  celestial,  thrusting 
the  earth  and  earthly  things  into  Tartarus, 

Where  very  far  from  hence,  deep  under  ground, 

Lies  a vast  gulf.* 

Having  therefore  said  in  his  Third  Book  of  Nature,  • 
that  it  is  more  expedient  for  a fool  to  live  than  not,  though 
he  should  never  attain  to  wisdom,  he  adds  these  words  : 
“For  such  are  the  good  things  of  men,  that  even  evil 
things  do  in  a manner  precede  other  things  that  are  in 
the  middle  place  ; not  that  these  things  themselves 
really  precede,  but  reason,  with  which  we  should  choose 
rather  to  live,  though  we  were  to  be  fools.”  Therefore  also, 


* II.  VIII.  14. 


384 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


though  we  were  to  be  unjust,  wicked,  hated  of  the  Gods, 
and  unhappy ; for  none  of  these  things  are  absent  from  those 
that  live  foolishly.  Is  it  then  convenient  rather  to  live  miser- 
ably than  not  to  live  miserably,  and  better  to  be  hurt  than 
not  hurt,  to  be  unjust  than  not  unjust,  to  break  the  laws 
than  not  to  break  them  ? That  is,  is  it  convenient  to  do 
things  that  are  not  convenient,  and  a duty  to  live  even 
against  duty?  Yes  indeed,  for  it  is  worse  to  want  sense 
and  reason  than  to  be  a fool.  What  then  ails  them,  that 
they  will  not  confess  that  to  be  evil  which  is  worse  than 
evil  ? Why  do  they  say  that  folly  alone  is  to  be  avoided,  if 
it  is  not  less  but  rather  more  convenient  to  shun  that  dispo- 
sition which  is  not  capable  of  folly  ? 

13.  But  who  can  complain  of  this,  that  shall  remember 
what  he  has  written  in  his  Second  Book  of  Nature,  de- 
claring that  vice  was  not  unprofitably  made  for  the  uni- 
verse ? But  it  is  meet  I should  set  down  his  doctrine  in  his 
own  words,  that  you  may  understand  in  what  place  those 
rank  vice,  and  what  discourses  they  hold  of  it,  who  accuse 
Xenocrates  and  Speusippus  for  not  reckoning  health  in- 
different and  riches  useless.  “ Vice,”  saith  he,  “ has  its 
limit  in  reference  to  other  accidents.  For  it  is  also  in 
some  sort  according  to  the  reason  of  Nature,  and  (as  I may 
so  say)  is  not  wholly  useless  in  respect  of  the  universe ; 
for  otherwise  there  would  not  be  any  good.”  Is  there  then 
no  good  among  the  Gods,  because  there  is  no  evil  ? And 
when  Jupiter,  having  resolved  all  matter  into  himself,  shall 
be  alone,  other  differences  being  taken  away,  will  there 
then  be  no  good,  because  there  will  be  no  evil  ? But  is 
there  melody  in  a choir  though  none  in  it  sings  faultily, 
and  health  in  the  body  though  no  member  is  sick  : and 
yet  cannot  virtue  have  its  existence  without  vice  ? But  as 
the  poison  of  a serpent  or  the  gall  of  an  hyena  is  to  be 
mixed  with  some  medicines,  was  it  also  of  necessity  that 
there  must  have  been  some  conjunction  of  the  wickedness 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


385 


of  Meletus  with  the  justice  of  Socrates,  and  the  dissolute 
demeanor  of  Cleon  with  the  probity  of  Pericles  ? And 
could  not  Jupiter  have  found  a means  to  bring  into  the 
world  Hercules  and  Lycurgus,  if  he  had  not  also  made  for 
us  Sardanapalus  and  Phalaris  1 It  is  now  time  for  them  to 
say  that  the  consumption  was  made  for  the  sound  consti- 
tution of  men’s  bodies,  and  the  gout  for  the  swiftness  of 
their  feet ; and  that  Achilles  would  not  have  had  a good 
head  of  hair  if  Thersites  had  not  been  bald.  For  what 
difference  is  there  between  such  triflers  and  ravers,  and 
those  who  say  that  intemperance  was  not  brought  forth 
unprolitably  for  continence,  nor  injustice  for  justice,  so 
that  we  must  pray  to  the  Gods,  there  may  be  always 
wickedness, 

Lies,  fawning  speeches,  and  deceitful  manners,* 

if,  when  these  are  taken  away,  virtue  will  also  vanish  and 
be  lost? 

14.  Or  do  you  desire  to  understand  the  greatest  sweet- 
ness of  his  eloquence  and  persuasion'?  “ For,”  says  he,  “ as 
comedies  have  in  them  sometimes  ridiculous  epigrams, 
which,  though  bad  in  themselves,  give  nevertheless  a cer- 
tain grace  to  the  whole  poem  ; so,  though  you  may  blame 
vice  in  itself,  yet  is  it  not  useless  to  other  things.”  First 
then  to  say  that  vice  was  made  by  the  providence  of  God, 
as  a wanton  epigram  by  the  will  of  the  poet,  transcends  in 
absurdity  all  imagination.  For  this  being  granted,  how 
will  the  Gods  be  rather  givers  of  good  than  evil  ? How 
will  wickedness  be  displeasing  to  them,  and  hated  by 
them  ? And  what  shall  we  have  to  oppose  against  these 
ill-sounding  sentences  of  the  poets : 

A cause  to  men  God  sends, 

When  to  chastise  some  house  his  wrath  intends ; t 

* Hesiod,  Works  and  Bays,  78. 
t From  the  Niobe  of  Aeschylus,  Frag.  151 

25 


VOL.  IV. 


386 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


and  again, 

What  God  those  seeds  of  strife  ’twixt  them  did  sow  ? * 

Moreover,  a lewd  epigram  adorns  the  comedy  and  con- 
tributes to  its  end,  which  is  to  delight  the  spectators  and 
make  them  laugh.  But  Jupiter,  who  is  sumamed  fatherly, 
supreme,  just,  and  (as  Pindar  has  it)  the  most  perfect  artist, 
framing  the  world,  not  as  a great  interlude,  full  of  variety 
and  great  learning,  but  as  a common  city  of  Gods  and 
men,  living  together  in  concord  and  happiness  with  justice 
and  virtue,  — what  need  had  he,  for  the  attaining  to  this 
excellent  end,  of  thieves,  murderers,  parricides,  and  ty- 
rants 1 For  vice  entered  not  as  a morris-dance,  pleasing 
and  delightful  to  the  Divinity ; nor  was  injustice  brought 
in  amongst  the  affairs  of  men,  to  cause  mirth  and  laughter 
by  its  raillery  and  facetiousness,  since  there  is  not  to  be 
seen  in  it  so  much  as  a dream  of  that  celebrated  agreement 
with  Nature.  Besides,  that  foolish  epigram  is  a very  small 
part  of  the  poem,  and  takes  up  but  a very  little  place  in 
the  comedy ; neither  do  such  things  abound  in  it,  nor  do 
they  corrupt  any  of  those  things  which  seem  to  have  been 
well  done,  or  spoil  their  grace.  But  all  human  affairs  are 
replete  with  vice,  and  the  whole  life,  from  the  very  prologue 
and  beginning  to  the  end,  being  disordered,  depraved,  and 
disturbed,  and  having  no  part  of  it  pure  or  irreprehensible 
(as  these  men  say),  is  the  most  filthy  and  most  unpleasant 
of  all  farces. 

15.  Wherefore  I would  willingly  ask,  in  what  vice  is 
profitable  to  the  universe.  Not  surely  in  respect  of  heavenly 
things,  and  such  as  are  divine  by  nature.  For  it  would 
be  ridiculous  to  say,  that  if  there  had  not  arisen,  or  were 
not  amongst  men,  malice  and  covetousness  and  lying,  or 
that  if  we  did  not  rob,  plunder,  slander,  and  murder  one 
another,  the  sun  would  not  run  his  appointed  course,  the 
world  enjoy  its  seasons  and  periods  of  time,  or  the  earth, 


* II.  I.  8. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


387 


which  is  seated  in  the  midst  of  the  universe,  afford  the 
principles  of  the  wind  and  rain.  It  remains  then,  that  the 
existence  of  vice  must  be  profitable  for  us  and  our  affairs ; 
and  that  perhaps  these  men  mean.  Are  we  more  healthy 
for  being  vicious,  or  do  we  more  abound  with  necessaries  \ 
Or  does  vice  contribute  any  thing  to  our  beauty  and 
strength  \ They  say,  no.  But  where  on  earth  is  virtue  to 
be  found  1 Is  it  then  only  a name,  and  a visionary  opinion 
of  night- walking  sophisters,  and  not  a reality  lying  con- 
spicuous to  all,  like  vice,  so  that  we  cannot  partake  of  any 
thing  as  unprofitable,*  . . . but  least,  O ye  Gods ! of  virtue, 
for  which  we  were  created  \ Is  it  not  then  absurd,  that 
the  utensils  of  the  husbandman,  mariner,  and  charioteer 
should  be  serviceable  and  aiding  towards  his  intended  end, 
whilst  that  which  was  by  God  made  for  virtue  destroys  and 
corrupts  virtue  ? But  perhaps  it  is  time  now  to  leave  this 
point,  and  pass  to  another. 

16.  Lamprias.  Not  for  my  sake,  my  dear  friend,  I be- 
seech you ; for  I desire  to  understand,  in  what  manner 
these  men  bring  in  evil  things  before  the  good,  and  vice 
before  virtue. 

Diadumenas.  It  is  indeed,  sir,  a thing  worth  knowing. 
They  babble  indeed  much  ; but  in  conclusion  they  say  that 
prudence,  being  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  would 
be  wholly  taken  away  if  there  were  no  evil.  For  as,  if 
there  are  truths,  it  is  impossible  but  there  must  be  some 
lies  also  near  to  them ; so  it  stands  with  reason,  that  if 
there  are  good  things,  there  must  also  be  evil  things. 

Lamprias.  One  of  these  things  is  not  said  amiss ; and 
I think  also  that  the  other  is  not  unapprehended  by  me. 
For  I see  a difference  here : that  which  is  not  true  must 
immediately  be  false ; but  that  is  not  of  necessity  evil 
which  is  not  good ; because  that  between  true  and  false 
there  is  no  medium,  but  between  good  and  evil  there  is  the 

* The  text  of  this  passage  seems  to  be  hopelessly  corrupt.  (G.) 


388 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


indifferent.  Nor  is  it  of  necessity  that  the  one  must  sub- 
sist with  the  other.  For  Nature  may  have  good  without 
having  any  need  of  evil,  but  only  having  that  which  is 
neither  good  nor  evil.  But  if  there  is  any  thing  to  be  said 
by  you  to  the  former  reason,  let  us  hear  it. 

17.  Diadumenus.  Many  things  indeed  are  said;  but  at 
present  we  shall  make  use  only  of  what  is  most  necessary. 
In  the  first  place,  it  is  a folly  to  imagine  that  good  and  evil 
have  their  existence  for  the  sake  of  prudence.  For  good 
and  evil  being  already  extant,  prudence  came  afterwards  ; 
as  the  art  of  physic  was  invented,  there  being  already 
things  wholesome  and  unwholesome.  For  good  and  evil 
are  not  therefore  extant  that  there  may  be  prudence  ; but 
the  faculty  by  which  we  judge  good  and  evil  that  are 
already  in  being  is  named  prudence.  As  sight  is  a sense 
distinguishing  white  from  black ; which  colors  were  not 
therefore  made  that  we  might  have  sight,  but  we  rather 
wanted  sight  to  discern  these  things.  Secondly,  when  the 
world  shall  be  set  on  fire  (as  the  Stoics  will  have  it), 
there  will  then  no  evil  be  left,  but  all  will  then  be  prudent 
and  wise.  There  is  therefore  prudence,  though  there  is 
no  evil ; nor  is  it  of  necessity  for  evil  to  exist  that  prudence 
may  have  a being.  But  supposing  that  prudence  must 
always  be  a knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  what  inconven- 
ience would  it  be  if,  evil  being  taken  away,  prudence 
should  no  longer  subsist ; but  instead  of  this  we  should 
have  another  virtue,  not  being  the  knowledge  of  good  and 
evil,  but  of  good  only'?  So,  if  black  should  be  wholly 
lost  from  among  the  colors,  and  any  one  should  therefore 
contend  that  sight  is  also  lost,  for  that  there  is  no  longer 
the  sense  of  discerning  black  and  white,  what  should  hin- 
der us  from  answering  him : It  is  no  prejudice  to  us,  if  we 
have  not  what  you  call  sight,  but  in  lieu  of  that  have 
another  sense  and  faculty,  by  which  we  apprehend  colors 
that  are  white  and  not  white.  For  I indeed  think  that 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


389 


neither  our  taste  would  be  lost,  if  bitter  things  were  want- 
ing, nor  our  feeling,  if  pain  were  taken  away,  nor  prudence, 
if  evil  had  no  being ; but  that  these  senses  would  remain, 
to  apprehend  things  sweet  and  grateful  and  those  that  are 
not  so,  and  prudence  to  be  the  science  of  things  good  and 
not  good.  But  let  those  who  think  otherwise  take  the 
name  to  themselves,  leaving  us  the  thing. 

18.  Besides  all  this,  what  should  hinder  but  there  may 
be  an  understanding  of  evil,  and  an  existence  of  good? 
As  the  Gods,  I believe,  enjoy  health,  but  understand  the 
fever  and  pleurisy.  Since  even  we,  who,  as  they  say,  have 
abundance  of  evils  but  no  good,  are  not  yet  destitute  of 
the  knowledge  what  prudence,  what  goodness,  and  what 
happiness  is.  And  this  also  would  be  wonderful,  that  if 
virtue  were  absent,  there  should  be  those  who  could  teach 
us  what  it  is  and  give  us  a comprehension  of  it,  while  if 
vice  were  not  extant,  it  should  be  impossible  to  have  any 
understanding  of  it.  For  see  what  these  men  persuade  us 
who  philosophize  against  the  conceptions,  — that  by  folly 
indeed  we  comprehend  prudence,  but  prudence  without 
folly  cannot  so  much  as  comprehend  folly  itself. 

19.  And  if  Nature  had  absolutely  stood  in  need  of  the 
generation  of  evil,  yet  might  one  or  two  examples  of  vice 
have  been  sufficient ; or  if  you  will,  it  might  have  been 
requisite  that  ten,  a thousand,  or  ten  thousand  vicious  men 
should  be  brought  forth,  and  not  that  the  multitude  of 
vices  should  be  so  great  as  “ to  exceed  in  number  the 
sands  of  the  sea,  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  the  feathers 
of  all  the  various  kinds  of  birds  in  the  world,”  and  yet 
that  there  should  not  be  so  much  all  this  while  as  a dream 
of  virtue.  Those  who  in  Sparta  had  the  charge  of  the 
public  halls  or  eating  places  called  Phiditia,  were  wont  to 
bring  forth  two  or  three  Helots  drunken  and  full  of  wine, 
that  the  young  men,  seeing  what  drunkenness  was,  might 
learn  to  keep  sobriety.  But  in  human  life  there  are  many 


390 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


such  examples  of  vice.  For  there  is  not  any  one  sober  to 
virtue  ; but  we  all  stagger  up  and  down,  acting  shamefully 
j and  living  miserably.  Thus  does  reason  inebriate  us,  and 
with  so  much  trouble  and  madness  does  it  fill  us,  that  we 
fall  in  nothing  short  of  those  dogs  of  whom  Aesop  says, 
that  seeing  certain  skins  swimming  on  the  water,  they  en- 
deavored to  drink  the  sea  up,  but  burst  before  they  could 
get  at  them.  For  reason  also,  by  which  we  hope  to  gain 
reputation  and  attain  to  virtue,  does,  ere  we  can  reach  to 
it,  corrupt  and  destroy  us,  being  before  filled  with  abun- 
dance of  heady  and  bitter  vice  ; — if  indeed,  as  these  men 
say,  they  who  are  got  even  to  the  uppermost  step  have  no 
ease,  cessation,  or  breathing  from  folly  and  infelicity. 

20.  But  let  us  see  what  manner  of  thing  he  shows  vice 
to  be  who  says  that  it  was  not  brought  forth  unprofitably, 
and  of  what  use  and  what  a possession  he  makes  it  to  be 
to  those  who  have  it,  writing  in  his  book  of  right  actions, 
that  a wicked  man  wants  nothing,  has  need  of  nothing, 
nothing  is  useful  to  him,  nothing  proper,  nothing  fit  for 
him.  How  then  is  vice  useful,  with  which  neither  health 
nor  abundance  of  riches  nor  advancement  in  virtue  is 
profitable'?  Who  then  does  not  want  these  things,  of 
which  some  are  “ preferable  ” and  “ acceptable,”  and 
therefore  highly  useful,  and  others  are  “ according  to 
Nature,”  as  themselves  term  them?  But  (they  say)  no  one 
has  need  of  them,  unless  he  become  wise.  Therefore  the 
vicious  man  does  not  even  stand  in  need  of  being  made 
wise.  Nor  are  men  hungry  and  thirsty  before  they  become 
wise.  When  thirsty,  therefore,  they  have  no  need  of 
water,  nor  when  hungry,  of  bread. 

Be  like  to  courteous  guests,  and  him 

Who  only  fire  and  shelter  asks  : 

does  this  man  now  not  need  entertainment?  Nor  had  he 
need  of  a cloak,  who  said, 

Give  Ilipponax  a cloak,  for  I’m  stiff  with  cold. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


391 


But  will  you  speak  a paradox  indeed,  both  extravagant 
and  singular!  Say  then  that  a wise  man  has  need  of 
nothing,  that  he  wants  nothing,  he  is  fortunate,  he  is  free 
from  want,  he  is  self-sufficient,  blessed,  perfect.  Now 
what  madness  is  this,  that  he  to  whom  nothing  is  wanting 
has  need  of  the  goods  he  has,  but  that  the  vicious  indeed 
wants  many  things,  and  stands  in  need  of  nothing.  For 
thus  indeed  says  Clirysippus,  that  the  vicious  wants  but 
stands  not  in  need  ; removing  the  common  notions,  like 
chessmen,  backwards  and  forwards.  For  all  men  think 
that  having  need  precedes  wanting,  esteeming  him  who 
stands  in  need  of  things  that  are  not  at  hand  or  easy  to 
be  got,  to  want  them.  For  no  man  wants  horns  or  Avings, 
because  no  man  has  need  of  them.  But  we  say  that  those 
Avant  arms  and  money  and  clothes  who  are  destitute  of 
them,  Avhen  they  have  occasion  for  them.  But  these  men 
are  so  desirous  of  seeming  always  to  say  something  against 
the  common  notions,  that  for  the  love  of  novelty  they  often 
depart  from  their  oavii  opinions,  as  they  do  here. 

21.  But  recall  yourself  to  the  consideration  of  Avhat  has 
been  said  a little  above.  This  is  one  of  their  assertions 
against  the  common  conception,  that  no  vicious  man  re- 
ceives any  utility.  And  yet  many  being  instructed  profit ; 
many  being  slaves  are  made  free ; many  being  besieged 
are  delivered,  being  lame  are  led  by  the  hand,  and  being 
sick  are  cured.  “ But  possessing  all  these  things,  they  are 
never  the  better,  neither  do  receive  benefits,  nor  have  they 
any  benefactors,  nor  do  they  slight  their  benefactors.” 
Vicious  men  then  are  not  ungrateful,  no  more  than  are 
Avise  men.  Ingratitude  therefore  has  no  being  ; because 
the  good  receiving  a benefit  fail  not  to  acknoAvledge  it,  and 
the  bad  are  not  capable  of  receiving  any.  Behold  iioav, 
what  they  say  to  this,  — that  benefit  is  ranked  among  mean 
or  middle  things,  and  that  to  give  and  receAe  utility  be- 
longs only  to  the  wise,  but  the  bad  also  receive  a benefit. 


392 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


Then  they  who  partake  of  the  benefit  partake  not  also  of 
its  use ; and  whither  a benefit  extends,  there  is  nothing 
useful  or  commodious.  Now  what  else  is  there  that  makes 
a kind  office  a benefit,  but  that  the  bestower  of  it  is,  in 
some  respect,  useful  to  the  needy  receiver? 

22.  Lamprias.  But  let  these  things  pass.  What,  I be- 
seech you,  is  this  so  highly  venerated  utility,  which  pre- 
serving as  some  great  and  excellent  thing  for  the  wise, 
they  permit  not  so  much  as  the  name  of  it  to  the  vicious  ? 

Diadumenus.  If  (say  they)  one  wise  man  does  but  any 
way  prudently  stretch  out  his  finger,  all  the  wise  men  all 
the  world  over  receive  utility  by  it.  This  is  the  work  of 
their  amity ; in  this  do  the  virtues  of  the  wise  man  termi- 
nate by  their  common  utilities.  Aristotle  then  and  Xeno- 
crates  doted,  saying  that  men  receive  utility  from  the 
Gods,  from  their  parents,  from  their  masters,  being  igno- 
rant of  that  wonderful  utility  which  wise  men  receive 
from  one  another,  being  moved  according  to  virtue,  though 
they  neither  are  together  nor  yet  know  it.  Yet  all  men 
esteem,  that  laying  up,  keeping,  and  bestowing  are  then 
useful  and  profitable,  when  some  benefit  or  profit  is  re- 
covered by  it.  The  thriving  man  buys  keys,  and  diligently 
keeps  his  stores, 

Witli’s  hand  unlocking  wealth’s  sweet  treasury.* 

But  to  store  up  and  to  keep  with  diligence  and  labor 
such  things  as  are  for  no  use  is  not  seemly  or  honorable, 
but  ridiculous.  If  Ulysses  indeed  had  tied  up  with  the 
knot  which  Circe  taught  him,  not  the  gifts  he  had  received 
from  Alcinous,  — tripods,  caldrons,  cloths,  and  gold,  — but 
heaping  up  trash,  stones,  and  such  like  trumpery,  should 
have  thought  his  employment  about  such  things,  and  the 
possession  and  keeping  of  them,  a happy  and  blessed 
work,  would  any  one  have  imitated  this  foolish  providence 


* From  the  Belleropliontes  of  Euripides,  Frag.  287,  vs.  8. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


393 


and  empty  care  ? Yet  this  is  the  beauty,  gravity,  and  hap- 
piness of  the  Stoical  consent,  being  nothing  else  but  a 
gathering  together  and  keeping  of  useless  and  indifferent 
things.  For  such  are  things  according  to  Nature,  and  still 
more  exterior  things  ; if  indeed  they  compare  the  greatest 
riches  to  fringes  and  golden  chamber-pots,  and  sometimes 
also,  as  it  happens,  to  oil-cruets.  Then,  as  those  who  seem 
proudly  to  have  affronted  and  railed  at  some  Gods  or 
demi-gods  presently  changing  their  note,  fall  prostrate 
and  sit  humbly  on  the  ground,  praising  and  magnifying  the 
Divinity ; so  these  men,  having  met  with  punishment  of  this 
arrogancy  and  vanity,  again  exercise  themselves  in  these 
indifferent  things  and  such  as  pertain  nothing  to  them,  cry- 
ing out  with  a loud  voice  that  there  is  but  one  thing  good, 
specious,  and  honorable,  the  storing  up  of  these  things 
and  the  communication  of  them,  and  that  it  is  not  meet 
for  those  to  live  who  have  them  not,  but  to  dispatch  out 
of  the  way  and  famish  themselves,  bidding  a long  farewell 
to  virtue. 

They  esteem  indeed  Theognis  to  have  been  a man  alto- 
gether of  a base  and  abject  spirit,  for  saying,  as  one  over- 
fearful in  regard  to  poverty,  which  is  an  indifferent  thing  : 

From  poverty  to  fly,  into  the  deep 

Throw  thyself,  Cyrnus,  or  from  rocks  so  steep. 

Yet  they  themselves  exhort  the  same  thing  in  prose,  and 
affirm  that  a man,  to  free  himself  from  some  great  disease 
or  exceedingly  acute  pain,  if  he  have  not  at  hand  sword  or 
hemlock,  ought  to  leap  into  the  sea  or  throw  himself  head- 
long from  a precipice  ; neither  of  which  is  hurtful,  or 
evil,  or  incommodious,  or  makes  them  who  fall  into  it  mis- 
erable. 

23.  With  what  then,  says  he,  shall  I begin  1 And  what 
shall  I take  for  the  principle  of  duty  and  matter  of  virtue, 
leaving  Nature  and  that  which  is  according  to  Nature  1 
With  what,  O good  sir,  do  Aristotle  and  Theophrastus  be- 


394 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


gin  \ What  beginnings  do  Xenocrates  and  Polemo  take  ? 
Docs  not  also  Zeno  follow  these,  who  suppose  Nature  and 
that  which  is  according  to  Nature  to  be  the  elements  of 
happiness  \ But  they  indeed  persisted  in  these  tilings,  as 
desirable,  good,  and  profitable ; and  joining  to  them  vir- 
tue, which  employs  them  and  uses  every  one  of  them 
according  to  its  property,  thought  to  complete  and  consum- 
mate a perfect  life  and  one  every  way  absolute,  producing 
that  concord  which  is  truly  suitable  and  consonant  to  Na- 
ture. For  these  men  did  not  fall  into  confusion,  like  those 
who  leap  up  from  the  ground  and  presently  fall  down 
again  upon  it,  terming  the  same  things  acceptable  and  not 
desirable,  proper  and  not  good,  unprofitable  and  yet  use- 
ful, nothing  to  us  and  yet  the  principles  of  duties.  But 
their  life  was  such  as  their  speech,  and  they  exhibited  ac- 
tions suitable  and  consonant  to  their  sayings.  But  they 
who  are  of  the  Stoic  sect  — not  unlike  to  that  woman  in 
Archilochus,  who  deceitfully  carried  in  one  hand  water,  in 
the  other  fire  — by  some  doctrines  draw  nature  to  them, 
and  by  others  drive  her  from  them.  Or  rather,  by  their 
deeds  and  actions  they  embrace  those  things  which  are 
according  to  Nature,  as  good  and  desirable,  but  in  words 
and  speeches  they  reject  and  contemn  them,  as  indifferent 
and  of  no  use  to  virtue  for  the  acquiring  felicity. 

24.  Now,  forasmuch  as  all  men  esteem  the  sovereign 
good  to  be  joyous,  desirable,  happy,  of  the  greatest  dig- 
nity, self-sufficient,  and  wanting  nothing ; compare  their 
good,  and  see  how  it  agrees  with  this  common  conception. 
Does  the  stretching  out  a finger  prudently  produce  this 
joy  % Is  a prudent  torture  a thing  desirable  1 Is  he  hap- 
py, who  with  reason  breaks  his  neck  ] Is  that  of  the 
greatest  dignity,  which  reason  often  chooses  to  let  go  for 
that  which  is  not  good  \ Is  that  perfect  and  self-sufficient, 
by  enjoying  which,  if  they  have  not  also  indifferent  things, 
they  neither  can  nor  will  endure  to  live  ? There  is  also 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


395 


another  principle  of  the  Stoics,  by  which  custom  is  still 
more  injured,  taking  and  plucking  from  her  genuine  no- 
tions, which  are  as  her  legitimate  children,  and  supposing 
other  bastardly,  wild,  and  illegitimate  ones  in  their  room, 
and  necessitating  her  to  nourish  and  cherish  the  one  in- 
stead of  the  other ; and  that  too  in  those  doctrines  which 
concern  things  good  and  bad,  desirable  and  avoidable, 
proper  and  strange,  the  energy  of  which  ought  to  be  more 
clearly  distinguished  than  that  of  hot  and  cold,  black  and 
white.  For  the  imaginations  of  these  things  are  brought 
in  by  the  senses  from  without ; but  those  have  their  orig- 
inal bred  from  the  good  things  which  we  have  within  us. 
But  these  men  entering  with  their  logic  upon  the  topic  of 
felicity,  as  on  the  sophism  called  Pseudomenos,  or  that 
named  Kyrieuon,  have  removed  no  ambiguities,  but  brought 
in  very  many. 

25.  Indeed,  of  two  good  things,  of  which  the  one  is  the 
end  and  the  other  belongs  to  the  end,  none  is  ignorant  that 
the  end  is  the  greater  and  perfecter  good.  Chrysippus 
also  acknowledges  this  difference,  as  is  manifest  from  his 
Third  Book  of  Good  Things.  For  he  dissents  from  those 
who  make  science  the  end,  and  sets  it  down.  ...  In  his 
Treatise  of  Justice,  however,  he  does  not  think  that 
justice  can  be  safe,  if  any  one  supposes  pleasure  to  be 
the  end ; but  grants  it  may,  if  pleasure  is  not  said  to  be  the 
end,  but  simply  a good.  Nor  do  I think  that  you  need  now 
to  hear  me  repeat  his  words,  since  his  Third  Book  of 
Justice  is  everywhere  to  be  had.  When  therefore,  O my 
friend,  they  elsewhere  say  that  no  one  good  is  greater  or 
less  than  another,  and  that  what  is  not  the  end  is  equal  to 
the  end,  they  contradict  not  only  the  common  conceptions, 
but  even  their  own  words.  Again,  if  of  two  evils,  the  one 
when  it  is  present  renders  us  worse,  and  the  other  hurts  us 
but  renders  us  not  worse,  it  is  against  common  sense  not  to 
say  that  the  evil  which  by  its  presence  renders  us  worse  is 


396 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


greater  than  that  which  hurts  us  but  renders  us  not  worse. 
Now  Chrysippus  indeed  confesses,  that  there  are  some  fears 
and  sorrows  and  errors  which  hurt  us,  but  render  us  not 
worse.  Read  his  First  Book  of  Justice  against  Plato ; for 
in  respect  of  other  things,  it  is  worth  the  while  to  note  the 
babbling  of  the  man  in  that  place,  delivering  indifferently 
all  matters  and  doctrines,  as  well  proper  to  his  own  sect  as 
foreign. 

26.  It  is  likewise  against  common  sense  when  he  says 
that  there  may  be  two  ends  or  scopes  proposed  of  life,  and 
that  all  the  things  we  do  are  not  to  be  referred  to  one ; and 
yet  this  is  more  against  common  sense,  to  say  that  there  is 
an  end,  and  yet  that  every  action  is  to  be  referred  to  an- 
other. Nevertheless  they  must  of  necessity  endure  one  of 
these.  For  if  those  things  which  are  first  according  to 
Nature  are  not  eligible  for  themselves,  but  the  choice  and 
taking  of  them  agreeably  to  reason  is  so,  and  if  every  one 
therefore  does  all  his  actions  for  the  acquiring  the  first 
things  according  to  Nature,  it  follows  that  all  things  which 
are  done  must  have  their  reference  to  this,  that  the  princi- 
pal things  according  to  Nature  may  be  obtained.  But  they 
think  that  they  who  aim  and  aspire  to  get  these  things  do 
not  have  the  things  themselves  for  the  end,  but  that  to 
which  they  must  refer,  namely,  the  choice  and  not  the 
things.  For  the  end  indeed  is  to  choose  and  receive  these 
things  prudently.  But  the  things  themselves  and  the  en- 
joying of  them  are  not  the  end,  but  the  material  object, 
having  its  worth  only  from  the  choice.  For  it  is  my  opinion 
that  they  both  use  and  write  this  very  expression,  to  show 
the  difference. 

Lamprias.  You  have  exactly  related  both  what  they  say 
and  in  what  manner  they  deliver  it. 

Diadumenus.  But  observe  how  it  fares  with  them,  as 
with  those  that  endeavor  to  leap  over  their  own  shadow ; 
for  they  do  not  leave  behind,  but  always  carry  along  with 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


397 


them  in  their  speech  some  absurdity  most  remote  from 
common  sense.  For  as,  if  any  one  should  say  that  he  who 
shoots  does  all  he  can,  not  that  he  may  hit  the  mark,  but 
that  he  may  do  all  he  can,  such  a one  would  rightly  be 
esteemed  to  speak  enigmatically  and  prodigiously ; so  these 
doting  dreamers,  who  contend  that  the  obtaining  of  natu- 
ral things  is  not  the  end  of  aiming  after  natural  things,  but 
the  taking  and  choosing  them  is,  and  that  the  desire  and 
endeavor  after  health  is  not  in  every  one  terminated  in  the 
enjoyment  of  health,  but  on  the  contrary,  the  enjoyment  of 
health  is  referred  to  the  desire  and  endeavor  after  it,  and 
that  certain  walkings  and  contentions  of  speech  and  suffer- 
ing incisions  and  taking  of  medicines,  so  they  are  done  by 
reason,  are  the  end  of  health,  and  not  health  of  them,  — 
they,  I say,  trifle  like  to  those  who  say,  Let  us  sup,  that  we 
may  sacrifice,  that  we  may  bathe.  But  this  rather  changes 
order  and  custom,  and  all  things  which  these  men  say  carry 
with  them  the  total  subversion  and  confusion  of  affairs. 
Thus,  we  do  not  desire  to  take  a walk  in  fit  time  that  we 
may  digest  our  meat ; but  we  digest  our  meat  that  we  may 
take  a walk  in  fit  time.  Has  Nature  also  made  health  for 
the  sake  of  hellebore,  instead  of  producing  hellebore  for 
the  sake  of  health'?  For  what  is  wanting  to  bring  them 
to  the  highest  degree  of  speaking  paradoxes,  but  the  say- 
ing of  such  things?  What  difference  is  there  between 
him  who  says  that  health  was  made  for  the  sake  of  medi- 
cines and  not  medicines  for  the  sake  of  health,  and  him 
who  makes  the  choice  of  medicines  and  their  composition 
and  use  more  desirable  than  health  itself? — or  rather  who 
esteems  health  not  at  all  desirable,  but  placing  the  end  in 
the  negotiation  about  these  things,  prefers  desire  to  enjoy- 
ment, and  not  enjoyment  to  desire?  For  to  desire,  forsooth 
(they  say),  is  joined  the  proceeding  wisely  and  discreetly. 
It  is  true  indeed,  we  will  say,  if  respect  be  had  to  the  end, 
that  is,  the  enjoyment  and  possession  of  the  things  it  pur- 


398 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


sues ; but  otherwise,  it  is  wholly  void  of  reason,  if  it  does 
all  things  for  the  obtaining  of  that  the  enjoyment  of  which 
is  neither  honorable  nor  happy. 

27.  Now,  since  we  are  fallen  upon  this  discourse,  any 
thing  may  rather  be  said  to  agree  with  common  sense,  than 
that  those  who  have  neither  received  nor  have  any  concep- 
tion of  good  do  nevertheless  desire  and  pursue  it.  For 
you  see  how  Chrysippus  drives  Ariston  into  this  difficulty, 
that  he  should  understand  an  indifference  in  things  inclin- 
ing neither  to  good  nor  to  bad,  before  either  good  or  bad 
is  itself  understood ; for  so  indifference  will  appear  to  have 
subsisted  even  before  itself,  if  the  understanding  of  it  can- 
not be  perceived  unless  good  be  first  understood,  while  the 
good  is  nothing  else  than  this  very  indifference.  Under- 
stand now  and  consider  this  indifference  which  the  Stoa 
denies  and  calls  consent,  whence  and  in  what  manner  it 
gives  us  the  knowledge  of  good.  For  if  without  good  the 
indifference  to  that  which  is  not  good  cannot  be  understood, 
much  less  does  the  knowledge  of  good  things  give  any  in- 
telligence of  itself  to  those  who  had  not  before  some  notion 
of  the  good.  But  as  there  can  be  no  knowledge  of  the  art 
of  things  wholesome  and  unwholesome  in  those  who  have 
not  first  some  knowledge  of  the  things  themselves ; so  they 
cannot  conceive  any  notion  of  the  science  of  good  and  evil 
who  have  not  some  fore-knowledge  of  good  and  evil. 

Lamprias.  What  then  is  good  ? 

Diadumenus.  Nothing  but  prudence. 

Lamprias.  And  what  is  prudence  ? 

Diadumenus.  Nothing  but  the  science  of  good. 

Lamprias.  There  is  much  then  of  “Jupiter’s  Corinth” 
(that  is,  much  reasoning  in  a circle)  admitted  into  their 
arguments.  For  I would  have  you  let  alone  the  saying 
about  the  turning  of  the  pestle,  lest  you  should  seem  to 
mock  them  ; although  an  accident  like  to  that  has  insinu- 
ated itself  into  their  discourse.  For  it  seems  that,  to  the 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


399 


understanding  of  good,  one  lias  need  to  understand  pru- 
dence, and  to  seek  for  prudence  in  the  understanding  of 
good,  being  forced  always  to  pursue  the  one  by  the  other, 
and  thus  failing  of  both ; since  to  the  understanding  of 
each  we  have  need  of  that  which  cannot  he  known  without 
the  other  be  first  understood. 

Diadumenus.  But  there  is  yet  another  way,  by  which 
you  may  perceive  not  only  the  perversion  but  the  eversion 
of  their  discourse,  and  the  reduction  of  it  entirely  to  noth- 
ing. They  hold  the  essence  of  good  to  be  the  reasonable 
election  of  things  according  to  Nature.  Now  the  election 
is  not  reasonable  which  is  not  directed  to  some  end,  as  has 
been  said  before.  What  then  is  this  end?  Nothing  else, 
say  they,  but  to  reason  rightly  in  the  election  of  things  ac- 
cording to  Nature.  First  then,  the  conception  of  good  is 
lost  and  gone.  For  to  reason  rightly  in  election  is  an 
operation  proceeding  from  an  habit  of  right  reasoning  ; 
and  therefore  being  constrained  to  learn  this  from  the  end, 
and  the  end  not  without  this,  we  fail  of  understanding 
either  of  them.  Besides,  which  is  more,  this  reasonable 
election  ought  in  strict  justice  to  be  a choice  of  things 
good  and  useful,  and  co-operating  to  the  end  ; for  how  can 
it  be  reasonable  to  choose  things  which  are  neither  con- 
venient nor  honorable  nor  at  all  eligible?  For  be  it,  as  they 
say,  a reasonable  election  of  things  having  a fitness  for  the 
causing  felicity ; see  then  to  what  a beautiful  and  grave 
conclusion  their  discourse  brings  them.  For  the  end  is  (it 
seems),  according  to  them,  to  reason  rightly  in  the  choice 
of  things  which  are  of  worth  in  causing  us  to  reason 
rightly. 

Lamprias.  When  I hear  these  words,  my  friend,  what 
is  said  seems  to  me  strangely  extravagant ; and  I farther 
want  to  know  how  this  happens. 

Diadumenus.  You  must  then  be  more  attentive  ; for  it 
is  not  for  every  one  to  understand  this  riddle.  Hear  there- 


400 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


fore  and  answer.  Is  not  the  end,  according  to  them,  to 
reason  rightly  in  the  election  of  things  according  to  Na- 
ture ? 

Lamprias.  So  they  say. 

Diadumenus.  And  are  these  things  according  to  Na- 
ture chosen  as  good,  or  as  having  some  fitness  or  prefer- 
ences . . . either  for  this  end  or  for  something  else  ? 

Lamprias.  I think  not  for  any  thing  else  but  for  this 
end. 

Diadumenus.  Noav  then,  having  discovered  the  matter, 
see  what  befalls  them.  They  hold  that  the  end  is  to 
reason  rightly  in  the  choice  of  things  which  are  of  worth 
in  causing  us  to  reason  rightly,  for  they  say  that  we  neither 
have  nor  understand  any  other  essence  either  of  good  or 
of  felicity  but  this  precious  rectitude  of  reasoning  in  the 
election  of  things  that  are  of  worth.  But  there  are  some 
who  think  that  this  is  spoken  against  Antipater,  and  not 
against  the  whole  sect ; for  that  he,  being  pressed  by  Car- 
neades,  fell  into  these  fooleries. 

28.  But  as  for  those  things  that  are  against  the  common 
conceptions  taught  in  the  Stoa  concerning  love,  they  are 
all  of  them  concerned  in  the  absurdity.  They  say,  that 
those  youths  are  deformed  who  are  vicious  and  foolish, 
and  that  the  wise  are  fair ; and  yet  that  none  of  these 
beautiful  ones  is  either  beloved  or  worthy  of  being  beloved. 
Nor  yet  is  this  the  worst ; but  they  add,  that  those  who 
love  the  deformed  ones  cease  to  do  so  when  they  are  be- 
come fair.  Now  whoever  knew  such  a love  as  is  kindled 
and  has  its  being  at  the  sight  of  the  body’s  deformity 
joined  with  that  of  the  soul,  and  is  quenched  and  decays 
at  the  accession  of  beauty  joined  with  prudence,  justice, 
and  temperance1?  These  men  are  not  unlike  to  those 
gnats  which  love  to  settle  on  the  dregs  of  wine,  or  on 
vinegar,  but  shun  and  fly  away  from  potable  and  pleasant 
wine.  As  for  that  which  they  call  and  term  an  appear- 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


401 


ance  of  beauty,  saying  tliat  it  is  the  inducement  of  love, 
— first,  it  has  no  probability,  for  in  those  who  are  very 
foul  and  highly  wicked  there  cannot  be  an  appearance  of 
beauty,  if  indeed  (as  is  said)  the  wickedness  of  the  dis- 
position fills  the  face  with  deformity.  And  secondly,  it  is 
absolutely  against  all  common  conceptions  that  the  de- 
formed should  be  worthy  of  love  because  he  one  day  will 
be  fair  and  expects  to  have  beauty,  but  that  when  he  has 
obtained  it  and  is  become  fair  and  good,  he  should  be 
beloved  of  none. 

Lamprias.  Love,  they  say,  is  a certain  hunting  after  a 
young  person  who  is  as  yet  indeed  imperfect,  but  naturally 
well-disposed  towards  virtue. 

Diadumenus.  And  what  do  we  now  else,  O my  best 
friend,  but  demonstrate  that  their  sect  perverts  and  destroys 
all  our  common  conceptions  with  improbable  things.  and 
unusual  expressions'?  For  none  would  hinder  the  solici- 
tude of  these  Avise  men  towards  young  persons,  if  it  were 
free  from  all  passionate  affection,  from  being  called  hunt- 
ing or  love  of  instruction ; but  they  ought  to  call  love  that 
which  all  men  and  women  understand  and  call  by  this 
name,  like  that  which  Penelope’s  suitors  in  Homer  seem 
to  acknowledge, 

Who  all  desired  to  lie  with  her  ;* 

or  as  Jupiter  in  another  place  says  to  Juno, 

For  neither  Goddess  yet  nor  mortal  dame 

E’er  kindled  in  my  heart  so  great  a flame.t 

29.  Thus  casting  moral  philosophy  into  these  matters, 
in  which  all  is 

A mazy  whirl,  with  nothing  sound,  and  all  perplexed,  1 

they  contemn  and  deride  all  about  them,  as  if  themselves 
were  the  only  men  who  regulated  nature  and  custom  as  it 
ought  to  be,  and  who  at  the  same  time  adapted  reason  to 

Odyss.  I.  366.  t II.  XIV.  316.  J Eurip.  Andromache,  448. 


VOL.  IV. 


26 


402 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


each  man’s  peculiar  state  by  means  of  aversions,  desires, 
appetites,  pursuits,  and  impulses.  But  custom  has  received 
no  good  from  their  logic,  but,  like  the  ear  diseased  by 
vain  sounds,  is  tilled  with  difficulty  and  obscurity,  — of 
which,  if  you  think  good,  we  will  elsewhere  begin  a 
new  discourse.  But  now  we  will  run  through  the  chief 
and  principal  heads  of  their  natural  philosophy,  which  no 
less  confounds  the  common  conceptions  than  that  other 
concerning  ends. 

30.  First,  this  is  altogether  absurd  and  against  sense,  to 
say  that  is  which  is  not,  and  things  which  are  not  are. 
But  above  all,  that  is  most  absurd  which  they  say  of  the 
universe.  For,  putting  round  about  the  circumference  of 
the  world  an  infinite  vacuum,  they  say  that  the  universe 
is  neither  a body  nor  bodiless.  It  follows  then  from  this 
that  the  universe  has  no  being,  since  with  them  body  only 
has  a being.  Since  therefore  it  is  the  part  of  that  which 
has  a being  both  to  do  and  suffer,  and  the  universe  has  no 
being,  it  follows  that  the  universe  will  neither  do  nor 
suffer.  Neither  will  it  be  in  a place  ; for  that  which  takes 
up  place  is  a body,  and  the  universe  is  not  a body,  there- 
fore the  universe  is  nowhere.  And  since  that  only  rests 
which  continues  in  one  and  the  same  place,  the  universe 
rests  not,  because  it  takes  not  up  place.  Neither  yet  is  it 
moved,  for  what  is  moved  must  have  a place  and  space  to 
move  in.  Moreover,  what  is  moved  either  moves  itself,  or 
suffers  motion  from  another.  Now,  that  which  is  moved 
by  itself  has  some  bents  and  inclinations  proceeding  from 
its  gravity  or  levity ; and  gravity  and  levity  are  either 
certain  habits  or  faculties  or  differences  of  bodies.  But  the 
universe  is  not  a body.  It  follows  then  of  necessity,  that  the 
universe  is  neither  heavy  nor  light,  and  consequently,  that 
it  has  not  in  itself  any  principle  of  motion.  Nor  yet  will 
the  universe  be  moved  by  any  other ; for  there  is  nothing 
else  besides  the  universe.  Thus  are  they  necessitated  to 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


403 


say  as  tliey  do,  that  the  universe  neither  rests  nor  is  moved. 
Lastly,  since  according  to  their  opinion  it  must  not  be  said 
that  the  universe  is  a body,  and  yet  the  heaven,  the  earth, 
animals,  plants,  men,  and  stones  are  bodies,  it  follows  that 
that  which  is  no  body  will  have  bodies  for  its  parts,  and 
things  which  have  existence  will  be  parts  of  that  which 
has  no  existence,  and  that  which  is  not  heavy  will  have 
parts  that  are  heavy,  and  what  is  not  light  will  have  parts 
that  are  light ; — than  which  there  cannot  be  any  dreams 
imagined  more  repugnant  to  the  common  conceptions. 

Moreover,  there  is  nothing  so  evident  or  so  agreeing  to 
common  sense  as  this,  that  what  is  not  animate  is  inani- 
mate, and  what  is  not  inanimate  is  animate.  And  yet  they 
overthrow  also  this  evidence,  confessing  the  universe  to  be 
neither  animate  nor  inanimate.  Besides  this,  none  thinks 
the  universe,  of  which  there  is  no  part  wanting,  to  be  im- 
perfect ; but  they  deny  the  universe  to  be  perfect,  saying 
that  what  is  perfect  may  be  defined,  but  the  universe  be- 
cause of  its  infiniteness  cannot  be  defined.  Therefore, 
according  to  them,  there  is  something  which  is  neither 
perfect  nor  imperfect.  Moreover,  the  universe  is  neither  a 
part,  since  there  is  nothing  greater  than  it ; nor  the  whole, 
for  the  whole  (they  say)  is  predicated  only  of  that  which 
is  digested  into  order ; but  the  universe  is,  through  its 
infiniteness,  undetermined  and  unordered.  Moreover,  there 
is  no  other  thing  which  can  be  the  cause  of  the  universe, 
there  being  nothing  besides  the  universe ; nor  is  the  uni- 
verse the  cause  of  other  things  or  even  of  itself ; for  its 
nature  suffers  it  not  to  act,  and  a cause  is  understood  by 
its  acting.  Suppose  now,  one  should  ask  all  men  what 
they  imagine  nothing  to  be,  and  what  notion  they  have  of 
it.  Would  they  not  answer,  that  it  neither  is  a cause  nor 
has  a cause,  that  it  is  neither  the  whole  nor  a part,  that  it 
is  neither  perfect  nor  imperfect,  that  it  is  neither  animate 
nor  inanimate,  that  it  neither  is  moved  nor  rests  nor  sub- 


404 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


sists,  that  it  is  neither  corporeal  nor  incorporeal ; and  that 
this  and  no  other  thing  is  meant  by  nothing  ? Since  then 
they  alone  predicate  that  of  the  universe  which  all  others 
do  of  nothing , it  seems  plain  that  they  make  the  universe 
and  nothing  to  be  the  same.  Time  must  then  be  said  to 
be  nothing ; the  same  also  must  be  said  of  predicate, 
axiom,  connection,  combination,  which  terms  they  use 
more  than  any  of  the  other  philosophers,  yet  they  say 
that  they  have  no  being.  But  farther,  to  say  that  what  is 
true  has  no  being  or  subsistence  but  is  comprehended,  and 
that  that  is  comprehensible  and  credible  which  no  way 
partakes  of  the  essence  of  being,  — does  not  this  exceed 
all  absurdity? 

31.  But  lest  these  things  should  seem  to  have  too  much 
of  logical  difficulty,  let  us  proceed  to  such  as  pertain  more 
to  natural  philosophy.  Since  then,  as  themselves  say, 

Jove  is  of  all  beginning,  midst,  and  end,* 

they  ought  chiefly  to  have  applied  themselves  to  remedy, 
redress,  and  reduce  to  the  best  order  the  conceptions  con- 
cerning the  Gods,  if  there  were  in  them  any  thing  confused 
or  erroneous  ; or  if  not,  to  have  left  every  one  in  those  sen- 
timents which  they  had  from  the  laws  and  custom  concern- 
ing the  Divinity : 

For  neither  now  nor  yesterday 
These  deep  conceits  of  God  began  ; 

Time  out  of  mind  they  have  been  aye, 

But  no  man  knows  where,  how,  or  wlien.f 

But  these  men,  having  begun  (as  it  were)  “from  Vesta”  to 
disturb  the  opinions  settled  and  received  in  every  country 
concerning  the  Gods,  have  not  (to  speak  sincerely)  left 
any  thing  entire  and  uncorrupted.  For  what  man  is  there 
or  ever  was,  except  these,  who  does  not  believe  the  Divinity 
to  be  immortal  and  eternal  ? Or  what  in  the  common  an- 

* See  Orphic  Fragments,  VI.  10  (Herm.).  f Soph.  Antigone,  456. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


405 


ticipations  is  more  unanimously  chanted  forth  concerning 
the  Gods  than  such  things  as  these : 

There  the  blest  Gods  eternally  enjoy 
Their  sweet  delights  ; * 

and  again, 

Both  Gods  immortal,  and  earth-dwelling  men ; t 

and  again, 

Exempt  from  sickness  and  old  age  are  they, 

And  free  from  toil,  and  have  escaped  the  flood 
Of  roaring  Acheron  ? J 

One  may  perhaps  light  upon  some  nations  so  barbarous 
and  savage  as  not  to  think  there  is  a God ; but  there  was 
never  found  any  man  who,  believing  a God,  did  not  at  the 
same  time  believe  him  immortal  and  eternal.  Certainly, 
those  who  were  called  Atheists,  like  Theodoras,  Diagoras, 
and  Hippo,  durst  not  say  that  the  Divinity  is  corruptible, 
but  they  did  not  believe  that  there  is  any  thing  incorrupti- 
ble ; not  indeed  admitting  the  subsistence  of  an  incorrupti- 
bility, but  keeping  the  idea  of  a God.  But  Chrysippus 
and  Cleanthes,  having  filled  (as  one  may  say)  heaven,  earth, 
air,  and  sea  with  Gods,  have  not  yet  made  any  one  of  all 
these  Gods  immortal  or  eternal,  except  Jupiter  alone,  in 
whom  they  consume  all  the  rest ; so  that  it  is  no  more 
proper  for  him  to  consume  others  than  to  be  consumed 
himself.  For  it  is  alike  an  infirmity  to  perish  by  being 
resolved  into  another,  and  to  be  saved  by  being  nourished 
by  the  resolution  of  others  into  himself.  Now  these  are 
not  like  other  of  their  absurdities,  gathered  by  argument 
from  their  suppositions  or  drawn  by  consequence  from  their 
doctrines ; but  they  themselves  proclaim  it  aloud  in  their 
writings  concerning  the  Gods,  Providence,  Fate,  and  Na- 
ture, expressly  saying  that  all  the  other  Gods  were  born, 
and  shall  die  by  the  fire,  melting  away,  in  their  opinion,  as 
if  they  were  of  wax  or  tin.  It  is  indeed  as  much  against 

* Odyss.  VI.  46.  t II.  V.  442.  $ From  Pindar. 


406 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


common  sense  that  God  should  be  mortal  as  that  man 
should  be  immortal ; nay,  indeed,  I do  not  see  what  the 
difference  between  God  and  man  will  be,  if  God  also  is  a 
reasonable  and  corruptible  animal.  For  if  they  oppose  us 
with  this  subtle  distinction,  that  man  is  mortal,  and  God  not 
mortal  but  corruptible,  see  what  they  get  by  it.  For  they 
will  say  either  that  God  is  at  the  same  time  both  immortal 
and  corruptible,  or  else  that  he  neither  is  mortal  nor  im- 
mortal ; the  absurdity  of  which  even  those  cannot  exceed 
who  set  themselves  industriously  to  devise  positions  repug- 
nant to  common  sense.  I speak  of  others ; for  these  men 
have  left  no  one  of  the  absurdest  things  unspoken  or  unat- 
tempted. 

To  these  things  Cleanthes,  contending  for  the  conflagra- 
tion of  the  world,  says,  that  the  sun  will  make  the  moon 
and  all  the  other  stars  like  to  himself,  and  will  change 
them  into  himself.  Indeed,  if  the  stars,  being  Gods, 
should  contribute  any  thing  to  the  sun  towards  their  own 
destruction  by  contributing  to  its  conflagration,  it  would  be 
very  ridiculous  for  us  to  make  prayers  to  them  for  our  sal- 
vation, and  to  think  them  the  saviors  of  men,  whose 
nature  it  is  to  accelerate  their  own  corruption  and  disso- 
lution. 

32.  And  yet  these  men  leave  nothing  unsaid  against 
Epicurus,  crying  out,  Fie,  fie  upon  him,  as  confounding 
their  presumption  concerning  God  by  taking  away  Provi- 
dence ; for  God  (they  say)  is  presumed  and  understood  to 
be  not  only  immortal  and  happy,  but  also  a lover  of  men 
and  careful  of  them  and  beneficial  to  them  ; and  herein 
they  say  true.  Now  if  they  who  abolish  Providence  take 
away  the  pre-conception  concerning  God,  what  do  they 
who  say  that  the  Gods  indeed  have  care  of  us,  but  deny 
them  to  be  helpful  to  us,  and  make  them  not  bestowers  of 
good  things  but  of  indifferent  ones,  giving,  to  wit,  not 
virtue,  but  wealth,  health,  children,  and  such  like  things, 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


407 


none  of  which  is  helpful,  profitable,  desirable,  or  available? 
Or  shall  we  not  rather  think,  that  the  Epicureans  do  not 
take  away  the  conceptions  concerning  the  Gods ; but  that 
these  Stoics  scoff  at  the  Gods  and  deride  them,  saying  one 
is  a God  of  fruits,  another  of  marriage,  another  a physi- 
cian, and  another  a diviner,  while  yet  health,  issue,  and 
plenty  of  fruits  are  not  good  things,  but  indifferent  things 
and  unprofitable  to  those  who  have  them? 

33.  The  third  point  of  the  conception  concerning  the 
Gods  is,  that  the  Gods  do  in  nothing  so  much  differ  from 
men  as  in  happiness  and  virtue.  But  according  to  Chry- 
sippus,  they  have  not  so  much  as  this  difference.  For  he 
says  that  Jupiter  does  not  exceed  Dion  in  virtue,  but  that 
Jupiter  and  Dion,  being  both  wise,  are  equally  aided  by 
one  another,  when  one  falls  into  the  motion  of  the  other. 
For  this  and  none  else  is  the  good  which  the  Gods  do  to 
men,  and  likewise  men  to  the  Gods  when  they  are  wise. 
For  they  say,  that  a man  who  falls  not  short  in  virtue 
comes  not  behind  them  in  felicity,  and  that  he  who,  being 
tormented  with  diseases  and  being  maimed  in  the  body, 
makes  himself  away,  is  equally  happy  with  Jupiter  the 
Savior,  provided  he  be  but  wise.  But  this  man  neither 
is  nor  ever  was  upon  the  earth ; but  there  are  infinite  mil- 
lions of  men  unhappy  to  the  highest  degree  in  the  state 
and  government  of  Jupiter,  which  is  most  excellently  ad- 
ministered. Now  what  can  be  more  against  sense  than 
that,  when  Jupiter  governs  exceedingly  well,  we  should  be 
exceedingly  miserable  ? But  if  (which  it  is  unlawful  even 
to  say)  he  would  wish  no  longer  to  be  a savior,  nor  a deliv- 
erer, nor  a protector,  but  the  contrary  to  all  these  glorious 
appellations,  there  can  no  goodness  be  added  to  the  things 
that  are,  either  as  to  their  multitude  or  magnitude,  since, 
as  these  men  say,  all  men  live  to  the  height  miserably  and 
wickedly,  neither  vice  receiving  addition,  nor  unhappiness 


increase. 


408 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


34.  Nor  is  this  the  worst ; but  they  are  angry  with  Me 
nander  for  saying  upon  the  stage, 

The  chief  beginning  of  men’s  miseries 

Are  things  exceeding  good  ; 

for  that  this  is  against  sense.  And  yet  they  make  God,  who 
is  good,  the  beginning  of  evils.  “ For  matter,”  they  say, 
“ produced  not  any  evil  of  itself;  for  it  is  without  quality, 
and  whatever  differences  it  has,  it  has  received  them  all  from 
that  which  moves  and  forms  it.”  But  that  which  moves  and 
forms  it  is  the  reason  dwelling  in  it,  since  it  is  not  made  to 
move  and  form  itself.  So  that  of  necessity  evil,  if  it  come  by 
nothing,  must  have  been  produced  from  that  which  has  no 
being ; but  if  by  some  moving  principle,  from  God.  But 
if  they  think  that  Jupiter  has  not  the  command  of  his 
parts  nor  uses  every  one  of  them  according  to  his  reason, 
they  speak  against  common  sense,  and  imagine  an  animal, 
many  of  whose  parts  are  not  subservient  to  his  will  but 
use  their  own  operations  and  actions,  to  which  the  whole 
gives  no  incitation  nor  begins  their  motion.  For  there  is 
nothing  which  has  life  so  ill  compacted  as  that,  against  its 
will,  its  feet  shall  go,  its  tongue  speak,  its  horns  push,  or 
its  teeth  bite.  The  most  of  which  things  God  must  of 
necessity  suffer,  if  the  wicked,  being  parts  of  him,  do 
against  his  will  lie,  cheat,  rob,  and  murder  one  another. 
But  if,  as  Chrysippus  says,  the  very  least  part  cannot  pos- 
sibly behave  itself  otherwise  than  according  to  Jupiter’s 
pleasure,  and  if  every  living  thing  is  so  framed  by  Nature 
as  to  rest  and  move  according  as  he  inclines  it  and  as  he 
turns,  stays,  and  disposes  it, 

This  saying  is  more  impious  than  the  first.* 

For  it  were  more  tolerable  to  say  that  many  parts  of 
Jupiter  are,  through  his  weakness  and  want  of  power, 
hurried  on  to  do  many  absurd  things  against  his  nature 


* See  Nauck’s  Tragic  Fragments,  p.  704  (No.  345). 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


409 


and  will,  than  that  there  is  not  any  intemperance  or  wick- 
edness of  which  Jupiter  is  not  the  cause.  Moreover,  since 
they  affirm  the  world  to  be  a city  and  the  stars  citizens,  if 
this  be  so,  there  must  be  also  tribes-men  and  magis- 
trates, the  sun  must  be  some  consul,  and  the  evening  star 
a praetor  or  mayor  of  a city.  Now  I know  not  whether 
any  one  that  shall  go  about  to  confute  such  things  will 
not  show  himself  more  absurd  than  those  who  assert  and 
affirm  them. 

35.  Is  it  not  therefore  against  sense  to  say  that  the  seed 
is  more  and  greater  than  that  which  is  produced  of  it  I 
For  we  see  that  Nature  in  all  animals  and  plants,  even 
those  that  are  wild,  has  taken  small,  slender,  and  scarce 
visible  things  for  principles  of  generation  to  the  greatest. 
For  it  does  not  only  from  a grain  of  wheat  produce  an  ear- 
bearing stalk,  or  a vine  from  the  stone  of  a grape ; but 
from  a small  berry  or  acorn  which  has  escaped  being  eaten 
by  the  bird,  kindling  and  setting  generation  on  fire  (as  it 
were)  from  a little  spark,  it  sends  forth  the  stock  of 
a bush,  or  the  tall  body  of  an  oak,  palm,  or  pine  tree. 
Whence  also  they  say  that  seed  is  in  Greek  called 

as  it  were,  the  amiQuoig  or  the  coiling  up  of  a great 
mass  in  a little  compass  ; and  that  Nature  has  the  name 
of  yvag,  as  if  it  were  the  inflation  (i^cpvaijaig)  and  diffusion 
of  reason  and  numbers  opened  and  loosened  by  it.  But 
now,  in  opposition  to  this,  they  maintain  that  fire  is  the 
seed  of  the  world,  which  shall  after  the  conflagration 
change  into  seed  the  world,  which  will  then  have  a co- 
pious nature  from  a smaller  body  and  bulk,  and  possess 
an  infinite  space  of  vacuum  filled  by  its  increase  ; and  the 
world  being  made,  the  size  again  recedes  and  settles,  the 
matter  being  after  the  generation  gathered  and  contracted 
into  itself. 

36.  You  may  hear  them  and  read  many  of  their  writings, 
in  which  they  jangle  with  the  Academics,  and  cry  out 


410 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


against  them  as  confounding  all  things  with  their  doctrine 
of  indistinguishable  identity,  and  as  vehemently  contending 
that  there  is  but  one  quality  in  two  substances.  And  yet 
there  is  no  man  who  understands  not  this,  and  would  not 
on  the  contrary  think  it  wonderful  and  extremely  strange 
if  there  should  not  in  all  time  be  found  a dove  exactly  and 
in  all  respects  like  to  another  dove,  a bee  to  a bee,  a grain 
of  wheat  to  a grain  of  wheat,  or  (as  the  proverb  has  it) 
one  fig  to  another.  But  these  things  are  plainly  against 
common  sense  which  the  Stoics  say  and  feign,  — that  there 
are  in  one  substance  two  particular  qualities,  and  that  the 
same  substance,  which  has  particularly  one  quality,  when 
another  quality  is  added,  receives  and  equally  conserves 
them  both.  For  if  there  may  be  two,  there  may  be  also 
three,  four,  and  five,  and  even  more  than  you  can  name, 
in  one  and  the  same  substance ; I say  not  in  its  different 
parts,  but  all  alike  in  the  whole,  though  ever  infinite  in 
number.  For  Chrysippus  says,  that  Jupiter  and  the  world 
are  like  to  man,  as  is  also  Providence  to  the  soul ; when 
therefore  the  conflagration  shall  be,  Jupiter,  who  alone  of 
all  the  Gods  is  incorruptible,  will  retire  into  Providence, 
and  they  being  together,  will  both  perpetually  remain  in 
the  one  substance  of  the  ether. 

37.  But  leaving  now  the  Gods,  and  beseeching  them  to 
give  these  Stoics  common  sense  and  a common  understand- 
ing, let  us  look  into  their  doctrines  concerning  the  ele- 
ments. It  is  against  the  common  conceptions  that  one 
body  should  be  the  place  of  another,  or  that  a body  should 
penetrate  through  a body,  neither  of  them  containing  any 
vacuity,  but  the  full  passing  into  the  full,  and  that  which 
has  no  vacuity  — but  is  full  and  has  no  place  by  reason  of 
its  continuity  — receiving  the  mixture.  But  these  men,  not 
thrusting  one  thing  into  one,  nor  yet  two  or  three  or  ten 
together,  but  jumbling  all  the  parts  of  the  world,  being 
cut  piecemeal,  into  any  one  thing  which  they  shall  first 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


411 


light  on,  and  saying  that  the  very  least  which  is  perceived 
by  sense  will  contain  the  greatest  that  shall  come  unto  it, 
boldly  frame  a new  doctrine,  convicting  themselves  here, 
as  in  many  other  things,  of  taking  for  their  suppositions 
things  repugnant  to  common  sense.  And  presently  upon 
this  they  are  forced  to  admit  into  their  discourse  many 
monstrous  and  strange  positions,  mixing  whole  bodies  with 
whole  ; of  Avhich  this  also  is  one,  that  three  are  four.  For 
this  others  put  as  an  example  of  those  things  which  can- 
not be  conceived  even  in  thought.  But  to  the  Stoics  it  is 
a matter  of  truth,  that  when  one  cup  of  wine  is  mixed  with 
two  of  water,  if  it  is  not  to  be  lost  but  the  mixture  is  to 
be  equalized,  it  must  be  extended  through  the  whole  and 
be  confounded  therewith,  so  as  to  make  that  which  was 
one  two  by  the  equalization  of  the  mixture.  For  the  one 
remains,  but  is  extended  as  much  as  two,  and  thus  is  equal 
to  the  double  of  itself.  Now  if  it  happens  in  the  mixture 
with  two  to  take  the  measure  of  two  in  the  diffusion,  this 
is  together  the  measure  both  of  three  and  four,  — of  three 
because  one  is  mixed  with  two,  and  of  four  because,  being 
mixed  with  two,  it  has  an  equal  quantity  with  those  with 
which  it  is  mixed.  Now  this  fine  subtilty  is  a consequence 
of  their  putting  bodies  into  a body,  and  so  likewise  is  the 
unintelligibleness  of  the  manner  how  one  is  contained  in 
the  other.  For  it  is  of  necessity  that,  of  bodies  passing 
one  into  another  by  mixture,  the  one  should  not  contain 
and  the  other  be  contained,  nor  the  one  receive  and  the 
other  be  received  within ; for  this  would  not  be  a mixture, 
but  a contiguity  and  touching  of  the  superficies,  the  one 
entering  in,  and  the  other  enclosing  it  without,  and  the 
rest  of  the  parts  remaining  unmixed  and  pure,  and  so  it 
would  be  merely  many  different  things.  But  there  being 
a necessity,  according  to  their  axiom  of  mixture,  that  the 
things  which  are  mixed  should  be  mingled  one  within  the 
other,  and  that  the  same  things  should  together  be  con- 


412 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


tained  by  being  within,  and  by  receiving  contain  the  other, 
and  that  neither  of  them  could  possibly  exist  again  as  it 
was  before,  it  comes  to  pass  that  both  the  subjects  of  the 
mixture  mutually  penetrate  each  other,  and  that  there  is 
not  any  part  of  either  remaining  separate,  but  that  they 
are  necessarily  all  filled  with  each  other. 

Here  now  that*famous  leg  of  Arcesilaus  comes  in,  with 
much  laughter  insulting  over  their  absurdities  ; for  if  these 
mixtures  are  through  the  whole,  what  should  hinder  but 
that,  a leg  being  cut  off  and  putrefied  and  cast  into  the  sea 
and  diffused,  not  only  Antigonus’s  fleet  (as  Arcesilaus  said) 
might  sail  through  it,  but  also  Xerxes’s  twelve  hundred 
ships,  together  with  the  Grecians’  three  hundred  galleys, 
might  fight  in  it?  For  the  progress  will  not  henceforth 
fail,  nor  the  lesser  cease  to  be  in  the  greater  ; or  else  the 
mixture  will  be  at  an  end,  and  the  extremity  of  it,  touch- 
ing where  it  shall  end,  will  not  pass  through  the  whole, 
but  will  give  over  being  mingled.  But  if  the  mixture  is 
through  the  whole,  the  leg  will  not  indeed  of  itself  afford 
the  Greeks  room  for  the  sea-fight,  for  to  this  there  is  need 
of  putrefaction  and  change ; but  if  one  glass  or  but  one 
drop  of  wine  shall  fall  from  hence  into  the  Aegean  or 
Cretan  Sea,  it  will  pass  into  the  Ocean  or  main  Atlantic 
Sea,  not  lightly  touching  its  superficies,  but  being  spread 
quite  through  it  in  depth,  breadth,  and  length.  And  this 
Chrysippus  admits,  saying  immediately  in  his  First  Book 
of  Natural  Questions,  that  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  one 
drop  of  wine  from  being  mixed  with  the  whole  sea.  And 
that  we  may  not  wonder  at  this,  he  says  that  this  one  drop 
will  by  mixtion  extend  through  the  whole  world ; than 
which  I know  not  any  thing  that  can  appear  more  absurd. 

38.  And  this  also  is  against  sense,  that  there  is  not  in 
the  nature  of  bodies  any  thing  either  supreme  or  first  or 
last,  in  which  the  magnitude  of  the  body  may  terminate ; 
but  that  there  is  always  some  phenomenon  beyond  the 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


413 


assumed  body,  and  that  this  still  going  on  carries  the  sub- 
ject to  infinity  and  undeterminateness.  For  one  body 
cannot  be  imagined  greater  or  less  than  another,  if  both 
of  them  may  by  their  parts  proceed  in  infinitum, ; but  the 
nature  of  inequality  is  taken  away.  For  of  things  that  are 
esteemed  unequal,  the  one  falls  short  in  its  last  parts,  and 
the  other  goes  on  and  exceeds.  Now  if  there  is  no  in- 
equality, it  follows  that  there  is  no  unevenness  nor  rough- 
ness of  bodies ; for  unevenness  is  the  inequality  of  the 
same  superficies  with  itself,  and  roughness  is  an  uneven- 
ness joined  with  hardness ; neither  of  which  is  left  us  by 
those  who  terminate  no  body  in  its  last  part,  but  extend 
them  all  by  the  multitude  of  their  parts  unto  an  infinity. 
And  yet  is  it  not  evident  that  a man  consists  of  more  parts 
than  a finger,  and  the  world  of  more  than  a man  \ This 
indeed  all  men  know  and  understand,  unless  they  become 
Stoics ; but  if  they  are  once  Stoics,  they  on  the  contrary 
say  and  think  that  a man  has  no  more  parts  than  a finger, 
nor  the  world  than  a man.  For  division  reduces  bodies  to 
an  infinity ; and  of  infinites  neither  is  more  or  less  or  ex- 
ceeds in  multitude,  or  the  parts  of  the  remainder  will 
cease  to  be  divided  and  to  afford  a multitude  of  them- 
selves. 

Lamprias.  How  then  do  they  extricate  themselves  out 
of  these  difficulties  1 

Diadumenus.  Surely  with  very  great  cunning  and  cour- 
age. For  Chrysippus  says  : “ If  we  are  asked,  if  we  have 
any  parts,  and  how  many,  and  of  what  and  how  many 
parts  they  consist,  we  are  to  use  a distinction,  making  it  a 
position  that  the  wdiole  body  is  compacted  of  the  head, 
trunk,  and  legs,  as  if  that  were  all  which  is  enquired  and 
doubted  of.  But  if  they  extend  their  interrogation  to  the 
last  parts,  no  such  thing  is  to  be  undertaken,  but  we  are 
to  say  that  they  consist  not  of  any  certain  parts,  nor  yet 
of  so  many,  nor  of  infinite,  nor  of  finite.”  And  I seem  to 


414 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


myself  to  have  used  his  very  words,  that  you  may  perceive 
how  he  maintains  the  common  notions,  forbidding  us  to 
think  of  what  or  how  many  parts  every  body  is  compacted, 
and  whether  of  infinite  or  finite.  For  if  there  were  any 
medium  between  finite  and  infinite,  as  the  indifferent  is 
between  good  and  evil,  he  should,  by  telling  us  what  that 
is,  have  solved  the  difficulty.  But  if  — as  that  which  is 
not  equal  is  presently  understood  to  be  unequal,  and  that 
which  is  not  mortal  to  be  immortal  — we  also  understand 
that  which  is  not  finite  to  be  immediately  infinite,  to  say 
that  a body  consists  of  parts  neither  finite  nor  infinite  is, 
in  my  opinion,  the  same  thing  as  to  affirm  that  an  argu- 
ment is  compacted  of  positions  neither  true  nor  false.  . . . 

39.  To  this  he  with  a certain  youthful  rashness  adds, 
that  in  a pyramid  consisting  of  triangles,  the  sides  inclin- 
ing to  the  juncture  are  unequal,  and  yet  do  not  exceed 
one  another  in  that  they  are  greater.  Thus  does  he  keep 
the  common  notions.  For  if  there  is  any  thing  greater 
and  not  exceeding,  there  will  be  also  something  less  and 
not  deficient,  and  so  also  something  unequal  which  neither 
exceeds  nor  is  deficient ; that  is,  there  will  be  an  unequal 
thing  equal,  a greater  not  greater,  and  a less  not  less.  See 
it  yet  farther,  in  what  manner  he  answered  Democritus, 
enquiring  philosophically  and  properly,  if  a cone  is  divided 
by  a plane  parallel  with  its  base,  what  is  to  be  thought  of 
the  superficies  of  its  segments,  whether  they  are  equal  or 
unequal ; for  if  they  are  unequal,  they  will  render  the 
cone  uneven,  receiving  many  step-like  incisions  and  rough- 
nesses ; but  if  they  are  equal,  the  sections  will  be  equal, 
and  the  cone  will  seem  to  have  the  same  qualities  as  the 
cylinder,  to  wit,  to  be  composed  not  of  unequal  but  of 
equal  circles ; which  is  most  absurd.  Here,  that  he  may 
convince  Democritus  of  ignorance,  he  says,  that  the  super- 
ficies are  neither  equal  or  unequal,  but  that  the  bodies  are 
unequal,  because  the  superficies  are  neither  equal  nor  un- 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


415 


equal.  Indeed  to  assert  this  for  a law,  that  bodies  are 
unequal  while  the  superficies  are  not  unequal,  is  the  part 
of  a man  who  takes  to  himself  a wonderful  liberty  of 
writing  whatever  comes  into  his  head.  For  reason  and 
manifest  evidence,  on  the  contrary,  give  us  to  understand, 
that  the  superficies  of  unequal  bodies  are  unequal,  and  that 
the  bigger  the  body  is,  the  greater  also  is  the  superficies, 
unless  the  excess,  by  which  it  is  the  greater,  is  void  of  a 
superficies.  For  if  the  superficies  of  the  greater  bodies 
do  not  exceed  those  of  the  less,  but  sooner  fail,  a part  of 
that  body  which  has  an  end  will  be  without  an  end  and 
infinite.  For  if  he  says  that  he  is  compelled  to  this,  . . . 
For  those  rabbeted  incisions,  which  he  suspects  in  a cone, 
are  made  by  the  inequality  of  the  body,  and  not  of  the 
superficies.  It  is  ridiculous  therefore  to  take  the  superficies 
out  of  the  account,  and  after  all  to  leave  the  inequality  in 
the  bodies  themselves.  But  to  persist  still  in  this  matter, 
what  is  more  repugnant  to  sense  than  the  imagining  of 
such  things  1 F or  if  we  admit  that  one  superficies  is 
neither  equal  nor  unequal  to  another,  we  may  say  also  of 
magnitude  and  of  number,  that  one  is  neither  equal  nor 
unequal  to  another ; and  this,  not  having  any  thing  that 
we  can  call  or  think  to  be  a neuter  or  medium  between 
equal  and  unequal.  Besides,  if  there  are  superficies  neither 
equal  nor  unequal,  what  hinders  but  there  may  be  also 
circles  neither  equal  nor  unequal'?  For  indeed  these  su- 
perficies of  conic  sections  are  circles.  And  if  circles, 
why  may  not  also  their  diameters  be  neither  equal  nor 
unequal  ? And  if  so,  why  not  also  angles,  triangles,  par- 
allelograms, parallelopipeds,  and  bodies?  For  if  the  longi- 
tudes are  neither  equal  nor  unequal  to  one  another,  so 
will  the  weight,  percussion,  and  bodies  be  neither  equal 
nor  unequal.  How  then  dare  these  men  inveigh  against 
those  who  introduce  vacuities,  and  suppose  that  there  are 
some  indivisible  atoms,  and  who  say  that  motion  and  rest 


416 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


are  not  inconsistent  with  each  other,  when  themselves 
affirm  such  axioms  as  these  to  be  false : If  any  things 
are  not  equal  to  one  another,  they  are  unequal  to  one 
another ; and  the  same  things  are  not  equal  and  unequal 
to  one  another'?  But  when  he  says  that  there  is  some- 
thing greater  and  yet  not  exceeding,  it  were  worth  the 
while  to  ask,  whether  these  things  quadrate  with  one 
another.  For  if  they  quadrate,  how  is  either  the  greater? 
And  if  they  do  not  quadrate,  how  can  it  be  but  the  one 
must  exceed  and  the  other  fall  short?  For  if  neither  of 
these  be,  the  other  both  will  and  will  not  quadrate  with 
the  greater.  For  those  who  keep  not  the  common  con- 
ceptions must  of  necessity  fall  into  such  perplexities. 

40.  It  is  moreover  against  sense  to  say  that  nothing 
touches  another ; nor  is  this  less  absurd,  that  bodies  touch 
one  another,  but  touch  by  nothing.  For  they  are  necessi- 
tated to  admit  these  things,  Avho  allow  not  the  least  parts 
of  a body,  but  assume  something  which  is  before  that 
which  seems  to  touch,  and  never  cease  to  proceed  still 
farther.  What,  therefore,  these  men  principally  object  to 
the  patrons  of  those  indivisible  bodies  called  atoms  is  this, 
that  there  is  neither  a touching  of  the  whole  by  the  whole, 
nor  of  the  parts  by  the  parts ; for  that  the  one  makes  not 
a touching  but  a mixture,  and  that  the  other  is  not  possi- 
ble, these  individuals  having  no  parts.  How  then  do  not 
they  themselves  fall  into  the  same  inconvenience,  leaving 
no  first  or  last  part,  whilst  they  say,  that  whole  bodies 
mutually  touch  one  another  by  a term  or  extremity  and  not 
by  a part  ? But  this  term  is  not  a body ; therefore  one 
body  shall  touch  one  another  by  that  which  is  incorporeal, 
and  again  shall  not  touch,  that  which  is  incorporeal  com- 
ing between  them.  And  if  it  shall  touch,  the  body  shall 
both  do  and  suffer  something  by  that  which  is  incorporeal. 
For  it  is  the  nature  of  bodies  mutually  to  do  and  suffer, 
and  to  touch.  But  if  the  body  has  a touching  by  that 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


417 


which  is  incorporeal,  it  will  have  also  a contact,  and  a mixt- 
ure, and  a coalition.  Again,  in  these  contacts  and  mixt- 
ures, the  extremities  of  the  bodies  must  either  remain, 
or  not  remain  but  be  corrupted.  Now  both  of  these  are 
against  sense.  For  neither  do  they  themselves  admit  cor- 
ruptions and  generations  of  incorporeal  things  ; nor  can 
there  be  a mixture  and  coalition  of  bodies  retaining  their 
own  extremities.  For  the  extremity  determines  and  con- 
stitutes the  nature  of  the  body  ; and  mixtions,  unless  the 
mutual  laying  of  parts  by  parts  are  thereby  understood, 
wholly  confound  all  those  that  are  mixed.  And,  as  these 
men  say,  we  must  admit  the  corruption  of  extremities  in 
mixtures,  and  their  generation  again  in  the  separation  of 
them.  But  this  none  can  easily  understand.  Now  by 
what  bodies  mutually  touch  each  other,  by  the  same  they 
press,  thrust,  and  crush  each  other.  Now  that  this  should 
be  done  or  suffered  by  things  that  are  incorporeal,  is  im- 
possible and  not  so  much  as  to  be  imagined.  But  yet  this 
they  would  constrain  us  to  conceive.  For  if  a sphere 
touch  a plane  by  a point,  it  is  manifest  that  it  may  be  also 
drawn  over  the  plane  upon  a point ; and  if  the  superficies 
of  it  is  painted  with  vermilion,  it  will  imprint  a red  line 
on  the  plane ; and  if  it  is  fiery  hot,  it  will  burn  the  plane. 
Now  for  an  incorporeal  thing  to  color,  or  a body  to  be 
burned  by  that  which  is  incorporeal,  is  against  sense.  But 
if  we  should  imagine  an  earthen  or  glassy  sphere  to  fall 
from  on  high  upon  a plane  of  stone,  it  were  against  reason 
to  think  it  would  not  be  broken,  being  struck  against  that 
which  is  hard  and  solid ; but  it  would  be  more  absurd  that 
it  should  be  broken,  falling  upon  an  extremity  or  point 
that  is  incorporeal.  So  that  the  presumptions  concerning 
things  incorporeal  and  corporeal  are  wholly  disturbed,  or 
rather  taken  away,  by  their  joining  to  them  many  impos- 
sibilities. 

41.  It  is  also  against  common  sense,  that  there  should 

27 


VOL.  IV. 


418 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


be  a time  future  and  past,  but  no  time  present ; and  that 
erewhile  and  lately  subsist,  but  now  is  nothing  at  all.  Yet 
this  often  befalls  the  Stoics,  who  admit  not  the  least  time 
between,  nor  will  allow  the  present  to  be  indivisible  ; but 
whatsoever  any  one  thinks  to  take  and  understand  as  pres- 
ent, one  part  of  that  they  say  to  be  future,  and  the  other 
part  past ; so  that  there  is  no  part  remaining  or  left  of  the 
present  time : but  of  that  which  is  said  to  be  present,  one 
part  is  distributed  to  the  future,  the  other  to  the  past. 
Therefore  one  of  these  two  things  follows  : either  that, 
holding  there  was  a time  and  there  will  be  a time,  we  must 
deny  there  is  a time  ; or  we  must  hold  that  there  is  a time 
present,  part  of  which  has  already  been  and  part  will  be,  and 
say  that  of  that  which  now  is,  one  part  is  future  and  the 
other  past ; and  that  of  now , one  part  is  before  and  the 
other  behind ; and  that  now  is  that  which  is  neither  yet 
now  nor  any  longer  now ; for  that  which  is  past  is  no 
longer  now , and  that  which  is  to  come  is  not  yet  now. 
And  dividing  thus  the  present,  they  must  needs  say  of  the 
year  and  of  the  day,  that  part  of  it  was  of  the  year  or  day 
past,  and  part  will  be  of  the  year  or  day  to  come  ; and 
that  of  what  is  together,  there  is  a part  before  and  a part 
after.  For  no  less  are  they  perplexed,  confounding  to- 
gether these  terms,  not  yet  and  already  and  no  longer 
and  now  and  not  now.  But  all  other  men  suppose,  es- 
teem, and  think  erewhile  and  awhile  hence  to  be  different 
parts  of  time  from  now , which  is  followed  by  the  one  and 
preceded  by  the  other.  But  Archedemus,  saying  that  now 
is  the  beginning  and  juncture  of  that  which  is  past  and 
that  which  is  near  at  hand,  has  (as  it  seems)  without  per- 
ceiving it  thereby  taken  away  all  time.  For  if  now  is  no 
time,  but  only  a term  or  extremity  of  time,  and  if  every 
part  of  time  is  such  as  now , all  time  seems  to  have  no 
parts,  but  to  be  wholly  dissolved  into  terms,  joints,  and  be- 
ginnings. But  Chrysippus,  desiring  to  show  more  artifice 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


419 


in  his  division,  in  his  book  of  Vacuity  and  some  others, 
says,  that  the  past  and  future  time  are  not,  but  have  sub- 
sisted (or  will  subsist),  and  that  the  present  only  is  ; but 
in  his  third,  fourth,  and  fifth  books  concerning  Parts,  he 
asserts,  that  of  the  present  time  one  part  is  past,  the  other 
to  come.  Thus  it  comes  to  pass,  that  he  divides  subsist- 
ing time  into  non-subsisting  parts  of  a subsisting  total,  or 
rather  leaves  nothing  at  all  of  time  subsisting,  if  the 
present  has  no  part  but  what  is  either  future  or  past. 

42.  These  men’s  conception  therefore  of  time  is  not 
unlike  the  grasping  of  water,  which,  the  harder  it  is  held, 
all  the  more  slides  and  runs  away.  As  to  actions  and  mo- 
tions, all  evidence  is  utterly  confounded.  For  if  now  is 
divided  into  past  and  future,  it  is  of  necessity  that  what  is 
now  moved  partly  has  been  moved  and  partly  shall  be 
moved,  that  the  end  and  beginning  of  motion  have  been 
taken  away,  that  nothing  of  any  work  has  been  done  first, 
nor  shall  any  thing  be  last,  the  actions  being  distributed 
■with  time.  For  as  they  say  that  of  present  time,  part  is 
past  and  part  to  come  ; so  of  that  which  is  doing,  it  will 
be  said  that  part  is  done  and  part  shall  be  done.  When 
therefore  had  to  dine , to  write , to  walk,  a beginning, 
and  when  shall  they  have  an  end,  if  every  one  who  is  din- 
ing has  dined  and  shall  dine,  and  every  one  who  is  walk- 
ing has  walked  and  shall  walk  ? But  this  is,  as  it  is  said, 
of  all  absurdities  the  most  absurd,  that  if  he  who  now 
lives  has  already  lived  and  shall  live,  then  to  live  neither 
had  beginning  nor  shall  have  end  ; but  every  one  of  us,  as 
it  seems,  was  born  without  beginning  to  live,  and  shall  die 
without  ceasing  to  live.  For  if  there  is  no  last  part,  but 
he  who  lives  has  something  of  the  present  still  remaining 
for  the  future,  to  say  “ Socrates  shall  live  ” will  never  be 
false  so  long  as  it  shall  be  true  to  say  “ Socrates  lives  ; ” 
and  so  long  also  will  be  false  to  say  “ Socrates  is  dead.” 
So  that,  if  “ Socrates  shall  live  ” is  true  in  infinite  parts  of 


420 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


time,  it  will  in  no  part  of  time  be  true  to  say  “ Socrates 
is  dead.”  And  verily  what  end  will  there  be  of  a work, 
and  where  will  you  terminate  an  action,  if,  as  often  as  it  is 
true  to  say  “ This  is  doing,”  it  is  likewise  true  to  say  “ This 
shall  be  doing”'?  For  he  will  lie  who  shall  say,  there 
will  be  an  end  of  Plato’s  writing  and  disputing ; since 
Plato  will  never  give  over  writing  and  disputing,  if  it  is 
never  false  to  say  of  him  who  disputes  that  he  shall  dis- 
pute, and  of  him  who  writes  that  he  shall  write.  More- 
over, there  will  be  no  part  of  that  which  now  is,  but  either 
has  been  or  is  to  be,  and  is  either  past  or  future  ; but  of 
what  has  been  and  is  to  be,  of  past  and  future,  there  is  no 
sense  ; wherefore  there  is  absolutely  no  sense  of  any  thing. 
For  we  neither  see  what  is  past  and  future,  nor  do  we  hear 
or  have  any  other  sense  of  what  has  been  or  is  to  be. 
Nothing  then,  even  what  is  present,  is  to  be  perceived  by 
sense,  if  of  the  present,  part  is  always  future  and  part 
past,  — if  part  has  been  and  part  is  to  be. 

43.  Now  they  indeed  say,  that  Epicurus  does  intolerable 
things  and  violates  the  conceptions,  in  moving  all  bodies 
with  equal  celerity,  and  admitting  none  of  them  to  be 
swifter  than  another.  And  yet  it  is  much  more  intolerable 
and  farther  remote  from  sense,  that  nothing  can  be  over- 
taken by  another : 

Not  though  Adrastus’s  swift-footed  steed 

Should  chase  the  tortoise  slow, 

as  the  proverb  has  it.  Now  this  must  of  necessity  fall  out, 
if  things  move  according  to  prius  and  posterius,  and  the 
intervals  through  which  they  pass  are  (as  these  men’s  tenet 
is)  divisible  in  infinitum  ; for  if  the  tortoise  is  but  a fur- 
long before  the  horse,  they  who  divide  this  furlong  in 
infinitum , and  move  them  both  according  to  prius  and 
p>osterius,  will  never  bring  the  swiftest  to  the  slowest ; 
the  slower  always  adding  some  interval  divisible  into  infi- 
nite spaces.  Now  to  affirm  that,  water  being  poured  from 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


421 


a bowl  or  cup,  it  will  never  be  all  poured  out,  is  it  not 
both  against  common  sense,  and  a consequence  of  what 
these  men  say  ] For  no  man  can  understand  the  motion 
according  to  prius  of  things  infinitely  divisible  to  be  con- 
summated ; but  leaving  always  somewhat  divisible,  it  will 
make  all  the  effusion,  all  the  running  and  flux  of  a liquid, 
motion  of  a solid,  and  fall  of  an  heavy  thing  imperfect. 

44.  I pass  by  many  absurdities  of  theirs,  touching  only 
such  as  are  against  sense.  The  dispute  concerning  in- 
crease is  indeed  ancient ; for  the  question,  as  Chrysippus 
says,  was  put  by  Epicharmus.  Now,  whereas  those  of 
the  Academy  think  that  the  doubt  is  not  very  easy  and 
ready  all  of  a sudden  to  be  cleared,  these  men  have  might- 
ily exclaimed  against  them,  and  accused  them  of  taking 
away  the  presumptions,  and  yet  themselves  are  so  far  from 
preserving  the  common  notions,  that  they  pervert  even 
sense  itself.  For  the  discourse  is  simple,  and  these  men 
grant  the  suppositions,  — that  all  particular  substances 
flow  and  are  carried,  some  of  them  emitting  forth  some- 
what from  themselves,  and  others  receiving  things  coming 
from  elsewhere ; and  that  the  things  to  which  there  is 
made  an  accession  or  from  which  there  is  a decession  by 
numbers  and  multitudes,  do  not  remain  the  same,  but  be- 
come others  by  the  said  accessions,  the  substance  receiving 
a change ; and  that  these  changes  are  not  rightly  called 
by  custom  increasings  or  diminutions,  but  it  is  fitter  they 
should  be  styled  generations  and  corruptions,  because  they 
drive  by  force  from  one  state  to  another,  whereas  to  in- 
crease and  be  diminished  are  passions  of  a body  that  is 
subject  and  permanent.  These  things  being  thus  in  a man- 
ner said  and  delivered,  what  would  these  defenders  of 
evidence  and  canonical  regulators  of  common  conceptions 
have?  Every  one  of  us  (they  say)  is  double,  twin-like, 
and  composed  of  a double  nature  ; not  as  the  poets  feigned 
of  the  Molionidae,  that  they  in  some  parts  grow  together 


422 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


and  in  some  parts  are  separated,  — but  every  one  of  us 
has  two  bodies,  having  the  same  color,  the  same  figure,  the 
same  weight  and  place.  . . . These  things  were  never 
before  seen  by  any  man ; but  these  men  alone  have  dis- 
cerned this  composition,  doubleness,  and  ambiguity,  how 
every  one  of  us  is  two  subjects,  the  one  substance,  the 
other  quality ; and  the  one  is  in  perpetual  flux  and  mo- 
tion, neither  increasing  nor  being  diminished  nor  remaining 
altogether ; the  other  remains  and  increases  and  is  dimin- 
ished, and  suffers  all  things  contrary  to  the  former,  with 
which  it  is  so  concorporated,  conjoined,  and  confounded, 
that  it  exhibits  not  any  difference  to  be  perceived  by  sense. 
Indeed,  Lynceus  is  said  to  have  penetrated  stones  and  oaks 

I with  his  sight ; and  a certain  man  sitting  on  a watch-tower 
in  Sicily  beheld  the  ships  of  the  Carthaginians  setting 
forth  from  their  harbor,  which  was  a day  and  a night’s 
sail  from  thence.  Callicrates  and  Myrmecides  are  said  to 
have  made  chariots  that  might  be  covered  with  the  wings 
of  a fly,  and  to  have  engraved  verses  of  Homer  on  a se- 
same seed.  But  none  ever  discerned  or  discovered  this 
diversity  in  us  ; nor  have  we  perceived  ourselves  to  be 
double,  in  one  part  always  flowing,  and  in  the  other  re- 
maining the  same  from  our  birth  even  to  our  death.  But 
I make  the  discourse  more  simple,  since  they  make  four 
subjects  in  every  one,  or  rather  every  one  of  us  to  be  four. 
But  two  are  sufficient  to  show  their  absurdity.  For  if, 
when  we  hear  Pentheus  in  the  tragedy  affirm  that  he 
sees  two  suns  and  two  cities  of  Thebes,*  we  say  that 
he  does  not  see,  but  that  his  sight  is  dazzled,  he  being 
transported  and  troubled  in  his  mind ; why  do  we  not 
bid  those  farewell,  who  assert  not  one  city  alone,  but 
all  men  and  animals,  and  all  trees,  vessels,  instruments, 
and  clothes,  to  be  double  and  composed  of  two,  as  men 
who  constrain  us  to  dote  rather  than  to  understand?  But 


* Eurip.  Baccli.  918. 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


423 


this  feigning  other  natures  of  subjects  must  perhaps  be 
pardoned  them  ; for  there  appears  no  other  invention  by 
which  they  can  maintain  and  uphold  the  augmentations  of 
which  they  are  so  fond. 

45.  But  by  what  cause  moved,  or  for  the  adorning  of 
what  other  suppositions,  they  frame  in  a manner  innumer- 
able differences  and  forms  of  bodies  in  the  soul,  there  is 
none  can  say,  unless  it  be  that  they  remove,  or  rather 
wholly  abdicate  and  destroy,  the  common  and  usual  no- 
tions, to  introduce  other  foreign  and  strange  ones.  For 
it  is  very  absurd  that,  making  all  virtues  and  vices  — and 
with  them  all  arts,  memories,  fancies,  passions,  impulses, 
and  assents  — to  be  bodies,  they  should  affirm  that  they 
neither  lie  nor  subsist  in  any  subject,  leaving  them  for  a 
place  one  only  hole,  like  a prick  in  the  heart,  where  they 
crowd  the  principal  part  of  the  soul,  enclosed  with  so  many 
bodies,  that  a very  great  number  of  them  lie  hid  even 
from  those  who  think  they  can  spare  and  distinguish  them 
one  from  another.  Nay,  that  they  should  not  only  make 
them  bodies,  but  also  rational  creatures,  and  even  a swarm 
of  such  creatures,  not  friendly  or  gentle,  but  a multitude 
maliciously  rebellious  and  revengeful,  and  should  so  make 
of  each  one  of  us  a park  or  menagerie  or  Trojan  horse,  or 
whatever  else  we  may  call  their  fancies,  — this  is  the  very 
height  of  contempt  and  rebellion  against  evidence  and 
custom.  But  they  say,  that  not  only  the  virtues  and  vices, 
not  only  the  passions,  as  anger,  envy,  grief,  and  malicious- 
ness, not  only  comprehensions,  fancies,  and  ignorances,  not 
only  arts,  as  shoemaking  and  working  in  brass,  are  ani- 
mals ; but  besides  these,  also  they  make  even  the  operations 
bodies  and  animals,  saying  that  walking  is  an  animal,  as 
also  dancing,  supposing,  saluting,  and  railing.  The  con- 
sequence of  this  is  that  laughing  and  weeping  are  also 
animals ; and  if  so,  then  also  are  coughing,  sneezing, 
groaning,  spitting,  blowing  the  nose,  and  other  such  like 


424 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


things  sufficiently  known.  Neither  have  they  any  cause  to 
take  it  ill  that  they  are  by  reason,  proceeding  leisurely,  re- 
duced to  this,  if  they  shall  call  to  mind  how  Chrysippus, 
in  his  First  Book  of  Natural  Questions,  argues  thus : 
“ Is  not  night  a body  \ And  are  not  then  the  evening, 
dawning,  and  midnight  bodies  1 Or  is  not  a day  a body  ? 
Is  not  then  the  first  day  of  the  month  a body  \ And  the 
tenth,  the  fifteenth,  and  the  thirtieth,  are  they  not  bodies  ? 
Is  not  a month  a body  \ Summer,  autumn,  and  the  year,  are 
they  not  bodies  \ ” 

46.  These  things  they  hold  against  the  common  concep- 
tions ; but  those  which  follow  they  hold  also  against  their 
own,  engendering  that  which  is  most  hot  by  refrigeration, 
and  that  which  is  most  subtile  by  condensation.  For  the 
soul,  to  wit,  is  a substance  most  hot  and  most  subtile.  But 
this  they  make  by  the  refrigeration  and  condensation  of  the 
body,  changing,  as  it  were,  by  induration  the  spirit,  which 
of  vegetative  is  made  animal.  Moreover,  they  say  that  the 
sun  became  animated,  his  moisture  changing  into  intel- 
lectual fire.  Behold  how  the  sun  is  imagined  to  be  engen- 
dered by  refrigeration  ! Xenophanes  indeed,  when  one 
told  him  that  he  had  seen  eels  living  in  hot  water,  answered, 
We  will  boil  them  then  in  cold.  But  if  these  men  engen- 
der heat  by  refrigeration  and  lightness  by  condensation,  it 
follows,  they  must  also  generate  cold  things  by  heat,  thick 
things  by  dissolution,  and  heavy  things  by  rarefaction,  that 
so  they  may  keep  some  proportion  in  their  absurdity. 

47.  And  do  they  not  also  determine  the  substance  and 
generation  of  conception  itself,  even  against  the  common 
conceptions'?  For  conception  is  a certain  imagination,  and 
imagination  an  impression  in  the  soul.  Now  the  nature 
of  the  soul  is  an  exhalation,  in  which  it  is  difficult  for  an 
impression  to  be  made  because  of  its  tenuity,  and  for  which 
it  is  impossible  to  keep  an  impression  it  may  have  received. 
For  its  nutriment  and  generation,  consisting  of  moist  things, 


AGAINST  TIIE  STOICS. 


425 


have  continual  accession  and  consumption.  And  the  mixt- 
ure of  respiration  with  the  air  always  makes  some  new 
exhalation,  which  is  altered  and  changed  by  the  flax  of  the 
air  coming  from  abroad  and  again  going  out.  For  one  may 
more  easily  imagine  that  a stream  of  running  water  can 
retain  figures,  impressions,  and  images,  than  that  a spirit  can 
be  carried  in  vapors  and  humors,  and  continually  mingled 
with  another  idle  and  strange  breath  from  without.  But 
these  men  so  far  forget  themselves,  that,  having  defined  the 
conceptions  to  be  certain  stored-up  intelligences,  and  me- 
moirs to  be  constant  and  habitual  impressions,  and  having 
wholly  fixed  the  sciences,  as  having  stability  and  firmness, 
they  presently  place  under  them  a basis  and  seat  of  a slip- 
pery substance,  easy  to  be  dissipated  and  in  perpetual  flux 
and  motion. 

48.  Now  the  common  conception  of  an  element  and 
principle,  naturally  imprinted  in  almost  all  men,  is  this, 
that  it  is  simple,  unmixed,  and  uncompounded.  For  that 
is  not  an  element  or  principle  which  is  mixed ; but  those 
things  are  so  of  which  it  is  mixed.  But  these  men, 
making  God,  who  is  the  principle  of  all  things,  to  be  an 
intellectual  body  and  a mind  seated  in  matter,  pronounce 
him  to  be  neither  simple  nor  uncompounded,  but  to  be 
composed  of  and  by  another ; matter  being  of  itself  indeed 
without  reason  and  void  of  quality,  and  yet  having  sim- 
plicity and  the  property  of  a principle.  If  then  God  is 
not  incorporeal  and  immaterial,  he  participates  of  matter  as 
a principle.  For  if  matter  and  reason  are  one  and  the  same 
thing,  they  have  not  rightly  defined  matter  to  be  reasonless  ; 
but  if  they  are  different  things,  then  is  God  constituted  of 
them  both,  and  is  not  a simple,  but  compound  thing,  hav- 
ing to  the  intellectual  taken  the  corporeal  from  matter. 

49.  Moreover,  calling  these  four  bodies,  earth,  water,  air, 
and  fire,  the  first  elements,  they  do  (I  know  not  how)  make 
some  of  them  simple  and  pure,  and  others  compound  and 


426 


OF  COMMON  CONCEPTIONS, 


mixed.  For  they  hold  that  earth  and  water  keep  together 
neither  themselves  nor  other  things,  but  preserve  their 
unity  by  the  participation  of  air  and  force  of  fire  ; but  that 
air  and  fire  do  both  fortify  themselves  by  their  own  strength, 
or  being  mixed  with  the  other  two,  give  them  force, 
permanence,  and  subsistence.  How  then  is  either  earth 
or  water  an  element,  if  neither  of  them  is  either  simple, 
or  first,  or  self-sufficient,  but  if  each  wants  somewhat  from 
without  to  contain  and  keep  it  in  its  being'?  For  they 
have  not  left  so  much  as  a thought  of  their  substance  ; but 
this  discourse  concerning  the  earth  has  much  confusion  and 
uncertainty,  when  they  say  that  it  subsists  of  itself ; for  if 
the  earth  is  of  itself,  how  has  it  need  of  the  air  to  fix  and 
contain  it  ? But  neither  the  earth  nor  water  can  any  more 
be  said  to  be  of  itself ; but  the  air,  drawing  together  and 
thickening  the  matter,  has  made  the  earth,  and  again  dis- 
solving and  mollifying  it,  has  produced  the  water.  Neither 
of  these  then  is  an  element,  since  something  else  has  con- 
tributed being  and  generation  to  them  both. 

50.  Moreover,  they  say  that  subsistence  and  matter  are 
subject  to  qualities,  and  do  so  in  a manner  define  them ; 
and  again,  they  make  the  qualities  to  be  also  bodies.  But 
these  things  have  much  perplexity.  For  if  qualities  have 
a peculiar  substance,  for  which  they  both  are  and  are  called 
bodies,  they  need  no  other  substance  ; for  they  have  one 
of  their  own.  But  if  they  have  under  them  in  common 
only  that  which  the  Stoics  call  essence  and  matter,  it  is 
manifest  they  do  but  participate  of  the  body ; for  they  are 
not  bodies.  But  the  subject  and  recipient  must  of  neces- 
sity differ  from  those  things  which  it  receives  and  to  which 
it  is  subject.  But  these  men  see  by  halves ; for  they  say 
indeed  that  matter  is  void  of  quality,  but  they  will  not  call 
qualities  immaterial.  Now  how  can  they  make  a body 
without  quality,  who  understand  no  quality  without  a 
body?  For  the  reason  which  joins  a body  to  all  quality 


AGAINST  THE  STOICS. 


427 


suffers  not  the  understanding  to  comprehend  any  body  with- 
out some  quality.  Either,  therefore,  he  who  oppugns  in- 
corporeal quality  seems  also  to  oppugn  unqualified  matter  ; 
or  separating  the  one  from  the  other,  he  mutually  parts 
them  both.  As  for  the  reason  which  some  pretend,  that 
matter  is  called  unqualified  not  because  it  is  void  of  all 
quality,  but  because  it  has  all  qualities,  it  is  most  of  all 
against  sense.  For  no  man  calls  that  unqualified  which  is 
capable  of  every  quality,  nor  that  impassible  which  is  by 
nature  always  apt  to  suffer  all  things,  nor  that  immovable 
which  is  moved  every  way.  And  this  doubt  is  not  solved, 
that,  however  matter  is  always  understood  with  quality,  yet 
it  is  understood  to  be  another  thing  and  differing  from 
quality. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


1.  I first  lay  this  down  for  an  axiom,  that  there  ought 
to  be  seen  in  men’s  lives  an  agreement  with  their  doctrines. 
For  it  is  not  so  necessary  that  the  pleader  (as  Aeschines 
has  it)  and  the  law  speak  one  and  the  same  thing,  as  that 
the  life  of  a philosopher  be  consonant  to  his  speech.  For 
the  speech  of  a philosopher  is  a law  of  his  own  and  vol- 
untarily imposed  on  himself,  unless  they  esteem  philosophy 
to  be  a game,  or  an  acuteness  in  disputing  invented  for  the 
gaining  of  applause,  and  not  — what  it  really  is  — a thing 
deserving  our  greatest  study. 

2.  Since  then  there  are  in  their  discourses  many  things 
written  by  Zeno  himself,  many  by  Cleanthes,  and  most  of 
all  by  Chrysippus,  concerning  policy,  governing,  and  being 
governed,  concerning  judging  and  pleading,  and  yet  there 
is  not  to  be  found  in  any  of  their  lives  either  leading  of 
armies,  making  of  laws,  going  to  parliament,  pleading  be- 
fore the  judges,  fighting  for  their  country,  travelling  on 
embassies,  or  bestowing  of  public  gifts,  but  they  have  all, 
feeding  (if  I may  so  say)  on  rest  as  on  the  lotus,  led  their 
whole  lives,  and  those  not  short  but  very  long  ones,  in 
foreign  countries,  amongst  disputations,  books,  and  walk- 
ings ; it  is  manifest  that  they  have  lived  rather  according 
to  the  writings  and  sayings  of  others  than  their  own  pro- 
fessions, having  spent  all  their  days  in  that  repose  which 
Epicurus  and  Hieronymus  so  much  commend. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


429 


Chrysippus  indeed  himself,  in  his  Fourth  Book  of  Lives, 
thinks  there  is  no  difference  between  a scholastic  life  and 
a voluptuous  one.  I will  set  down  here  his  very  words : 
“ They  who  are  of  opinion  that  a scholastic  life  is  from 
the  very  beginning  most  suitable  to  philosophers  seem  to 
me  to  be  in  an  error,  thinking  that  men  ought  to  follow 
this  for  the  sake  of  some  recreation  or  some  other  thing 
like  to  it,  and  in  that  manner  to  spin  out  the  whole  course 
of  their  life  ; that  is,  if  it  may  be  explained,  to  live  at 
ease.  For  this  opinion  of  theirs  is  not  to  be  concealed, 
many  of  them  delivering  it  clearly,  and  not  a few  more 
obscurely.”  Who  therefore  did  more  grow  old  in  this 
scholastic  life  than  Chrysippus,  Cleantlies,  Diogenes,  Zeno, 
and  Antipater,  who  left  their  countries  not  out  of  any  dis- 
content, but  that  they  might  quietly  enjoy  their  delight, 
studying,  and  disputing  at  their  leisure.  To  verify  which, 
Aristocreon,  the  disciple  and  intimate  friend  of  Chrysippus, 
having  erected  his  statue  of  brass  upon  a pillar,  engraved 
on  it  these  verses  : 

This  brazen  statue  Aristocreon 

To’s  friend  Chrysippus  newly  here  has  put, 

Whose  sharp-edged  wit,  like  sword  of  champion, 

Did  Academic  knots  in  sunder  cut. 

Such  a one  then  was  Chrysippus,  an  old  man,  a philoso- 
pher, one  who  praised  the  regal  and  civil  life,  and  thought 
there  was  no  difference  between  a scholastic  and  volup- 
tuous one. 

3.  Bnt  those  others  of  them  who  intermeddle  in  state 
affairs  act  yet  more  contradictorily  to  their  own  doctrines. 
For  they  govern,  judge,  consult,  make  laws,  punish,  and 
honor,  as  if  those  were  indeed  cities  in  the  government  of 
which  they  concern  themselves,  those  truly  counsellors  and 
judges  who  are  at  any  time  allotted  to  such  offices,  those 
generals  who  are  chosen  by  suffrages,  and  those  laws  which 
were  made  by  Clisthenes,  Lycurgus,  and  Solon,  whom  they 


430 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


affirm  to  have  been  vicious  men  and  fools.  Thus  even  in 
the  management  of  state  affairs  are  they  at  war  with  them- 
selves. 

4.  Indeed  Antipater,  in  his  writings  concerning  the 
difference  between  Cleanthes  and  Chrysippus,  has  related 
that  Zeno  and  Cleanthes  would  not  be  made  citizens  of 
Athens,  lest  they  might  seem  to  injure  their  own  countries. 
I shall  not  much  insist  upon  it,  that,  if  they  did  well, 
Chrysippus  acted  amiss  in  suffering  himself  to  be  enrolled 
as  a member  of  that  city.  But  this  is  very  contradictory 
and  absurd,  that,  removing  their  persons  and  their  lives  so 
far  off  amongst  strangers,  they  reserved  their  names  for 
their  countries ; which  is  the  same  thing  as  if  a man, 
leaving  his  wife,  and  cohabiting  and  bedding  with  another, 
and  getting  children  on  her,  should  yet  refuse  to  contract 
marriage  with  the  second,  lest  he  might  seem  to  wrong  the 
former. 

5.  Again,  Chrysippus,  writing  in  his  treatise  of  Rhetoric, 
that  a Avise  man  will  so  plead  and  so  act  in  the  management 
of  a commonwealth,  as  if  riches,  glory,  and  health  were 
really  good,  confesses  that  his  speeches  are  inextricable 
and  impolitic,  and  his  doctrines  unsuitable  for  the  uses  and 
actions  of  human  life. 

6.  It  is  moreover  a doctrine  of  Zeno’s,  that  temples  are 
not  to  be  built  to  the  Gods ; for  that  a temple  is  neither  a 
thing  of  much  value  nor  holy  ; since  no  work  of  carpenters 
and  handicrafts-men  can  be  of  much  value.  And  yet  they 
who  praise  these  things  as  well  and  Avisely  said  are  initiated 
in  the  sacred  mysteries,  go  up  to  the  Citadel  (Avhere  Mi- 
ner A^a’s  temple  stands),  adore  the  shrines,  and  adorn  with 
garlands  the  sacraries,  being  the  Avorks  of  carpenters  and 
mechanical  persons.  Again,  they  think  that  the  Epicu- 
reans, Avho  sacrifice  to  the  Gods  and  yet  deny  them  to 
meddle  Avith  the  government  of  the  Avorld,  do  thereby  re- 
fute themselves ; Avhereas  they  themselves  are  more  con- 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


431 


trary  to  themselves,  sacrificing  on  altars  and  in  temples, 
which  they  affirm  ought  not  to  stand  nor  to  have  been 
built. 

7.  Moreover,  Zeno  admits  (as  Plato  does)  several  virtues 
with  various  distinctions  — to  wit,  prudence,  fortitude, 
temperance  and  justice  — as  being  indeed  inseparable, 
but  yet  divers  and  different  from  one  another.  But  again, 
defining  every  one  of  them,  he  says  that  fortitude  is  pru- 
dence in  executing,  justice  prudence  in  distributing,  as 
being  one  and  the  same  virtue,  but  seeming  to  differ  in  its 
relation  to  various  affairs  when  it  comes  to  action.  Nor 
does  Zeno  alone  seem  to  contradict  himself  in  these  mat- 
ters ; but  Chrysippus  also,  who  blames  Ariston  for  saying 
that  the  other  virtues  are  different  habits  of  one  and  the 
same  virtue,  and  yet  defends  Zeno,  who  in  this  manner 
defines  every  one  of  the  virtues.  And  Cleanthes,  having 
in  his  Commentaries  concerning  Nature  said,  that  vigor  is 
the  striking  of  fire,  which,  if  it  is  sufficient  in  the  soul  to 
perform  the  duties  presented  to  it,  is  called  force  and 
strength  ; subjoins  these  very  words  : “ Now  this  force  and 
strength,  when  it  is  in  things  apparent  and  to  be  persisted 
in,  is  continence ; when  in  things  to  be  endured,  it  is  for- 
titude ; when  about  worthiness,  it  is  justice ; and  when 
about  choosing  or  refusing,  it  is  temperance.” 

8.  Against  him,  who  said, 

Give  not  thy  judgment  till  both  sides  are  heard,* 

Zeno  on  the  contrary  made  use  of  such  an  argument  as 
this : “ If  he  who  spake  first  has  plainly  proved  his  cause, 
the  second  is  not  to  be  heard,  for  the  question  is  at  an  end ; 
and  if  he  has  not  proved  it,  it  is  the  same  case  as  if  being 
cited  he  did  not  appear,  or  appearing  did  nothing  but 
wrangle  ; so  that,  whether  he  has  proved  or  not  proved  his 
cause,  the  second  is  not  to  be  heard.”  And  yet  he  who 

* In  the  Pseudo-Phocylidea,  vs.  87  (Bergk). 


432 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


made  this  dilemma  has  written  against  Plato’s  Common- 
weal, dissolved  sophisms,  and  exhorted  his  scholars  to 
learn  logic,  as  enabling  them  to  do  the  same.  Now  Plato 
has  either  proved  or  not  proved  those  things  which  he  writ 
in  his  Commonweal ; but  in  neither  case  was  it  necessary 
to  write  against  him,  but  wholly  superfluous  and  vain. 
The  same  may  be  said  concerning  sophisms. 

9.  Chrysippus  is  of  opinion,  that  young  students  should 
first  learn  logic,  secondly,  ethics,  and  after  these,  physics, 
and  likewise  in  this  to  meddle  last  of  all  with  the  disputes 
concerning  the  Gods.  Now  these  things  having  been  often 
said  by  him,  it  will  suffice  to  set  down  what  is  found  in  his 
Fourth  Book  of  Lives,  being  thus  word  for  word  : “ First 
then,  it  seems  to  me,  according  as  it  has  been  rightly  said 
by  the  ancients,  that  there  are  three  kinds  of  philosophical 
speculations,  logical,  ethical,  and  physical,  and  that  of  these, 
the  logical  ought  to  be  placed  first,  the  ethical  second,  and 
the  physical  third,  and  that  of  the  physical,  the  discourse 
concerning  the  Gods  ought  to  be  the  last ; wherefore  also 
the  traditions  concerning  this  have  been  styled  Tshtai,  or  the 
Endings .”  But  that  very  discourse  concerning  the  Gods, 
which  he  says  ought  to  be  placed  the  last,  he  usually  places 
first  and  sets  before  every  moral  question.  For  he  is  seen 
not  to  say  any  thing  either  concerning  the  ends,  or  con- 
cerning justice,  or  concerning  good  and  evil,  or  concerning 
marriage  and  the  education  of  children,  or  concerning  the 
law  and  the  commonwealth ; but,  as  those  who  propose 
decrees  to  states  set  before  them  the  words  To  Good 
Fortune,  so  he  also  premises  something  of  Jupiter,  Fate, 
Providence,  and  of  the  world’s  being  one  and  finite  and 
maintained  by  one  power.  None  of  which  any  one  can 
be  persuaded  to  believe,  who  has  not  penetrated  deeply 
into  the  discourses  of  natural  philosophy.  Hear  what  he 
says  of  this  in  his  Third  Book  of  the  Gods : “ For  there  is 
not  to  be  found  any  other  beginning  or  any  other  genera- 


i 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


433 


tion  of  Justice,  but  what  is  from  Jupiter  and  common 
Nature.  From  thence  must  every  such  thing  have  its  be- 
ginning, if  we  will  say  any  thing  concerning  good  and  evil.” 
And  again,  in  his  Natural  Positions  he  says:  “For  one 
cannot  otherwise  or  more  properly  come  to  the  discourse 
of  good  and  evil,  to  the  virtues,  or  to  felicity,  than  from 
common  Nature  and  the  administration  of  the  world.”  And 
going  farther  on,  he  adds:  “For  to  these  we  must  annex 
the  discourse  concerning  good  and  evil,  there  being  no 
other  better  beginning  or  relation  thereof,  and  the  specula- 
tion of  Nature  being  learned  for  nothing  else,  but  to  under- 
stand the  difference  between  good  and  evil.”  According 
to  Chrysippus,  therefore,  the  natural  science  is  both  before 
and  after  the  moral ; or  rather,  it  is  an  inversion  of  order 
altogether  absurd,  if  this  must  be  put  after  those  things 
none  of  which  can  be  comprehended  without  this  ; and  his 
contradicting  himself  is  manifest,  when  he  asserts  the  dis- 
course of  Nature  to  be  the  beginning  of  that  concerning 
good  and  evil,  and  yet  commands  it  to  be  delivered,  not 
before,  but  after  it. 

Now,  if  any  one  shall  say  that  Chrysippus  in  his  book 
concerning  the  Use  of  Speech  has  written,  that  he  who 
applies  himself  to  logic  first  needs  not  absolutely  to  abstain 
from  the  rest,  but  should  take  as  much  of  them  as  shall 
fall  in  his  way,  he  will  indeed  say  the  truth,  but  will  withal 
confirm  the  fault.  For  he  oppugns  himself,  one  while 
commanding  that  the  science  concerning  God  should  be 
taken  last  and  for  a conclusion,  as  being  therefore  also 
called  TeIhxt},  and  again,  another  while  saying  that  this  is  to 
be  learned  together  with  the  very  first.  For  order  is  at  an 
end,  if  all  things  must  be  used  at  all  times.  But  this  is 
more,  that  having  made  the  science  concerning  the  Gods 
the  beginning  of  that  concerning  good  and  evil,  he  bids  not 
those  who  apply  themselves  to  the  ethics  to  begin  with 

that ; but  learning  these,  to  take  of  that  also  as  it  shall 

28 


VOL.  IV 


434 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


come  in  tlieir  way,  and  then  to  go  from  these  to  that,  with- 
out which,  he  says,  there  is  no  beginning  or  entrance  upon 
these. 

10.  As  for  disputing  on  both  sides,  he  says,  that  he  does 
not  universally  reject  it,  but  exhorts  us  to  use  it  with  cau- 
tion, as  is  done  in  pleadings,  not  with  a design  really  to 
disprove,  but  to  dissolve  their  probability.  “ For  to  those,” 
says  he,  “ who  endeavor  a suspension  of  assent  concerning 
all  things,  it  is  convenient  to  do  this,  and  it  co-operates  to 
what  they  desire ; but  as  for  those  who  would  work  and 
establish  in  us  a certain  science  according  to  which  we 
shall  professedly  live,  they  ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  state 
the  first  principles,  and  to  direct  their  novices  who  are  en- 
tered from  the  beginning  to  the  end ; and  where  there  is 
occasion  to  make  mention  of  contrary  discourses,  to  dissolve 
their  probability,  as  is  done  in  pleadings.”  For  this  he 
hath  said  in  express  words.  Now  that  it  is  absurd  for  phi- 
losophers to  think  that  they  ought  to  set  down  the  contrary 
opinion,  not  with  all  its  reasons,  but  like  pleaders,  disabling 
it,  as  if  they  contended  not  for  truth  but  victory,  we  have 
elsewhere  spoken  against  him.  But  that  he  himself  has, 
not  here  and  there  in  his  disputations,  but  frequently,  con- 
firmed. the  discourses  which  are  contrary  to  his  own  opin- 
ions, — and  that  stoutly,  and  with  so  much  earnestness  and 
contention  that  it  was  not  for  every  one  to  understand  what 
he  liked,  — the  Stoics  themselves  affirm,  who  admire  the 
man’s  acuteness,  and  think  that  Carneades  said  nothing  of 
his  own,  but  that  catching  hold  of  those  arguments  which 
Chrysippus  alleged  for  the  contrary  opinion,  he  assaulted 
with  them  his  positions,  and  often  cried  out, 

Wretch,  thy  own  strength  will  thee  undo,* 

as  if  Chrysippus  had  given  great  advantages  against  him- 
self to  those  who  would  disturb  and  calumniate  his  doc- 
trines. 


* II.  VI.  407. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


435 


But  of  tliose  things  which  he  has  written  against  custom 
they  are  so  proud  and  boasting,  that  they  fear  not  to  affirm, 
that  all  the  sayings  of  all  the  Academics  together,  if  they 
were  collected  into  one  body,  are  not  comparable  to  what 
Chrysippus  has  writ  in  disparagement  of  the  senses.  Which 
is  an  evident  sign  of  the  ignorance  or  self-love  of  the 
speakers ; but  this  indeed  is  true,  that  being  afterwards 
desirous  to  defend  custom  and  the  senses,  he  was  inferior 
to  himself,  and  the  latter  treatise  was  much  weaker  than 
the  former.  So  that  he  contradicts  himself;  for  having 
always  directed  the  proposing  of  an  adversary’s  opinions 
not  with  approbation,  but  with  a demonstration  of  their 
falsity,  he  has  showed  himself  more  acute  in  opposing  than 
defending  his  own  doctrines ; and  having  admonished  others 
to  take  heed  of  contrary  arguments,  as  withdrawing  com- 
prehension, he  has  been  more  sedulous  in  framing  such 
proofs  as  take  away  comprehension,  than  such  as  confirm 
it.  And  yet  he  plainly  shows  that  he  himself  feared  this, 
writing  thus  in  his  Fourth  Book  of  Lives : “ Repugnant 
arguments  and  probabilities  on  the  contrary  side  are  not 
rashly  to  be  proposed,  but  with  caution,  lest  the  hearers 
distracted  by  them  should  let  go  their  conceptions,  not  be- 
ing able  sufficiently  to  apprehend  the  solutions,  but  so 
weakly  that  their  comprehensions  may  easily  be  shaken. 
For  even  those  who  have,  according  to  custom,  preconceived 
both  sensible  objects  and  other  things  depending  on  the 
senses  quickly  forego  them,  being  distracted  by  Megarian 
interrogatories  and  by  others  more  numerous  and  forcible.” 
I would  willingly  therefore  ask  the  Stoics,  whether  they 
think  these  Megarian  interrogatories  to  be  more  forcible 
than  those  which  Chrysippus  has  written  in  six  books 
against  custom ; or  rather  this  should  be  asked  of  Chry- 
sippus himself.  For  observe  what  he  has  written  about 
the  Megarian  reason,  in  his  book  concerning  the  Use  of 
Speech,  thus : “ Some  such  things  fell  out  in  the  discourse 


436 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


of  Stilpo  and  Menedemus  ; for,  whereas  they  were  renowned 
for  wisdom,  their  disputing  has  turned  to  their  reproach, 
their  arguments  being  part  clumsy,  and  the  rest  violently 
sophistical.”  And  yet,  good  sir,  you  fear  lest  those  argu- 
ments which  you  deride  and  term  the  disgrace  of  their 
proposers,  as  having  a manifest  faultiness,  should  divert 
some  from  comprehension.  And  did  not  you  yourself, 
writing  so  many  books  against  custom,  in  which  you  have 
added  whatever  you  could  invent,  ambitiously  striving  to 
exceed  Arcesilaus,  expect  that  you  should  perplex  some  of 
your  readers'?  For  neither  does  he  use  slender  arguments 
against  custom ; but  as  if  he  were  pleading,  he  with  some 
passion  in  himself  stirs  up  the  affections  of  others,  telling 
his  opponent  that  he  talks  foolishly  and  labors  in  vain. 
And  that  he  may  leave  no  room  to  deny  his  speaking  of 
contradictions,  he  has  in  his  Natural  Positions  written  thus : 
“ It  may  be  lawful  for  those  who  comprehend  a thing  to 
argue  on  the  contrary  side,  applying  to  it  that  defence 
which  the  matter  itself  affords  ; and  sometimes,  when  they 
comprehend  neither,  to  discourse  what  is  alleged  for  either.” 
And  having  said  in  his  book  concerning  the  Use  of  Speech, 
that  we  ought  no  more  to  use  the  force  of  reason  than  of 
arms  for  such  things  as  are  not  fitting,  he  subjoins  this : 
“ For  they  are  to  be  employed  for  the  finding  out  of  truths 
and  for  the  alliance  of  them,  and  not  for  the  contrary, 
though  many  men  do  it.”  By  “ many  ” perhaps  he  means 
those  who  withhold  their  assent.  But  these  philosophers, 
comprehending  neither,  argue  on  both  sides,  believing  that, 
if  any  thing  is  comprehensible,  thus  only  or  chiefly  does 
truth  afford  a comprehension  of  itself.  But  you,  who  ac- 
cuse them,  and  do  yourself  write  contrary  to  those  things 
which  you  comprehend  concerning  custom,  and  exhort 
others  with  assurance  to  do  the  same,  confess  that  you 
wantonly  use  the  faculty  of  disputing,  out  of  vain  ambition, 
even  on  unprofitable  and  hurtful  things. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


437 


11.  They- say,  that  a good  deed  is  the  command,  and  sin 
the  prohibition  of  the  law ; and  therefore  that  the  law  , 
forbids  the  wicked  many  things,  but  commands  them  noth- 
ing, because  they  cannot  do  a good  deed.  But  who  is 
ignorant  that  he  who  cannot  do  a good  deed  cannot  also 
sin?  Therefore  they  make  the  law  to  contradict  itself, 
commanding  men  those  things  which  they  cannot  perform, 
and  forbidding  them  those  things  from  which  they  cannot 
abstain.  For  a man  who  cannot  be  temperate  cannot  but 
act  intemperately ; and  he  who  cannot  be  wise  cannot  but 
act  foolishly.  And  they  themselves  affirm,  that  those  who 
forbid  say  one  thing,  forbid  another,  and  command  another. 
For  he  who  says  “Thou  shalt  not  steal”  at  the  same  time 
that  he  says  these  words,  “ Thou  shalt  not  steal,”  forbids  also 
to  steal,  and  commands  not  to  steal.  The  law  therefore 
forbids  the  wicked  nothing,  unless  it  also  commands  them 
something.  And  they  say,  that  the  physician  bids  his  dis- 
ciple to  cut  and  cauterize,  omitting  to  add  these  words, 

“ seasonably  and  moderately  ; ” and  the  musician  commands 
his  scholar  to  play  on  the  harp  and  sing,  omitting  “ tun- 
ably  ” and  “ keeping  time.”  Wherefore  also  they  punish 
those  who  do  these  things  unskilfully  and  faultily ; for 
that  they  were  commanded  to  do  them  well,  and  they  have 
done  them  ill.  If  therefore  a wise  man  commands  his 
servant  to  say  or  do  something,  and  punishes  him  for  doing 
it  unseasonably  or  not  as  he  ought,  is  it  not  manifest  that 
he  commanded  him  to  do  a good  action  and  not  an  indif- 
ferent one  ? But  if  wise  men  command  wicked  ones  in- 
different things,  what  hinders  but  the  commands  of  the 
law  may  be  also  such?  Moreover,  the  impulse  (called 
oefii])  is,  according  to  him,  the  reason  of  a man  command- 
ing him  to  do  something,  as  he  has  written  in  his  book  of 
the  law.  Is  not  therefore  also  the  aversion  (called  ’acpooiuj) 
a prohibiting  reason,  and  a disinclination  a disinclination 
agreeable  to  reason?  Caution  therefore  is  also  reason 


438 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OE  THE  STOICS. 


prohibiting  a wise  man ; for  to  be  cautious  is  proper  only 
to  the  wise,  and  not  to  the  wicked.  If  then  the  reason  of 
a wise  man  is  one  thing  and  the  law  another,  wise  men 
have  caution  contrary  to  the  law  ; but  if  the  law  is  nothing 
else  but  the  reason  of  a wise  man,  the  law  is  found  to  for- 
bid wise  men  the  doing  of  those  things  of  which  they  are 
cautious. 

12.  Chrysippus  says,  that  nothing  is  profitable  to  the 
wdcked,  that  the  wicked  have  neither  use  nor  need  of  any 
thing.  Having  said  this  in  his  First  Book  of  Good  Deeds, 
he  says  again,  that  both  commodiousness  and  grace  pertain 
to  mean  or  indifferent  things,  none  of  which,  according  to 
them,  is  profitable.  In  the  same  place  he  affirms,  that 
there  is  nothing  proper,  nothing  convenient  for  a vicious 
man,  in  these  words : “ On  the  same  principle  we  declare 
that  there  is  nothing  foreign  or  strange  to  the  good  man, 
and  nothing  proper  or  rightfully  belonging  to  the  bad 
man,  since  the  one  is  good  and  the  other  bad.”  Why 
then  does  he  break  our  heads,  writing  particularly  in  every 
one  of  his  books,  as  well  natural  as  moral,  that  as  soon  as 
we  are  born,  we  are  appropriated  to  ourselves,  our  parts, 
and  our  offspring  1 And  why  in  his  First  Book  of  Justice 
does  he  say  that  the  very  brutes,  proportionably  to  the 
necessity  of  their  young,  are  appropriated  to  them,  except 
fishes,  whose  young  are  nourished  by  themselves'?  For 
neither  have  they  sense  who  have  nothing  sensible,  nor 
they  appropriation  who  have  nothing  proper ; for  appro- 
priation seems  to  be  the  sense  and  perception  of  what  is 
proper. 

13.  And  this  opinion  is  consequent  to  their  principal 
ones.  It  is  moreover  manifest  that  Chrysippus,  though  he 
has  also  written  many  things  to  the  contrary,  lays  this  for 
a position,  that  there  is  not  any  vice  greater  or  any  sin 
more  grievous  than  another,  nor  any  virtue  more  excellent 
or  any  good  deed  better  than  another ; so  that  he  says  in 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


439 


liis  Third  Book  of  Nature : “ As  it  well  beseems  Jupiter  to 
glory  in  himself  and  his  life,  to  magnify  himself,  and  (if 
we  may  so  say)  to  bear  up  his  head,  have  an  high  conceit 
of  himself,  and  speak  big,  for  that  he  leads  a life  worthy 
of  lofty  speech ; so  the  same  things  do  not  misbeseem  all 
good  men,  since  they  are  in  nothing  exceeded  by  Jupiter.” 
And  yet  himself,  in  his  Third  Book  of  Justice,  says,  that 
they  who  make  pleasure  the  end  destroy  justice,  but  they 
who  say  it  is  only  a good  do  not  destroy  it.  These  are  his 
very  words : “For  perhaps,  if  we  leave  this  to  pleasure, 
that  it  is  a good  but  not  the  end,  and  that  honesty  is  one 
of  those  things  which  are  eligible  for  themselves,  we  may 
preserve  justice,  making  the  honest  and  the  just  a greater 
good  than  pleasure.”  But  if  that  only  is  good  which  is 
honest,  he  ivho  affirms  pleasure  to  be  a good  is  in  an  error, 
but  be  errs  less  than  he  who  makes  it  also  the  end ; for 
the  one  destroys  justice,  the  other  preserves  it;  and  by 
the  one  human  society  is  overthrown,  but  the  other  leaves 
a place  to  goodness  and  humanity.  Now  I let  pass  his 
saying  farther  in  his  book  concerning  Jupiter,  that  the 
virtues  increase  and  go  on,  lest  I may  seem  to  catch  at 
words ; though  Chrysippus  is  indeed  in  this  kind  very 
sharp  upon  Plato  and  others.  But  when  he  forbids  the 
praising  of  every  thing  that  is  done  according  to  virtue,  he 
shows  that  there  is  some  difference  between  good  deeds. 
Now  he  says  thus  in  his  book  concerning  Jupiter : “For 
since  each  virtue  has  its  own  proper  works,  there  are  some 
of  these  that  are  more  to  be  praised  than  others ; for  he 
would  show  himself  to  be  very  frigid,  that  should  under- 
take to  praise  and  extol  any  man  for  holding  out  the  finger 
stoutly,  for  abstaining  chastely  from  an  old  woman  ready 
to  drop  into  the  grave,  and  patiently  hearing  it  said  that 
three  are  not  exactly  four.”  What  he  says  in  his  Third 
Book  of  the  Gods  is  not  unlike  to  this : “ For  I moreover 
think  that  the  praises  of  such  things  as  to  abstain  from  an 


440 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


old  woman  who  has  one  foot  in  the  grave,  and  to  endure 
the  bite  of  a fly,  though  proceeding  from  virtue,  would  be 
very  impertinent.”  What  other  reprehender  of  his  doc- 
trines does  this  man  then  expect'?  For  if  he  who  praises 
such  things  is  frigid,  he  who  asserts  every  one  of  them  to 
be  a great  — nay,  a very  great  good  deed  — is  much  more 
frigid.  For  if  to  bear  the  bite  of  a fly  is  equal  to  the 
being  valiant,  and  to  abstain  from  an  old  trot  now  at  the 
pit’s  brink  is  equal  to  the  being  temperate,  there  is,  I 
think,  no  difference  whether  a virtuous  man  is  prized  for 
these  or  for  those.  Moreover,  in  his  Second  Book  of 
Friendship,  teaching  that  friendships  are  not  for  every 
fault  to  be  dissolved,  he  has  these  very  expressions  : “ For 
it  is  meet  that  some  faults  should  be  wholly  passed  by, 
others  lightly  reprehended,  others  more  severely,  and  others 
deemed  worthy  a total  dissolution  of  friendship.”  And 
which  is  more,  he  says  in  the  same  book,  that  we  will 
converse  with  some  more  and  some  less,  so  that  some  shall 
be  more  and  some  less  friends ; and  this  diversity  extend- 
ing very  far,  some  are  worthy  of  such  an  amity,  others  of 
a greater ; and  these  will  deserve  to  be  so  far  trusted, 
those  not  so  far,  and  the  like.  For  what  else  has  he  done 
in  these  places,  but  shown  the  great  diversity  there  is  be- 
tween these  things  ? Moreover,  in  his  book  concerning 
Honesty,  to  demonstrate  that  only  to  be  good  which  is 
honest,  he  uses  these  words : “ What  is  good  is  eligible ; 
what  is  eligible  is  acceptable ; what  is  acceptable  is  laud- 
able ; and  what  is  laudable  is  honest.”  And  again  : “ What 
is  good  is  joyous ; what  is  joyous  is  venerable ; what  is 
venerable  is  honest.”  But  these  speeches  are  repugnant 
to  himself ; for  either  all  good  is  commendable,  and  then 
the  abstaining  chastely  from  an  old  woman  is  also  com- 
mendable ; or  all  good  is  neither  venerable  nor  joyous, 
and  his  reason  falls  to  the  ground.  For  how  can  it 
possibly  be  frigid  in  others  to  praise  any  for  such 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OE  TIIE  STOICS. 


441 


tilings,  and  not  ridiculous  for  him  to  rejoice  and  glory 
in  them  1 

14.  Such  indeed  he  frequently  is  ; but  in  his  disputations 
against  others  he  takes  not  the  least  care  of  speaking 
things  contrary  and  dissonant  to  himself.  For  in  his  books 
of  Exhorting,  reprehending  Plato,  who  said,  that  to  him 
who  has  neither  learned  nor  knows  how  to  live  it  is  profit- 
able not  to  live,  he  speaks  in  this  manner:  “For  this 
speech  is  both  repugnant  to  itself,  and  not  at  all  persuasive. 
For  first  insinuating  that  it  is  best  for  us  not  to  live,  and  in 
a sort  counselling  us  to  die,  he  will  excite  us  rather  to  any 
thing  else  than  to  be  philosophers ; for  neither  can  he  who 
does  not  live  philosophize,  nor  he  who  shall  live  long 
wickedly  and  ignorantly  become  wise.”  And  going  on,  he 
says  that  it  is  convenient  for  the  wicked  also  to  continue 
in  life.  And  afterwards  thus,  word  for  word  : “ First,  as 
virtue,  barely  taken,  has  nothing  towards  our  living,  so 
neither  has  vice  any  thing  to  oblige  us  to  depart.”  Nor  is 
it  necessary  to  turn  over  other  books,  that  we  may  show 
Chrysippus’s  contradictoriness  to  himself ; but  in  these 
same,  he  sometimes  with  commendation  brings  forth  this 
saying  of  Antisthenes,  that  either  understanding  or  a 
halter  is  to  be  provided,  as  also  that  of  Tyrtaeus, 

Come  nigh  the  bounds  of  virtue  or  of  death. 

Now  what  else  will  this  show,  but  that  to  wicked  men 
and  fools  not  to  live  is  more  profitable  than  to  live  ? And 
sometimes  correcting  Theognis,  he  says,  that  the  poet  should 
not  have  written, 

From  poverty  to  fly ; — 

but  rather  thus, 

From  wickedness  to  fly,  into  the  deep 

Throw  thyself,  Cyrnus,  or  from  rocks  so  steep.* 

What  therefore  else  does  he  seem  to  do,  but  to  set  down 

* See  Theognis,  vs.  175. 


442 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


himself  those  things  and  doctrines  which,  when  others 
write  them,  he  expunges ; condemning,  indeed,  Plato  for 
showing  that  not  to  live  is  better  than  to  live  viciously  and 
ignorantly ; and  yet  counselling  Theognis  to  let  a man 
break  his  neck  or  throw  himself  into  the  sea,  that  he  may 
avoid  vice?  For  having  praised  Antisthenes  for  directing 
fools  to  an  halter,  he  again  blames  him,  saying  that  vice 
has  nothing  that  should  oblige  us  to  depart  out  of  life. 

15.  Moreover,  in  his  books  against  the  same  Plato,  con- 
cerning Justice,  he  immediately  at  the  very  beginning  leaps 
into  a discourse  touching  the  Gods,  and  says,  that  Cephalus 
did  not  rightly  avert  men  from  injustice  by  the  fear  of  the 
Gods,  and  that  his  doctrine  is  easily  misrepresented,  and 
that  it  affords  to  the  contrary  many  arguments  and  proba- 
bilities impugning  the  discourse  concerning  divine  punish- 
ments, as  nothing  differing  from  the  tales  of  Acco  and 
Alphito  (or  Paw-Head  and  Bloody-Bones),  with  which 
women  are  wont  to  frighten  little  children  from  their  un- 
lucky pranks.  Having  thus  traduced  Plato,  he  in  other 
places  again  praises  him,  and  often  alleges  this  saying  of 
Euripides : 

Howe’er  you  may  deride  it,  there’s  a Jove, 

With  other  Gods,  who  sees  men’s  woes  above. 

And  likewise,  in  his  First  Book  of  Justice  citing  these 
verses  of  Hesiod, 

Then  Jove  from  heaven  punishments  did  send, 

And  plague  and  famine  brought  them  to  their  end,* 

he  says,  the  Gods  do  these  things,  that  the  wicked  being 
punished,  others  admonished  by  these  examples  may  less 
dare  to  attempt  the  doing  of  such  things. 

Again,  in  his  book  of  Justice,  subjoining,  that  it  is  pos- 
sible for  those  who  make  pleasure  a good  but  not  the  end 
to  preserve  also  justice,  he  said  in  express  terms : “For 
perhaps  if  we  leave  this  to  pleasure,  that  it  is  a good  but 

* Works  and  Days,  242. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


443 


not  the  end,  and  that  honesty  is  one  of  those  things  which 
are  eligible  for  themselves,  we  may  preserve  justice,  making 
the  honest  and  the  just  a greater  good  than  pleasure.”  So 
much  he  says  in  this  place  concerning  pleasure.  But  in 
his  book  against  Plato,  accusing  him  for  seeming  to  make 
health  a good,  he  says,  that  not  only  justice,  but  also  mag- 
nanimity, temperance,  and  all  the  other  virtues  will  be 
taken  away,  if  we  make  pleasure,  health,  or  any  thing  else 
which  is  not  honest,  to  be  a good.  What  therefore  is  to  be 
said  for  Plato,  we  have  elsewhere  written  against  him. 
But  here  his  contradicting  himself  is  manifest,  when  he 
says  in  one  place,  that  if  a man  supposes  that  with  honesty 
pleasure  also  is  a good,  justice  is  preserved,  and  in  an- 
other, accuses  those  who  make  any  thing  besides  honesty 
to  be  a good  of  taking  away  all  the  virtues.  But  that  he 
may  not  leave  any  means  of  making  an  apology  for  his 
contradictions,  writing  against  Aristotle  concerning  justice, 
he  affirms  him  not  to  have  spoken  rightly  when  he  said, 
that  pleasure  being  made  the  end,  justice  is  taken  away, 
and  together  with  justice,  every  one  also  of  the  other 
virtues.  For  justice  (he  says)  will  indeed  be  taken  away  ; 
but  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  the  other  virtues  from  re- 
maining and  being,  though  not  eligible  for  themselves,  yet 
good  and  virtues.  Then  he  reckons  up  every  one  of  them 
by  name.  But  it  will  be  better  to  set  down  his  own  words. 
“ For  pleasure,”  says  he,  “ appearing  according  to  this  dis- 
course to  be  made  the  end,  yet  all  this  seems  not  to  me  to 
be  contained  in  it.  Wherefore  we  must  say,  that  neither 
any  of  the  virtues  is  eligible  nor  any  of  the  vices  to  be 
avoided  for  itself,  but  that  all  these  things  are  to  be  re- 
ferred to  the  proposed  scope.  Yet  nothing,  according  to 
their  opinion,  will  hinder  but  that  fortitude,  prudence,  con- 
tinence, and  patience  may  be  good,  and  their  contraries  to 
be  avoided.”  Has  there  ever  then  been  any  man  more 
peevish  in  his  disputes  than  he,  who  has  blamed  two  of 


444 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


the  principal  philosophers,  the  one  for  taking  away  all 
virtue,  by  not  making  that  only  to  be  good  which  is  honest, 
and  the  other  for  not  thinking  all  the  virtues  except  justice 
to  be  preserved,  though  pleasure  is  made  the  end]  For  it 
is  a wonderful  licentiousness  that,  discoursing  of  the  same 
matters,  he  should  when  accusing  Plato  take  away  again 
those  very  things  which  himself  sets  down  when  repre- 
hending Aristotle.  Moreover,  in  his  demonstrations  con- 
cerning justice,  he  says  expressly,  that  every  good  deed  is 
both  a lawful  action  and  a just  operation ; but  that  every 
thing  which  is  done  according  to  continence,  patience,  pru- 
dence, or  fortitude  is  a good  deed,  and  therefore  also  a just 
operation.  Why  then  does  he  not  also  leave  justice  to 
them  to  whom  he  leaves  prudence,  fortitude,  and  conti- 
nence ; since  whatever  they  do  well  according  to  the  said 
virtue,  they  do  also  justly? 

16.  Moreover,  Plato  having  said,  that  injustice,  as  being 
the  corruption  and  sedition  of  the  soul,  loses  not  its  power 
even  in  those  who  have  it  within  them,  but  sets  the  wicked 
man  against  himself,  and  molests  and  disturbs  him ; Chry- 
sippus,  blaming  this,  affirms  that  it  is  absurdly  said,  “ A 
man  injures  himself ; ” for  that  injustice  is  to  another,  and 
not  to  one’s  self.  But  forgetting  this,  he  again  says,  in 
his  demonstrations  concerning  justice,  that  the  unjust  man 
is.  injured  by  himself  and  injures  himself  when  he  injures 
another,  becoming  to  himself  the  cause  of  transgressing, 
and  undeservedly  hurting  himself.  In  his  books  indeed 
against  Plato,  contending  that  we  cannot  speak  of  injus- 
tice against  one’s  self,  but  against  another,  he  has  these 
words  : “ For  men  cannot  be  unjust  by  themselves  ; injus- 
tice requires  several  on  opposite  sides,  speaking  contrary 
one  unto  another.  But  no  such  thing  extends  to  one 
alone,  except  inasmuch  as  he  is  affected  towards  his  neigh- 
bor.” But  in  his  demonstrations  he  has  such  discourses  as 
these,  concerning  the  unjust  man’s  being  injurious  also  to 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


445 


-l^imself : “ The  law  forbids  the  being  any  way  the  author 
of  transgression,  and  to  act  unjustly  will  be  transgression. 
He  therefore  who  is  to  himself  the  author  of  acting  un- 
justly transgresses  against  himself.  Now  he  that  trans- 
gresses against  any  one  also  injures  him ; therefore  lie  who 
is  injurious  to  any  one  whomsoever  is  injurious  also  to 
himself.”  Again : “ Sin  is  a hurt,  and  every  one  who 
sins  sins  against  himself ; every  one  therefore  who  sins 
hurts  himself  undeservedly,  and  if  so,  is  also  unjust  to 
himself.”  And  farther  thus  : “ He  who  is  hurt  by  anoth- 
er hurts  himself,  and  that  undeservedly.  Now  that  is  to 
be  unjust.  Every  one  therefore  that  is  injured,  by  whom- 
soever it  is,  is  unjust  also  to  himself.” 

17.  He  says,  that  the  doctrine  concerning  good  and 
evil  which  himself  introduces  and  approves  is  most  agree- 
able to  life,  and  does  most  of  all  reach  the  inbred  pre- 
notions ; for  this  he  has  affirmed  in  his  Third  Book  of 
Exhortations.  But  in  his  First  Book  he  says,  that  this 
doctrine  takes  a man  off  from  all  other  things,  as  being 
nothing  to  us,  nor  co-operating  any  thing  towards  felicity. 
See  now,  how  consonant  he  is  to  himself,  when  he  asserts 
a doctrine  which  takes  us  off  from  life,  health,  indolence, 
and  integrity  of  the  senses,  and  says  that  those  things  we 
beg  of  the  Gods  are  nothing  to  us,  though  most  agreeable 
to  life  and  to  the  common  presumptions.  But  that  there 
may  be  no  denial  of  his  speaking  contradictions,  in  his 
Third  Book  of  Justice  he  has  said  thus  : “ Wherefore  also, 
from  the  excellence  of  their  greatness  and  beauty,  we 
seem  to  speak  things  like  to  fictions,  and  not  according  to 
man  or  human  nature.”  Is  it  then  possible  that  any  one 
can  more  plainly  confess  his  speaking  things  contrary  to 
himself  than  this  man  does,  who  affirms  those  things  which 
(he  says)  for  their  excellency  seem  to  be  fictions  and  to  be 
spoken  above  man  and  human  nature,  to  be  agreeable  to 
life,  and  most  of  all  to  reach  the  inbred  prenotions  1 


446 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


18.  In  every  one  of  his  natural  and  ethical  books,  he 
asserts  vice  to  be  the  very  essence  of  unhappiness ; writ- 
ing and  contending  that  to  live  viciously  is  the  same  thing 
as  to  live  unhappily.  But  in  his  Third  Book  of  Nature, 
having  said  that  it  is  profitable  for  a fool  to  live  rather 
than  to  die,  though  he  is  never  to  become  wise,  he  sub- 
joins : “For  such  is  the  nature  of  good  things  among 
men,  that  evil  things  are  in  some  sort  preferred  before  in- 
different ones.”  I let  pass  therefore,  that  having  else- 
where said  that  nothing  is  profitable  to  fools,  he  here  says 
that  to  live  foolishly  is  profitable  to  them.  Now  those 
things  being  by  them  called  indifferent  which  are  neither 
bad  nor  good,  when  he  says  that  bad  things  precede  them, 
he  says  nothing  else  but  that  evil  things  precede  those 
that  are  not  evil,  and  that  to  be  unhappy  is  more  profita- 
ble than  not  to  be  unhappy  ; and  if  so,  he  esteems  not 
to  be  unhappy  to  be  more  unprofitable  — and  if  more 
unprofitable,  more  hurtful  — than  to  be  unhappy.  Desir- 
ing therefore  to  mitigate  this  absurdity,  he  adds  con- 
cerning evils : “ But  it  is  not  these  evils  that  are  preferred, 
but  reason ; with  which  it  is  more  convenient  to  live, 
though  we  shall  be  fools.”  First  therefore  he  says  that 
vice  and  things  participating  of  vice  are  evil,  and  that 
nothing  else  is  so.  Now  vice  is  something  reasonable,  or 
rather  depraved  reason.  For  those  therefore  who  are 
fools  to  live  with  reason,  is  nothing  else  but  to  live  with 
vice.  Thence  to  live  being  fools  is  to  live  being  unhappy. 
In  what  then  is  this  preferred  to  indifferent  things'?  For 
he  surely  will  not  say  that  with  regard  to  happiness  unhap- 
piness is  to  be  preferred.  But  neither,  say  they,  does 
Chrysippus  altogether  think  that  the  remaining  in  life  is 
to  be  reckoned  amongst  good  things,  or  the  going  out  of 
it  amongst  bad ; but  both  of  them  amongst  indifferent 
ones,  according  to  Nature.  Wherefore  also  it  sometimes 
becomes  meet  for  the  happy  to  make  themselves  away, 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


447 


and  again  for  the  unhappy  to  continue  in  life.  Now  what 
greater  repugnance  can  there  be  than  this  in  the  choice 
and  avoiding  of  things,  if  it  is  convenient  for  those  who 
are  in  the  highest  degree  happy  to  forsake  those  good 
things  that  are  present,  for  the  want  of  some  one  indiffer- 
ent thing'?  And  yet  they  esteem  none  of  the  indifferent 
things  either  desirable  or  to  be  avoided  ; but  only  good  de- 
sirable, and  only  evil  to  be  avoided.  So  that  it  comes  to 
pass,  according  to  them,  that  the  reasoning  about  actions 
regards  neither  things  desirable  nor  things  refusable ; but 
that  aiming  at  other  things,  which  they  neither  shun  nor 
choose,  they  make  life  and  death  dependent  on  these. 

19.  Chrysippus  confesses  that  good  things  are  totally 
different  from  bad  ; and  it  must  of  necessity  be  so,  if  these 
make  them  with  whom  they  are  present  miserable  to  the 
very  utmost  point,  and  those  render  their  possessors  in  the 
highest  degree  happy.  Now  he  says,  that  good  and  evil 
things  are  sensible,  writing  thus  in  his  First  Book  of  the 
End : “ That  good  and  evil  things  are  perceptible  by  sense, 
we  are  by  these  reasons  forced  to  say ; for  not  only  the 
passions,  with  their  species,  as  sorrow,  fear,  and  such 
others,  are  sensible ; but  we  may  also  have  a sense  of 
theft,  adultery,  and  the  like,  and  generally,  of  folly,  cow- 
ardice, and  other  vices  not  a few ; and  again,  not  only  of 
joy,  beneficence,  and  many  other  dependences  on  good 
deeds,  but  also  of  prudence,  fortitude,  and  the  other  vir- 
tues.” Let  us  pass  by  the  other  absurdities  of  these  things  ; 
hut  that  they  are  repugnant  to  those  things  which  are  de- 
livered by  him  concerning  “ the  wise  man  that  knows 
nothing  of  his  being  so,”  who  does  not  confess  ? For  good, 
when  present,  being  sensible  and  having  a great  difference 
from  evil,  is  it  not  most  absurd,  that  he  who  is  of  bad  be- 
come good  should  be  ignorant  of  it,  and  not  perceive  vir- 
tue when  present,  but  think  that  vice  is  still  within  him  ? 
For  either  none  who  has  all  virtues  can  be  ignorant  and 


448 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


doubt  of  liis  having  them  ; or  the  difference  of  virtue  from 
vice,  of  happiness  from  misery,  and  of  a most  honest  life 
from  a most  shameful  one,  is  little  and  altogether  difficult 
to  be  discerned,  if  he  who  has  exchanged  the  one  for  the 
other  does  not  perceive  it. 

20.  He  has  written  one  volume  of  lives  divided  into 
four  books ; in  the  fourth  of  these  he  says,  that  a wise 
man  meddles  with  no  business  but  his  own,  and  is  em- 
ployed about  his  own  affairs.  His  words  are  these : 
“ For  I am  of  opinion,  that  a prudent  man  shuns  affairs, 
meddles  little,  and  at  the  same  time  minds  his  own  occa- 
sions ; civil  persons  being  both  minders  of  their  own 
affairs  and  meddlers  with  little  else.”  He  has  said  almost 
the  same  in  his  book  of  Things  eligible  for  Themselves,  in 
these  very  words:  “ For  indeed  a quiet  life  seems  to  have 
in  it  a certain  security  and  freedom  from  danger,  though 
there  are  not  very  many  who  can  comprehend  it.”  It  is 
manifest  that  he  does  not  much  dissent  from  Epicurus, 
who  takes  away  Providence  that  he  may  leave  God  in 
repose.  But  the  same  Chrysippus  in  his  First  Book  of 
Lives  says,  that  a wise  man  willingly  takes  upon  him  a 
kingdom,  making  his  profit  by  it ; and  if  he  cannot  reign 
himself,  will  dwell  with  a king,  and  go  to  the  wars  with 
such  a king  as  was  Hydanthyrsus  the  Scythian  or  Leucon 
the  Pontic.  But  I will  here  also  set  down  his  very  dis- 
course, that  we  may  see  whether,  as  from  the  treble  and  the 
base  strings  there  arises  a symphony  in  music,  so  the  life 
of  a man  who  chooses  quietness  and  meddling  with  little 
accords  with  him  who,  upon  any  necessity,  rides  along 
with  the  Scythians  and  manages  the  affairs  of  the  tyrants 
in  the  Bosphorus  : “For  that  a wise  man  will  both  go  to  the 
wars  and  live  with  potentates,  we  will  again  consider  this 
hereafter  ; some  indeed  upon  the  like  arguments  not  so 
much  as  suspecting  this,  and  we  for  semblable  reasons  ad- 
mitting it.”  And  a little  after : “Not  only  with  those  who 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


449 


have  proceeded  well,  and  are  become  proficients  in  disci- 
pline and  good  manners,  as  with  Leucon  and  Hydan- 
thyrsus.” 

Some  there  are  who  blame  Callisthenes  for  sailing  to 
Alexander  in  hopes  to  obtain  the  rebuilding  of  Olynthus, 
as  Aristotle  had  procured  that  of  Stagira ; and  commend 
Ephorus,  Xenocrates,  and  Menedemus,  who  rejected  Alex- 
ander’s invitation.  But  Chrysippus  thrusts  his  wise  man 
headforwards  for  the  sake  of  gain,  as  far  as  Panticapaeum 
and  the  desert  of  the  Scythians.  And  that  he  does  this 
for  the  sake  of  profit  and  gain,  he  has  showed  before, 
supposing  three  ways  of  gaining  most  suitable  for  a 
wise  man,  — the  first  by  a kingdom,  the  second  by  his 
friends,  and  the  third,  besides  these,  by  teaching  of  phil- 
osophy. And  yet  he  frequently  even  tires  us  with  his 
praises  of  this  saying : 


Wliat  need  have  men  of  more  than  these  two  things  ? 

And  in  his  books  of  Nature  he  says,  that  a wise  man,  if  he 
has  lost  the  greatest  wealth  imaginable,  seems  to  have  lost 
but  a single  groat.  But  having  there  thus  elevated  and 
puffed  him  up,  he  again  here  throws  him  down  to  merce- 
nariness and  sophistry;  nay,  to  asking  pay  and  even  to 
receiving  it  beforehand,  sometimes  at  the  very  entrance  of 
his  scholar,  and  otherwhiles  after  some  time  past.  The 
latter,  he  says  indeed,  is  the  more  civil,  but  to  receive 
beforehand  the  more  sure ; delay  being  subject  to  sustain 
injuries.  Now  he  says  thus  : “ All  who  are  well  advised 
do  not  require  their  salary  in  the  same  manner,  but  differ- 
ently ; a multitude  of  them,  as  opportunity  offers,  not 
promising  to  make  their  scholars  good  men,  and  that 
within  a year,  but  to  do  this,  as  far  as  in  them  lies,  within 
a time  agreed  on.”  And  again  going  on,  he  says : “ But 
he  will  know  his  opportunity,  whether  he  ought  to  receive 
his  recompense  presently  at  the  very  entrance  (as  many 

29 


j 


VOL.  IV. 


450 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


have  done),  or  to  give  them  time,  this  manner  being  more 
liable  to  injuries,  but  withal,  seeming  the  more  courteous.” 
And  how  is  the  wise  man  a contemner  of  wealth,  who 
upon  a contract  delivers  virtue  for  money,  and  if  he  has 
not  delivered  it,  yet  requires  his  reward,  as  having  done 
what  is  in  him  ? Or  how  is  he  above  being  endamaged, 
when  he  is  so  cautious  lest  he  be  wronged  of  his  recom- 
pense'? For  no  man  is  wronged  who  is  not  endamaged. 
Therefore,  though  he  has  elsewhere  asserted  that  a wise 
man  cannot  be  injured,  he  here  says,  that  this  manner  of 
dealing  is  liable  to  injury. 

21.  In  his  book  of  a Commonweal  he  says,  that  his  citi- 
zens will  neither  act  nor  prepare  any  thing  for  the  sake  of 
pleasure,  and  praises  Euripides  for  having  uttered  this 
sentence : 

What  need  have  men  of  more  than  these  two  things, 

The  fruits  of  Ceres,  and  thirst-quenching  springs  1 

And  yet  a little  after  this,  going  on,  he  commends  Diogenes, 
who  forced  his  nature  to  pass  from  himself  in  public,  and 
said  to  those  that  were  present : I wish  I could  in  the 
same  manner  drive  hunger  also  out  of  my  belly.  What 
reason  then  is  there  to  praise  in  the  same  books  him  who 
rejects  all  pleasure,  and  withal,  him  who  for  the  sake  of 
pleasure  does  such  things,  and  proceeds  to  such  a degree 
of  filthiness?  Moreover,  having  in  his  book  of  Nature 
written,  that  Nature  has  produced  many  creatures  for  the 
sake  of  beauty,  delighting  in  pulchritude  and  pleasing  her- 
self with  variety,  and  having  added  a most  absurd  expres- 
sion, that  the  peacock  was  made  for  the  sake  of  his  tail 
and  for  the  beauty  of  it ; he  has,  in  his  treatise  of  a Com- 
monweal, sharply  reprehended  those  who  bred  peacocks 
and  nightingales,  as  if  he  were  making  laws  contrary  to 
the  lawgiver  of  the  world,  and  deriding  Nature  for  pleas- 
ing herself  in  the  beauty  of  animals  to  which  a wise  man 
would  not  give  a place  in  his  city.  For  how  can  it  but  be 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


451 


absurd  to  blame  those  who  nourish  these  creatures,  if  he 
commends  Providence  which  created  them  ? In  his  Fifth 
Book  of  Nature,  having  said,  that  bugs  profitably  awaken 
us  out  of  our  sleep,  that  mice  make  us  cautious  not  to  lay 
up  every  thing  negligently,  and  that  it  is  probable  that 
Nature,  rejoicing  in  variety,  takes  delight  in  the  production 
of  fair  creatures,  he  adds  these  words : “ The  evidence 
of  this  is  chiefly  shown  in  the  peacock’s  tail ; for  here  she 
manifests  that  this  animal  was  made  for  the  sake  of  his 
tail,  and  not  the  contrary ; so,  the  male  being  made,  the 
female  follows.”  In  his  book  of  a Commonweal,  having 
said  that  we  are  ready  to  paint  even  dunghills,  a little  after 
he  adds,  that  some  beautify  their  cornfields  with  vines 
climbing  up  trees,  and  myrtles  set  in  rows,  and  keep  pea- 
cocks, doves,  and  partridges,  that  they  may  hear  them 
cackle  and  coo,  and  nightingales.  Now  I would  gladly 
ask  him,  what  he  thinks  of  bees  and  honey'?  For  it  was 
of  consequence,  that  he  who  said  bugs  were  created  profit- 
ably should  also  say  that  bees  were  created  unprofitably. 
But  if  he  allows  these  a place  in  his  city,  why  does  he 
drive  away  his  citizens  from  things  that  are  pleasing  and 
delight  the  ear  ? To  be  brief,  — as  he  would  be  very  ab- 
surd who  should  blame  the  guests  for  eating  sweetmeats 
and  other  delicacies  and  drinking  of  wine,  and  at  the  same 
time  commend  him  who  invited  them  and  prepared  such 
things  for  them ; so  he  that  praises  Providence,  which  has 
afforded  fishes,  birds,  honey,  and  wine,  and  at  the  same 
time  finds  fault  with  those  who  reject  not  these  things,  nor 
content  themselves  with 

The  fruits  of  Ceres  and  thirst-quenching  springs, 

which  are  present  and  sufficient  to  nourish  us,  seems  to 
make  no  scruple  of  speaking  things  contradictory  to  him- 
self. 

22.  Moreover,  having  said  in  his  book  of  Exhortations, 


452 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


that  the  having  carnal  commerce  with  our  mothers,  daugh- 
ters, or  sisters,  the  eating  forbidden  food,  and  the  going 
from  a woman’s  bed  or  a dead  carcass  to  the  temple,  have 
been  without  reason  blamed,  he  affirms,  that  we  ought  for 
these  things  to  have  a regard  to  the  brute  beasts,  and  from 
what  is  done  by  them  conclude  that  none  of  these  is  ab- 
surd or  contrary  to  Nature ; for  that  the  comparisons  of 
other  animals  are  fitly  made  for  this  purpose,  to  show  that 
neither  their  coupling,  bringing-forth,  nor  dying  in  the 
temples  pollutes  the  Divinity.  Yet  he  again  in  his  Fifth 
Book  of  Nature  says,  that  Hesiod  rightly  forbids  the  making 
water  into  rivers  and  fountains,  and  that  we  should  rather 
abstain  from  doing  this  against  any  altar,  or  statue  of  the 
Gods ; and  that  it  is  not  to  be  admitted  for  an  argument, 
that  dogs,  asses,  and  young  children  do  it,  who  have  no 
discretion  or  consideration  of  such  things.  It  is  therefore 
absurd  to  say  in  one  place,  that  the  savage  example  of 
irrational  animals  is  fit  to  be  considered,  and  in  another, 
that  it  is  unreasonable  to  allege  it. 

23.  To  give  a solution  to  the  inclinations,  when  a man 
seems  to  be  necessitated  by  exterior  causes,  some  philoso- 
phers place  in  the  principal  faculty  of  the  soul  a certain 
adventitious  motion,  which  is  chiefly  manifested  in  things 
differing  not  at  all  from  one  another.  For  when,  with  two 
things  altogether  alike  and  of  equal  importance,  there  is  a 
necessity  to  choose  the  one,  there  being  no  cause  inclining 
to  either,  for  that  neither  of  them  differs  from  the  other, 
this  adventitious  power  of  the  soul,  seizing  on  its  inclina- 
tion, determines  the  doubt.  Chrysippus,  discoursing  against 
these  men,  as  offering  violence  to  Nature  by  devising  an 
effect  without  a cause,  in  many  places  alleges  the  die  and 
the  balance,  and  several  other  things,  which  cannot  fall  or 
incline  either  one  way  or  the  other  without  some  cause  or 
difference,  either  wholly  within  them  or  coming  to  them 
from  without ; for  that  what  is  causeless  (he  says)  is 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


453 


wholly  insubsistent,  as  also  wliat  is  fortuitous  ; and  in 
those  motions  devised  by  some  and  called  adventitious, 
there  occur  certain  obscure  causes,  which,  being  con- 
cealed from  us,  move  our  inclinations  to  one  side  or  other. 
These  are  some  of  those  things  which  are  most  evidently 
known  to  have  been  frequently  said  by  him  ; but  what  he 
has  said  contrary  to  this,  not  lying  so  exposed  to  every 
one’s  sight,  I will  set  down  in  his  own  words.  For  in  his 
book  of  Judging,  having  supposed  two  running  for  a 
wager  to  have  exactly  finished  their  race  together,  he 
examines  what  is  fit  for  the  judge  in  this  case  to  do. 
“Whether,”  says  he,  “may  the  judge  give  the  palm  to 
which  of  them  he  will,  because  they  both  happen  to  be 
so  familiar  to  him,  that  he  would  in  some  sort  seem  to 
bestow  on  them  somewhat  of  his  own  1 Or  rather,  since 
the  palm  is  common  to  both,  may  it  be,  as  if  lots  had  been 
cast,  given  to  either,  according  to  the  inclination  he  chan- 
ces to  have  1 I say  the  inclination  he  chances  to  have,  as 
when  two  groats,  every  way  else  alike,  being  presented  to 
us,  we  incline  to  one  of  them  and  take  it.”  And  in  his 
Sixth  Book  of  Duties,  having  said  that  there  are  some 
things  not  worthy  of  much  study  or  attention,  he  thinks 
we  ought,  as  if  we  had  cast  lots,  to  commit  the  choice  of 
those  things  to  the  casual  inclination  of  the  mind  : “As 
if,”  says  he,  “ of  those  who  try  the  same  two  groats  in  a 
certain  time,  some  should  say  this  and  others  that  to  be 
good,  and  there  being  no  more  cause  for  the  taking  of  one 
than  the  other,  we  should  leave  off  making  any  farther 
enquiry  into  their  value,  and  take  that  which  chances  to 
come  first  to  hand ; thus  casting  the  lot  (as  it  were)  ac- 
cording to  some  hidden  principle,  and  being  in  danger  of 
choosing  the  worse  of  them.”  For  in  these  passages,  the 
casting  of  lots  and  the  casual  inclining  of  the  mind,  which 
is  without  any  cause,  introduce  the  choice  of  indifferent 
things. 


454 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


24.  In  his  Third  Book  of  Dialectics,  having  said  that 

Plato,  Aristotle,  and  those  who  came  after  them,  even  to 
Polemon  and  Straton,  but  especially  Socrates,  diligently 
studied  dialectics,  and  having  cried  out  that  one  would 
even  choose  to  err  with  such  and  so  great  men  as  these, 
he  brings  in  these  words:  “For  if  they  had  spoken  of 

these  things  cursorily,  one  might  perhaps  have  cavilled  at 
this  place ; but  having  treated  of  dialectic  skill  as  one  of 
the  greatest  and  most  necessary  faculties,  it  is  not  probable 
they  should  have  been  so  much  mistaken,  having  been 
such  in  all  the  parts  of  philosophy  as  we  esteem  them.” 
Why  then  (might  some  one  say  to  him)  do  you  never 
cease  to  oppose  and  argue  against  such  and  so  great  men, 
as  if  you  thought  them  to  err  in  the  principal  and  greatest 
matters  ? For  it  is  not  probable  that  they  writ  seriously 
of  dialectics,  and  only  transitorily  and  in  sport  of  the 
beginning,  end,  Gods,  and  justice,  in  which  you  affirm 
their  discourse  to  be  blind  and  contradictory  to  itself,  and 
to  have  a thousand  other  faults. 

25.  In  one  place  he  says,  that  the  vice  called  ’Eitr/ator/.axia, 
or  the  rejoicing  at  other  men’s  harms,  has  no  being  ; since 
no  good  man  ever  rejoiced  at  another’s  evils.  But  in  his 
Second  Book  of  Good,  having  declared  envy  to  be  a sorrow 
at  other  men’s  good,  — to  wit,  in  such  as  desire  the  de- 
pression of  their  neighbors  that  themselves  may  excel,  — 
he  joins  to  it  this  rejoicing  at  other  men’s  harms,  saying  thus : 
“ To  this  is  contiguous  the  rejoicing  at  other  men’s  harms,  in 
such  as  for  like  causes  desire  to  have  their  neighbors  low ; 
but  in  those  that  are  turned  according  to  other  natural  mo- 
tions, is  engendered  mercy.”  For  he  manifestly  admits 
the  joy  at  other  men’s  harms  to  be  subsistent,  as  well  as 
envy  and  mercy ; though  in  other  places  he  affirms  it  to 
have  no  subsistence  ; as  he  does  also  the  hatred  of  wicked- 
ness, and  the  desire  of  dishonest  gain. 

26.  Having  in  many  places  said,  that  those  who  have  a 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OE  THE  STOICS. 


455 


long  time  been  happy  are  nothing  more  so,  but  equally 
and  in  like  manner  with  those  who  have  but  a moment 
been  partakers  of  felicity,  he  has  again  in  many  other 
places  affirmed,  that  it  is  not  fit  to  stretch  out  so  much  as 
a finger  for  the  obtaining  momentary  prudence,  which  flies 
away  like  a flash  of  lightning.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  set 
down  what  is  to  this  purpose  written  by  him  in  his  Sixth 
Book  of  Moral  Questions.  For  having  said,  that  neither 
does  every  good  thing  equally  cause  joy,  nor  every  good 
deed  the  like  glorying,  he  subjoins  these  words  : “ For  if 
a man  should  have  wisdom  only  for  a moment  of  time  or 
the  last  minute  of  life,  he  ought  not  so  much  as  to  stretch 
out  his  finger  for  such  a short-lived  prudence.”  And  yet 
men  are  neither  more  happy  for  being  longer  so,  nor  is 
eternal  felicity  more  eligible  than  that  which  lasts  but  a 
moment.  If  he  had  indeed  held  prudence  to  be  a good, 
producing  felicity,  as  Epicurus  thought,  one  should  have 
blamed  only  the  absurdity  and  the  paradoxicalness  of  this 
opinion ; but  since  prudence  of  itself  is  not  another  thing 
differing  from  felicity,  but  felicity  itself,  how  is  it  not  a 
contradiction  to  say,  that  momentary  happiness  is  equally 
desirable  with  eternal,  and  yet  that  momentary  happiness 
is  nothing  worth'? 

27.  Chrysippus  also  says,  that  the  virtues  follow  one 
another,  and  that  not  only  he  who  has  one  has  all,  but  also 
that  he  who  acts  according  to  any  one  of  them  acts  ac- 
cording to  them  all ; and  he  affirms,  that  there  is  not  any 
man  perfect  who  is  not  possessed  of  all  the  virtues,  nor 
any  action  perfect  to  the  doing  of  which  all  the  virtues  do 
not  concur.  But  yet  in  his  Sixth  Book  of  Moral  Questions 
he  says,  that  a good  man  does  not  always  act  valiantly,  nor 
a vicious  man  always  fearfully ; for  certain  objects  being 
presented  to  the  fancies,  the  one  must  persist  in  his  judg- 
ments, and  the  other  depart  from  them ; and  he  says  that 
it  is  not  probable  a wicked  man  should  be  always  indulg- 


456 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


mg  liis  lust.  If  then  to  act  valiantly  is  the  same  thing  as 
to  use  fortitude ; and  to  act  timorously  as  to  yield  to  fear, 
they  cannot  but  speak  contradictions  who  say,  that  he  who 
is  possessed  of  either  virtue  or  vice  acts  at  the  same  time 
according  to  all  the  virtues  or  all  the  vices,  and  yet  that  a 
valiant  man  does  not  always  act  valiantly  nor  a vicious  man 
timorously. 

28.  He  defines  Rhetoric  to  be  an  art  concerning  the 
ornament  and  the  ordering  of  a discourse  that  is  pro- 
nounced. And  farther  in  his  First  Book  he  has  Avritten 
thus : “ And  I am  not  only  of  opinion  that  a regard  ought 
to  be  had  to  a liberal  and  simple  adorning  of  Avords,  but 
also  that  care  is  to  be  taken  for  proper  delivery,  as 
regards  the  right  elevation  of  the  voice  and  the  composi- 
tions of  the  countenance  and  hands.”  Yet  he,  Avho  is  in 
this  place  so  curious  and  exact,  again  in  the  same  book, 
speaking  of  the  collision  of  the  voAvels,  says:  “We  ought 
not  only  to  let  these  things  pass,  minding  someAvhat  that 
is  better,  but  also  to  neglect  certain  obscurities  and  defects, 
nay,  solecisms  also,  of  which  others,  and  those  not  a few, 
would  be  ashamed.”  Certainly,  in  one  place  to  alloAv  those 
who  would  speak  eloquently  so  carefully  to  dispose  their 
speech  as  even  to  observe  a decorum  in  the  very  composi- 
tion of  their  mouth  and  hands,  and  in  another  place  to 
forbid  the  taking  care  of  defects  and  obscurities,  and  the 
being  ashamed  even  of  committing  solecisms,  is  the  prop- 
erty of  a man  who  little  cares  Avhat  he  says,  but  rashly 
utters  whatever  comes  first  into  his  mouth. 

29.  Moreover,  in  his  Natural  Positions  having  Avarned 
us  not  to  trouble  ourselves  but  to  be  at  quiet  about  such 
things  as  require  experience  and  investigation,  he  says : 
“ Let  us  not  think  after  the  same  manner  Avith  Plato,  that 
liquid  nourishment  is  conveyed  to  the  lungs,  and  dry  to  the 
stomach  ; nor  let  us  embrace  other  errors  like  to  these.” 
Now  it  is  my  opinion,  that  to  reprehend  others,  and  then 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


457 


not  to  keep  one’s  self  from  falling  into  those  tilings  which 
one  has  reprehended,  is  the  greatest  of  contradictions  and 
shamefullest  of  errors.  But  he  says,  that  the  connections 
made  by  ten  axioms  amount  to  above  a million  in  number, 
having  neither  searched  diligently  into  it  by  himself  nor 
attained  to  the  truth  by  men  experienced  in  it.  Yet  Plato 
had  to  testify  for  him  the  most  renowned  of  the  physicians, 
Hippocrates,  Philistion,  and  Dioxippus  the  disciple  of  Hip- 
pocrates ; and  of  the  poets,  Euripides,  Alcaeus,  Eupolis, 
and  Eratosthenes,  who  all  say  that  the  drink  passes  through 
the  lungs.  But  all  the  arithmeticians  refel  Chrysippus, 
amongst  whom  also  is  Hipparchus,  demonstrating  that  the 
error  of  his  computation  is  very  great ; since  the  affirma- 
tive makes  of  the  ten  axioms  one  hundred  and  three 
thousand  forty  and  nine  connections,  and  the  negative 
three  hundred  and  ten  thousand  nine  hundred  fifty  and 
two. 

30.  Some  of  the  ancients  have  said,  that  the  same  befell 
Zeno  which  befalls  him  who  has  sour  wine  which  he  can 
sell  neither  for  vinegar  nor  wine ; for  his  “ things  pre- 
ferred,” as  he  called  them,  cannot  be  disposed  of,  either  as 
good  or  as  indifferent.  But  Chrysippus  has  made  the 
matter  yet  far  more  intricate ; for  he  sometimes  says,  that 
they  are  mad  who  make  no  account  of  riches,  health, 
freedom  from  pain,  and  integrity  of  the  body,  nor  take 
any  care  to  attain  them  ; and  having  cited  that  sentence  of 
Hesiod, 

Work  hard,  0 God-born  Perses,* 

he  cries  out,  that  it  would  be  a madness  to  advise  the 
contrary  and  say, 

Work  not,  0 God-horn  Perses. 

And  in  his  book  of  Lives  he  affirms,  that  a wise  man 
will  for  the  sake  of  gain  live  with  kings,  and  teach  for 


* Works  and  Days,  299. 


458 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


money,  receiving  from  some  of  his  scholars  his  reward 
beforehand,  and  making  contract  with  others  of  them ; 
and  in  his  Seventh  Book  of  Duties  he  says,  that  he  will 
not  scruple  to  turn  his  heels  thrice  over  his  head,  if  for 
so  doing  he  may  have  a talent.  In  his  First  Book  of  Good 
Things,  he  yields  and  grants  to  those  that  desire  it  to  call 
these  preferred  things  good  and  their  contraries  evil,  in 
these  very  words  : “ Any  one  who  will,  according  to  these 
permutations,  may  call  one  thing  good  and  another  evil, 
having  a regard  to  the  things  themselves,  and  not  wander- 
ing elsewhere,  not  failing  in  the  understanding  of  the 
things  signified,  and  in  the  rest  accommodating  himself  to 
custom  in  the  denomination.”  Having  thus  in  this  place 
set  his  preferred  things  so  near  to  good,  and  mixed  them 
therewith,  he  again  says,  that  none  of  these  things  belongs 
at  all  to  us,  but  that  reason  withdraws  and  averts  us  from 
all  such  things ; for  he  has  written  thus  in  his  First  Book 
of  Exhortations.  And  in  his  Third  Book  of  Nature  he 
says,  that  some  esteem  those  happy  who  reign  and  are 
rich,  which  is  all  one  as  if  those  should  be  reputed  happy 
who  make  water  in  golden  chamber-pots  and  wear  golden 
fringes ; but  to  a good  man  the  losing  of  his  whole  estate 
is  but  as  the  losing  of  one  groat,  and  the  being  sick  no 
more  than  if  he  had  stumbled.  Wherefore  he  has  not 
filled  virtue  only,  but  Providence  also,  with  these  contradic- 
tions. For  virtue  would  seem  to  the  utmost  degree  sordid 
and  foolish,  if  it  should  busy  itself  about  such  matters, 
and  enjoin  a wise  man  for  their  sake  to  sail  to  Bosphorus 
or  tumble  with  his  heels  over  his  head.  And  Jupiter  would 
be  very  ridiculous  to  be  styled  Ctesius,  Epicarpius,  and 
Chari todotes,  because  forsooth  he  gives  the  wicked  golden 
chamber-pots  and  golden  fringes,  and  the  good  such 
things  as  are  hardly  worth  a groat,  when  through  J upiter’s 
providence  they  become  rich.  And  yet  much  more  ridic- 
ulous is  Apollo,  if  he  sits  to  give  oracles  concerning 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


459 


golden  fringes  and  chamber-pots  and  the  recovering  of  a] 
stumble. 


31.  But  they  make  this  repugnancy  yet  more  evident 


their  demonstration.  For  they  say,  that  what  may  be  used 
both  well  and  ill,  the  same  is  neither  good  nor  bad ; but 
fools  make  an  ill  use  of  riches,  health,  and  strength  of 
body ; therefore  none  of  these  is  good.  If  therefore  God 
gives  not  virtue  to  men,  — but  honesty  is  eligible  of  itself, 

— and  yet  bestows  on  them  riches  and  health  without 
virtue,  he  confers  them  on  those  who  will  use  them  not 
well  but  ill,  that  is  hurtfully,  shamefully,  and  perniciously. 
Now,  if  the  Gods  can  bestow  virtue  and  do  not,  they  are 
not  good ; but  if  they  cannot  make  men  good,  neither  can 
they  help  them,  for  except  virtue  nothing  is  good  and  help- 
ful. Now  to  judge  those  who  are  otherwise  made  good 
according  to  virtue  and  strength  ...  is  nothing  to  the 
purpose,  for  good  men  also  judge  the  Gods  according  to 
virtue  and  strength ; so  that  they  do  no  more  aid  men  than 
they  are  aided  by  them. 

Now  Chrysippus  neither  professes  himself  nor  any  one 
of  his  disciples  and  teachers  to  be  virtuous.  What  then 
do  they  think  of  others,  but  those  things  which  they  say, 

— that  they  are  all  mad,  fools,  impious,  transgressors  of 
the  laws,  and  in  the  utmost  degree  of  misery  and  unhappi- 
ness \ And  yet  they  say  that  our  affairs,  though  we  act 
thus  miserably,  are  governed  by  the  providence  of  the 
Gods.  Now  if  the  Gods,  changing  their  minds,  should 
desire-  to  hurt,  afflict,  overthrow,  and  quite  crush  us,  they 
could  not  put  us  in  a worse  condition  than  we  already 
are ; as  Chrysippus  demonstrates  that  life  can  admit  no 
greater  degree  either  of  misery  or  of  unhappiness  ; so 
that  if  it  had  a voice,  it  would  pronounce  these  words  of 
Hercules  : 


I am  so  full  of  miseries,  there  is 
No  place  to  stow  them  in.* 


460 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


Now  who  can  imagine  any  assertions  more  repugnant  to 
one  another  than  that  of  Chrysippus  concerning  the  Gods 
and  that  concerning  men ; when  he  says,  that  the  Gods  do 
in  the  best  manner  possible  provide  for  men,  and  yet  men 
are  in  the  worst  condition  imaginable  \ 

32.  Some  of  the  Pythagoreans  blame  him  for  having  in 
his  book  of  Justice  written  concerning  cocks,  that  they 
are  usefully  procreated,  because  they  awaken  us  from  our 
sleep,  hunt  out  scorpions,  and  animate  us  to  battle,  breed- 
ing in  us  a certain  emulation  to  show  courage  ; and  yet 
that  we  must  eat  them,  lest  the  number  of  chickens  should 
be  greater  than  were  expedient.  But  he  so  derides  those 
who  blame  him  for  this,  that  he  has  written  thus  concern- 
ing Jupiter  the  Savior  and  Creator,  the  father  of  justice, 
equity,  and  peace,  in  his  Third  Book  of  the  Gods:  “As 
cities  overcharged  with  too  great  a number  of  citizens  send 
forth  colonies  into  other  places  and  make  war  upon  some, 
so  does  God  give  the  beginnings  of  corruption.”  And  he 
brings  in  Euripides  for  a witness,  with  others  who  say, 
that  the  Trojan  war  was  caused  by  the  Gods,  to  exhaust 
the  multitude  of  men. 

But  letting  pass  their  other  absurdities  (for  our  design  is 
not  to  enquire  what  they  have  said  amiss,  but  only  what 
they  have  said  dissonantly  to  themselves),  consider  how 
he  always  attributes  to  the  Gods  specious  and  kind  appel- 
lations, but  at  the  same  time  cruel,  barbarous,  and  Gala- 
tian deeds.  For  those  so  great  slaughters  and  carnages, 
as  were  the  productions  of  the  Trojan  war  and  again  of 
the  Persian  and  Peloponnesian,  were  no  way  like  to  colo- 
nies, unless  these  men  know  of  some  cities  built  in  hell 
and  under  the  earth.  But  Chrysippus  makes  God  like  to 
Deiotarus,  the  Galatian  king,  who  having  many  sons,  and 
being  desirous  to  leave  his  kingdom  and  house  to  one  of 
them,  killed  all  the  rest ; as  he  that  cuts  and  prunes  away 
all  the  other  branches  from  the  vine,  that  one  which  he 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


461 


leaves  remaining  may  grow  strong  and  great.  And  yet  the 
vine-dresser  does  this,  the  sprigs  being  slender  and  weak ; 
and  we,  to  favor  a bitch,  take  from  her  many  of  her  new- 
born puppies,  whilst  they  are  yet  blind.  Bnt  Jupiter, 
having  not  only  suffered  and  seen  men  to  grow  up,  but 
having  also  both  created  and  increased  them,  plagues  them 
afterwards,  devising  occasions  of  their  destruction  and  cor- 
ruption ; whereas  he  should  rather  not  have  given  them 
any  causes  and  beginnings  of  generation. 

33.  However  this  is  but  a small  matter ; but  that  which 
follows  is  greater.  For  there  is  no  war  amongst  men  with- 
out vice.  But  sometimes  the  love  of  pleasure,  sometimes 
the  love  of  money,  and  sometimes  the  love  of  glory  and 
rule  is  the  cause  of  it.  If  therefore  God  is  the  author 
of  wars,  he  must  be  also  of  sins,  provoking  and  perverting 
men.  And  yet  himself  says  in  his  treatise  of  Judgment 
and  his  Second  Book  of  the  Gods,  that  it  is  no  way  ra- 
tional to  say  that  the  Divinity  is  in  any  respect  the  cause 
of  dishonesty.  For  as  the  law  can  in  no  way  be  the  cause 
of  transgression,  so  neither  can  the  Gods  of  being  impious  ; 
therefore  neither  is  it  rational  that  they  should  be  the 
causes  of  any  thing  that  is  filthy.  What  therefore  can  be 
more  filthy  to  men  than  the  mutual  killing  of  one  another  ? 
— to  which  Chrysippus  says  that  God  gives  beginnings. 
But  some  one  perhaps  will  say,  that  he  elsewhere  praises 
Euripides  for  saying, 

If  Gods  do  aught  dishonest,  they’re  no  Gods ; 

and  again, 

’Tis  a most  easy  thing  t’  accuse  the  Gods  ; * 

as  if  we  were  now  doing  any  thing  else  than  setting  down 
such  words  and  sentences  of  his  as  are  repugnant  to  one 
another. 

34.  Yet  that  very  thing  which  is  now  praised  may  be 

* From  the  Bellerophontes  of  Euripides,  Frag.  294 ; and  the  Archelaus,  Frag. 
256. 


462 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


objected,  not  once  or  twice  or  thrice,  but  even  ten  thousand 
times,  against  Chrysippus : 

’Tis  a most  easy  thing  t’  accuse  the  Gods. 

For  first  having  in  his  book  of  Nature  compared  the  eter- 
nity of  motion  to  a drink  made  of  divers  species  confusedly 
mixed  together,  turning  and  jumbling  the  things  that  are 
made,  some  this  way,  others  that  way,  he  goes  on  thus  : 
“ Now  the  administration  of  the  universe  proceeding  in 
this  manner,  it  is  of  necessity  we  should  be  in  the  condi- 
tion we  are,  whether  contrary  to  our  own  nature  we  are 
sick  or  maimed,  or  whether  we  are  grammarians  or  musi- 
cians.” And  again  a little  after,  “ According  to  this  rea- 
son we  shall  say  the  like  of  our  virtue  and  vice,  and 
generally  of  arts  or  the  ignorance  of  arts,  as  I have  said.” 
And  a little  after,  taking  away  all  ambiguity,  he  says : 
“ For  no  particular  thing,  not  even  the  least,  can  be  other- 
wise than  according  to  common  Nature  and  its  reason.” 
But  that  common  Nature  and  the  common  reason  of  Na- 
ture are  with  him  Fate  and  Providence  and  Jupiter,  is  not 
unknown  even  to  the  antipodes.  For  these  things  are 
everywhere  inculcated  by  the  Stoics ; and  Chrysippus  af- 
firms that  Homer  said  very  well, 

Jove’s  purposes  were  ripening,* 

having  respect  to  Fate  and  the  Nature  of  the  universe,  ac- 
cording to  which  every  thing  is  governed.  How  then  do 
these  agree,  both  that  God  is  no  way  the  cause  of  any  dis- 
honest thing,  and  again,  that  not  even  the  least  thing  im- 
aginable can  be  otherwise  done  than  according  to  common 
Nature  and  its  reason  ? For  amongst  all  things  that  are 
done,  there  must  of  necessity  be  also  dishonest  things  at- 
tributed to  the  Gods.  And  though  Epicurus  indeed  turns 
himself  every  way,  and  studies  artifices,  devising  how  to 
deliver  and  set  loose  our  voluntary  free  will  from  this 


* II.  I.  6. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OE  THE  STOICS. 


463 


eternal  motion,  that  he  may  not  leave  vice  irreprehensible  ; 
yet  Chrysippus  gives  vice  a most  absolute  liberty,  as  being 
done  not  only  of  necessity  or  according  to  Fate,  but  also 
according  to  the  reason  of  God  and  best  Nature.  And 
these  things  are  yet  farther  seen  in  what  he  says  after- 
wards, being  thus  word  for  word : “ For  common  Nature 
extending  to  all  things,  it  will  be  of  necessity  that  every 
thing,  howsoever  done  in  the  whole  or  in  any  one  soever 
of  its  parts,  must  be  done  according  to  this  common  Nature 
and  its  reason,  proceeding  on  regularly  without  any  im- 
pediment. For  there  is  nothing  without  that  can  hinder 
the  administration,  nor  is  there  any  of  the  parts  that  can 
be  moved  or  habituated  otherwise  than  according  to  com- 
mon Nature.”  What  then  are  these  habits  and  motions  of 
the  parts  'l  It  is  manifest,  that  the  habits  are  vices  and 
diseases,  covetousness,  luxury,  ambition,  cowardice,  injus- 
tice ; and  that  the  motions  are  adulteries,  thefts,  treasons, 
murders,  parricides.  Of  these  Chrysippus  thinks,  that 
no  one,  either  little  or  great,  is  contrary  to  the  reason  of 
Jupiter,  or  to  his  law,  justice,  and  providence ; so  neither 
is  the  transgressing  of  the  law  done  against  the  law,  nor 
the  acting  unjustly  against  justice,  nor  the  committing  of 
sin  against  Providence. 

35.  And  yet  he  says,  that  God  punishes  vice,  and  does 
many  things  for  the  chastising  of  the  wicked.  And  in 
his  Second  Book  of  the  Gods  he  says,  that  many  adversi- 
ties sometimes  befall  the  good,  not  as  they  do  the  wicked, 
for  punishment,  but  according  to  another  dispensation,  as 
it  is  in  cities.  And  again  in  these  words  : “ First  we  are 
to  understand  of  evils  in  like  manner  as  has  been  said 
before : then,  that  these  things  are  distributed  according 
to  the  reason  of  Jupiter,  whether  for  punishment,  or  ac- 
cording to  some  other  dispensation,  having  in  some  sort 
respect  to  the  universe.”  This  therefore  is  indeed  severe, 
that  wickedness  is  both  done  and  punished  according  to 


464 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


the  reason  of  Jupiter.  But  he  aggravates  this  contradic- 
tion in  his  Second  Book  of  Nature,  writing  thus  : “ Vice, 
in  reference  to  grievous  accidents,  has  a certain  reason  of 
its  own.  For  it  is  also  in  some  sort  according  to  the  rea- 
son of  Nature,  and,  as  I may  so  say,  is  not  wholly  useless 
in  respect  of  the  universe.  For  otherwise  also  there  would 
not  be  any  good.”  Thus  does  he  reprehend  those  that 
dispute  indifferently  on  both  sides,  who,  out  of  a desire  to 
say  something  wholly  singular  and  more  exquisite  concern- 
ing every  thing,  affirms,  that  men  do  not  unprofitably  cut 
purses,  calumniate,  and  play  madmen,  and  that  it  is  not 
unprofitable  there  should  be  unprofitable,  hurtful,  and  un- 
happy  persons.  What  manner  of  God  then  is  Jupiter, — 
I mean  Chrysippus’s  Jupiter,  — who  punishes  an  act  done 
neither  willingly  nor  unprofitably?  For  vice  is  indeed, 
according  to  Chrysippus’s  discourse,  wholly  reprehensible  ; 
but  Jupiter  is  to  be  blamed,  whether  he  has  made  vice 
which  is  an  unprofitable  thing,  or,  having  made  it  not  un- 
profitable, punishes  it. 

36.  Again,  in  his  First  Book  of  Justice,  having  spoken 
of  the  Gods  as  resisting  the  injustices  of  some,  he  says 
“ But  wholly  to  take  away  vice  is  neither  possible  nor  ex- 
pedient.” Whether  it  were  not  better  that  law-breaking, 
injustice,  and  folly  should  be  taken  away,  is  not  the  design 
of  this  present  discourse  to  enquire.  * But  he  himself,  as 
much  as  in  him  lies,  by  his  philosophy  taking  away  vice, 
which  it  is  not  expedient  to  take  away,  does  something  re- 
pugnant both  to  reason  and  God.  Besides  this,  saying 
that  God  resists  some  injustices,  he  again  declares  plainly 
the  impiety  of  sins. 

37.  Having  often  written  that  there  is  nothing  repre- 
hensible, nothing  to  be  complained  of  in  the  Avorld,  all 
things  being  finished  according  to  a most  excellent  nature, 
he  again  elsewhere  leaves  certain  negligences  to  be  rep- 
rehended, and  those  not  concerning  small  or  base  matters. 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS.  465 

For  having  in  his  Third  Book  of  Substance  related  that 
some  such  things  befall  honest  and  good  men,  he  says  : 
“ Is  it  because  some  things  are  not  regarded,  as  in  great 
families  some  bran  — yea,  and  some  grains  of  corn  also  — 
are  scattered,  the  generality  being  nevertheless  well  ordered  ; 
or  is  it  that  there  are  evil  Genii  set  over  those  things  in 
which  there  are  real  and  faulty  negligence  \ ” And  he 
also  affirms  that  there  is  much  necessity  intermixed.  I let 
pass,  how  inconsiderate  it  is  to  compare  such  accidents  be- 
falling honest  and  good  men,  as  were  the  condemnation  of 
Socrates,  the  burning  of  Pythagoras,  whilst  he  was  yet 
living,  by  the  Cyloneans,  the  putting  to  death  — and  that 
with  torture — of  Zeno  by  the  tyrant  Demylus,  and  of 
Antiphon  by  Dionysius,  with  the  letting  of  bran  fall.  But 
that  there  should  be  evil  Genii  placed  by  Providence  over 
such  charges,  — how  can  it  but  be  a reproach  to  God,  as 
it  would  be  to  a king,  to  commit  the  administration  of  his 
provinces  to  evil  and  rash  governors  and  captains,  and 
suffer  the  best  of  his  subjects  to  be  despised  and  ill-treated 
by  them”?  And  furthermore,  if  there  is  much  necessity 
mixed  amongst  affairs,  then  God  has  not  power  over  them 
all,  nor  are  they  all  administered  according  to  his  reason. 

38.  He  contends  much  against  Epicurus  and  those  that 
take  away  providence  from  the  conceptions  we  have  of  the 
Gods,  whom  we  esteem  beneficial  and  gracious  to  men. 
And  these  things  being  frequently  said  by  them,  there  is 
no  necessity  of  setting  down  the  words.  Yet  all  do  not 
conceive  the  Gods  to  be  good  and  favorable  to  us.  For 
see  what  the  Jews  and  Syrians  think  of  the  Gods ; see 
also  with  how  much  superstition  the  poets  are  filled.  But 
there  is  not  any  one,  in  a manner  to  speak  of,  that  imag- 
ines God  to  be  corruptible  or  to  have  been  born.  And  to 
omit  all  others,  Antipater  the  Tarsian,  in  his  book  of  the 
Gods  writes  thus,  word  for  word : “ At  the  beginning  of 

our  discourse  we  will  briefly  repeat  the  opinion  we  have 

30 


VOL.  IV. 


466 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


concerning  God.  We  understand  therefore  God  to  be  an 
animal,  blessed  and  incorruptible,  and  beneficial  to  men.” 
And  then  expounding  every  one  of  these  terms  he  says  : 
“ And  indeed  all  men  esteem  the  Gods  to  be  incorrupti- 
ble.” Chrysippus  therefore  is,  according  to  Antipater, 
not  one  of  “ all  men  ; ” for  he  thinks  none  of  the  Gods,  ex- 
cept Fire,  to  be  incorruptible,  but  that  they  all  equally  were 
born  and  will  die.  These  things  are,  in  a manner,  every- 
where said  by  him.  But  I will  set  down  his  words  out  of 
his  Third  Book  of  the  Gods  : “ It  is  otherwise  with  the 
Gods.  For  some  of  them  are  born  and  corruptible,  but 
others  not  born.  And  to  demonstrate  these  things  from 
the  beginning  will  be  more  fit  for  a treatise  of  Nature. 
For  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  other  Gods  who  are  of  a like 
nature,  were  begotten ; but  Jupiter  is  eternal.”  And 
again  going  on : “ But  the  like  will  be  said  concerning  dy- 
ing and  being  born,  both  concerning  the  other  Gods  and 
Jupiter.  For  they  indeed  are  corruptible,  but  his  parts 
incorruptible.”  With  these  I compare  a few  of  the  things 
said  by  Antipater : “ Whosoever  they  are  that  take  away 
from  the  Gods  beneficence,  they  attack  in  some  part  our 
preconception  of  them  ; and  according  to  the  same  reason 
they  also  do  this,  who  think  they  participate  of  generation 
and  corruption.”  If  then  he  who  esteems  the  Gods  cor- 
ruptible is  equally  absurd  with  him  who  thinks  them  not 
to  be  provident  and  gracious  to  men,  Chrysippus  is  no  less 
in  an  error  than  Epicurus.  For  one  of  them  deprives  the 
Gods  of  beneficence,  the  other  of  incorruptibility. 

39.  And  moreover,  Chrysippus,  in  his  Third  Book  of 
the  Gods  treating  of  the  other  Gods  being  nourished,  says 
thus : “ The  other  Gods  indeed  use  nourishment,  being 
equally  sustained  by  it ; but  Jupiter  and  the  World  are  sus- 
tained after  another  manner  from  those  who  are  consumed 
and  were  engendered  by  fire.”  Here  indeed  he  declares, 
that  all  the  other  Gods  are  nourished  except  the  W orld  and 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


467 


Jupiter ; but  in  his  First  Book  of  Providence  he  says . 
“ Jupiter  increases  till  he  has  consumed  all  things  into  him- 
self. For  since  death  is  the  separation  of  the  soul  from 
the  body,  and  the  soul  of  the  World  is  not  indeed  separated, 
but  increases  continually  till  it  has  consumed  all  matter  into 
itself,  it  is  not  to  be  said  that  the  World  dies.”  Who  can 
therefore  appear  to  speak  things  more  contradictory  to  him- 
self than  he  who  says  that  the  same  God  is  now  nourished 
and  again  not  nourished'?  Nor  is  there  any  need  of  gather- 
ing this  by  argument ; for  himself  has  plainly  written  in 
the  same  place:  “But  the  World  alone  is  said  to  be  self- 
sufficient,  because  it  alone  has  in  itself  all  things  it  stands 
in  need  of,  and  is  nourished  and  augmented  of  itself,  the 
other  parts  being  mutually  changed  into  one  another.”  He 
is  then  repugnant  to  himself,  not  only  by  declaring  in  one 
place  that  all  the  Gods  are  nourished  except  the  World  and 
Jupiter,  and  saying  in  another,  that  the  World  also  is 
nourished  ; but  much  more,  when  he  affirms  that  the  World 
increases  by  nourishing  itself.  Now  the  contrary  had  been 
much  more  probable,  to  wit,  that  the  World  alone  does  not 
increase,  having  its  own  destruction  for  its  food ; but  that 
addition  and  increase  are  incident  to  the  other  Gods,  who 
are  nourished  from  without,  and  the  World  is  rather  con- 
sumed into  them,  if  so  it  is  that  the  World  feeds  on  itself, 
and  they  always  receive  something  and  are  nourished  from 
that. 

40.  Secondly,  the  conception  of  the  Gods  contains  in 
it  felicity,  blessedness,  and  self-perfection.  Wherefore  also 
Euripides  is  commended  for  saying : 

For  God,  if  truly  God,  does  nothing  want, 

And  all  these  speeches  are  but  poets’  cant.* 

But  Chrysippus  in  the  places  I have  alleged  says,  that  the 
World  only  is  self-sufficient,  because  this  alone  has  in  itself 
all  things  it  needs.  What  then  follows  from  this,  that  the 

* Hercules  Furens,  1345. 


468 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


World  alone  is  self-sufficient'?  That  neither  the  Sun,  Moon, 
nor  any  other  of  the  Gods  is  self-sufficient,  and  not  being 
self-sufficient,  they  cannot  be  happy  or  blessed. 

41.  He  says,  that  the  infant  in  the  womb  is  nourished  by 
Nature,  like  a plant ; but  when  it  is  brought  forth,  being 
cooled  and  hardened  by  the  air,  it  changes  its  spirit  and 
becomes  an  animal ; whence  the  soul  is  not  unfitly  named 
Psyche  because  of  this  refrigeration  (xpvxeiv).  But  again  he 
esteems  the  soul  the  more  subtile  and  fine  spirit  of  Nature, 
therein  contradicting  himself ; for  how  can  a subtile  thing 
be  made  of  a gross  one,  and  be  rarefied  by  refrigeration 
and  condensation?  And  what  is  more,  how  does  he,  declar- 
ing an  animal  to  be  made  by  refrigeration,  think  the  sun 
to  be  animated,  which  is  of  fire  and  made  of  an  exhalation 
changed  into  fire  ? For  he  says  in  his  Third  Book  of  Na- 
ture : “Now  the  change  of  fire  is  such,  that  it  is  turned 
by  the  air  into  water ; and  the  earth  subsiding  from  this, 
the  air  exhales ; the  air  being  subtilized,  the  ether  is  pro- 
duced round  about  it ; and  the  stars  are,  with  the  sun, 
kindled  from  the  sea.”  Now  what  is  more  contrary  to 
kindling  than  refrigeration,  or  to  rarefaction  than  conden- 
sation? For  the  one  makes  water  and  earth  of  fire  and  air, 
and  the  other  changes  that  which  is  moist  and  earthy  into 
fire  and  air.  But  yet  in  one  place  he  makes  kindling,  in 
another  cooling,  to  be  the  beginning  of  animation.  And 
he  moreover  says,  that  when  the  inflammation  is  through- 
out, it  lives  and  is  an  animal,  but  being  again  extinct  and 
thickened,  it  is  turned  into  water  and  earth  and  corporeity. 
Now  in  his  First  Book  of  Providence  he  says  : “ For  the 

world,  indeed,  being  wholly  set  on  fire,  is  presently  also 
the  soul  and  guide  of  itself ; but  when  it  is  changed  into 
moisture,  and  has  changed  the  soul  remaining  within  it  in 
some  sort  into  a body  and  soul,  so  as  to  consist  of  these 
two,  it  is  then  after  another  manner.”  Here,  forsooth,  he 
plainly  says,  that  the  inanimate  parts  of  the  world  are  by 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


469 


inflammation  turned  into  an  animated  thing,  and  that  again 
by  extinction  the  soul  is  relaxed  and  moistened,  being 
changed  into  corporeity.  He  seems  therefore  very  absurd, 
one  while  by  refrigeration  making  animals  of  senseless 
things,  and  again,  by  the  same  changing  the  greatest  part 
of  the  world’s  soul  into  senseless  and  inanimate  things. 

But  besides  this,  his  discourse  concerning  the  generation 
of  the  soul  has  a demonstration  contrary  to  his  own 
opinion;  for  he  says,  that  the  soul  is  generated  when  the 
infant  is  already  brought  forth,  the  spirit  being  changed  by 
refrigeration,  as  by  hardening.  Now  for  the  soul’s  being 
engendered,  and  that  after  the  birth,  he  chiefly  uses  this 
demonstration,  that  the  children  are  for  the  most  part  in 
manners  and  inclinations  like  to  their  parents.  Now  the 
repugnancy  of  these  things  is  evident.  For  it  is  not  pos- 
sible that  the  soul,  which  is  not  generated  till  after  the 
birth,  should  have  its  inclination  before  the  birth ; or  it 
will  fall  out  that  the  soul  is  like  before  it  is  generated  ; 
that  is,  it  will  be  in  likeness,  and  yet  not  be,  because  it  is 
not  yet  generated.  But  if  any  one  says  that,  the  likeness 
being  bred  in  the  tempers  of  the  bodies,  the  souls  are 
changed  when  they  are  generated,  he  destroys  the  argu- 
ment of  the  soul’s  being  generated.  For  thus  it  may  come 
to  pass,  that  the  soul,  though  not  generated,  may  at  its 
entrance  into  the  body  be  changed  by  the  mixture  of  like- 
ness. 

42.  He  says  sometimes,  that  the  air  is  light  and  mounts 
upwards,  and  sometimes,  that  it  is  neither  heavy  nor  light. 
For  in  his  Second  Book  of  Motion  he  says,  that  the  fire, 
being  without  gravity,  ascends  upwards,  and  the  air  like  to 
that ; the  water  approaching  more  to  the  earth,  and  the  air 
to  the  fire.  But  in  his  Physical  Arts  he  inclines  to  the 
other  opinion,  that  the  air  of  itself  has  neither  gravity  nor 
levity. 

43.  He  says  that  the  air  is  by  nature  dark,  and  uses  this 


470 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


as  an  argument  of  its  being  also  the  first  cold ; for  that  its 
darkness  is  opposite  to  the  brightness,  and  its  coldness  to 
the  heat  of  fire.  Moving  this  in  his  First  Book  of  Natural 
Questions,  he  again  in  his  treatise  of  Habits  says,  that 
habits  are  nothing  else  but  airs  ; for  bodies  are  contained 
by  these,  and  the  cause  that  every  one  of  the  bodies  con- 
tained in  any  habit  is  such  as  it  is,  is  the  containing  air, 
which  they  call  in  iron  hardness,  in  stone  solidness,  in 
silver  whiteness.  These  words  have  in  them  much  absurd- 
ity and  contradiction.  For  if  the  air  remains  such  as  it  is 
of  its  own  nature,  how  comes  black,  in  that  which  is  not 
white,  to  be  made  whiteness;  and  soft,  in  that  which  is  not 
hard,  to  be  made  hardness ; and  rare,  in  that  which  is 
not  thick,  to  be  made  thickness  ? But  if,  being  mixed  with 
these,  it  is  altered  and  made  like  to  them,  how  is  it  a habit 
or  power  or  cause  of  these  things  by  which  it  is  subdued? 
For  such  a change,  by  which  it  loses  its  own  qualities,  is 
the  property  of  a patient,  not  of  an  agent,  and  not  of  a 
thing  containing,  but  of  a thing  languishing.  Yet  they 
everywhere  affirm,  that  matter,  being  of  its  own  nature  idle 
and  motionless,  is  subjected  to  qualities,  and  that  the  quali- 
ties are  spirits,  which,  being  also  aerial  tensions,  give  a 
form  and  figure  to  every  part  of  matter  to  which  they  ad- 
here. These  things  they  cannot  rationally  say,  supposing 
the  air  to  be  such  as  they  affirm  it.  For  if  it  is  a habit 
and  tension,  it  will  assimilate  every  body  to  itself,  so  that  it 
shall  be  black  and  soft.  But  if  by  the  mixture  with  these 
things  it  receives  forms  contrary  to  those  it  has,  it  will  be 
in  some  sort  the  matter,  and  not  the  cause  or  power  of 
matter. 

44.  It  is  often  said  by  Chrysippus,  that  there  is  without 
the  world  an  infinite  vacuum,  and  that  this  infinity  has 
neither  beginning,  middle,  nor  end.  And  by  this  the  Stoics 
chiefly  refute  that  spontaneous  motion  of  the  atoms  down- 
ward, which  is  taught  by  Epicurus ; there  not  being  in 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


471 


infinity  any  difference  according  to  which  one  thing  is 
thought  to  be  above,  another  below.  But  in  his  Fourth 
Book  of  Things  Possible,  having  supposed  a certain  middle 
place  and  middle  region,  he  says  that  the  world  is  situated 
there.  The  words  are  these : “ Wherefore,  if  it  is  to  be 
said  of  the  world  that  it  is  corruptible,  this  seems  to  want 
proof ; yet  nevertheless  it  rather  appears  to  me  to  be  so. 
However,  its  occupation  of  the  place  wherein  it  stands  co- 
operates very  much  towards  its  seeming  to  be  incorruptible, 
because  it  is  in  the  midst ; since  if  it  were  thought  to  be 
anywhere  else,  corruption  Avould  absolutely  take  hold  of 
it.”  And  again,  a little  after:  “For  so  also  in  a manner 
has  essence  happened  eternally  to  possess  the  middle  place, 
being  immediately  from  the  beginning  such  as  it  is  ; so  that 
both  by  another  manner  and  through  this  chance  it  admits 
not  any  corruption,  and  is  therefore  eternal.”  These  words 
have  one  apparent  and  visible  contradiction,  to  wit,  his 
admitting  a certain  middle  place  and  middle  region  in 
infinity.  They  have  also  a second,  more  obscure  indeed, 
but  withal  more  absurd  than  this.  For  thinking  that  the 
world  would  not  have  remained  incorruptible  if  its  situation 
had  happened  to  have  been  in  any  other  part  of  the  vacu- 
um, he  manifestly  appears  to  have  feared  lest,  the  parts  of 
essence  moving  towards  the  middle,  there  should  be  a dis- 
solution and  corruption  of  the  world.  Now  this  he  would 
not  have  feared,  had  he  not  thought  that  bodies  do  by  na- 
ture tend  from  every  place  towards  the  middle,  not  of 
essence,  but  of  the  region  containing  essence ; of  which 
also  he  has  frequently  spoken,  as  of  a thing  impossible 
and  contrary  to  Nature ; for  that  (as  he  says)  there  is  not 
in  the  vacuum  any  difference  by  which  bodies  are  drawn 
rather  this  way  than  that  way,  but  the  construction  of  the 
world  is  the  cause  of  motion,  bodies  inclining  and  being 
carried  from  every  side  to  the  centre  and  middle  of  it.  It 
is  sufficient  to  this  purpose,  to  set  down  the  text  out  of  his 


472 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


Second  Book  of  Motion ; for  having  discoursed,  that  the 
world  indeed  is  a perfect  body,  but  that  the  parts  of  the 
world  are  not  perfect,  because  they  have  in  some  sort 
respect  to  the  whole  and  are  not  of  themselves ; and  going 
forward  concerning  its  motion,  as  having  been  framed  by 
Nature  to  be  moved  by  all  its  parts  towards  compaction 
and  cohesion,  and  not  towards  dissolution  and  breaking,  he 
says  thus : “ But  the  universe  thus  tending  and  being 
moved  to  the  same  point,  and  the  parts  having  the  same 
motion  from  the  nature  of  the  body,  it  is  probable  that  all 
bodies  have  this  first  motion  according  to  Nature  towards 
the  centre  of  the  world,  — the  world  being  thus  moved  as 
regards  itself,  and  the  parts  being  thus  moved  as  being  its 
parts.”  What  then  ailed  you,  good  sir  (might  some  one 
say  to  him),  that  you  have  so  far  forgotten  those  words,  as 
to  affirm  that  the  world,  if  it  had  not  casually  possessed 
the  middle  place,  would  have  been  dissoluble  and  corrupt- 
ible 1 For  if  it  is  by  Nature  so  framed  as  always  to  incline 
towards  the  middle,  and  its  parts  from  every  side  tend  to  the 
same,  into  what  place  soever  of  the  vacuum  it  should  have 
been  transposed,  — thus  containing  and  (as  it  Avere)  embrac- 
ing itself,  — it  would  have  remained  incorruptible  and  without 
danger  of  breaking.  For  things  that  are  broken  and  dissi- 
pated suffer  this  by  the  separation  and  dissolution  of  their 
parts,  every  one  of  them  hasting  to  its  own  place  from  that 
which  it  had  contrary  to  Nature.  But  you,  being  of  opin- 
ion that,  if  the  world  should  have  been  seated  in  any  other 
place  of  the  vacuum,  it  would  have  been  wholly  liable  to 
corruption,  and  affirming  the  same,  and  therefore  asserting 
a middle  in  that  which  naturally  can  have  no  middle,  — 
to  wit,  in  that  which  is  infinite,  — have  indeed  dismissed 
these  tensions,  coherences,  and  inclinations,  as  having 
nothing  available  to  its  preservation,  and  attributed  all  the 
cause  of  its  permanency  to  the  possession  of  place.  And, 
as  if  you  were  ambitious  to  confute  yourself,  to  the  things 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


473 


you  have  said  before  you  join  this  also : “In  whatsoever 
manner  every  one  of  the  parts  moves,  being  coherent  to 
the  rest,  it  is  agreeable  to  reason  that  in  the  same  also  the 
whole  should  move  by  itself ; yea,  though  we  should,  for 
argument’s  sake,  imagine  and  suppose  it  to  be  in  some 
vacuity  of  this  world ; for  as,  being  kept  in  on  every  side, 
it  wrould  move  towards  the  middle,  so  it  would  continue  in 
the  same  motion,  though  by  way  of  disputation  we  should 
admit  that  there  were  on  a sudden  a vacuum  round  about 
it.”  No  part  then  whatsoever,  though  encompassed  by  a 
vacuum,  loses  its  inclination  moving  it  towards  the  middle 
of  the  world ; but  the  world  itself,  if  chance  had  not  pre- 
pared it  a place  in  the  middle,  would  have  lost  its  contain- 
ing vigor,  the  parts  of  its  essence  being  carried  some  one 
way,  some  another. 

45.  And  these  things  indeed  contain  great  contradictions 
to  natural  reason  ; but  this  is  also  repugnant  to  the  doc- 
trine concerning  God  and  Providence,  that  assigning  to 
them  the  least  causes,  he  takes  from  them  the  most  prin- 
cipal and  greatest.  For  what  is  more  principal  than  the 
permanency  of  the  world,  or  that  its  essence,  united  in  its 
parts,  is  contained  in  itself?  But  this,  as  Chrysippus 
says,  fell  out  casually.  For  if  the  possession  of  place 
is  the  cause  of  incorruptibility,  and  this  was  the  pro- 
duction of  chance,  it  is  manifest  that  the  preservation  of 
the  universe  is  a work  of  chance,  and  not  of  Fate  and 
Providence. 

46.  Now,  as  for  his  doctrine  of  possibles,  how  can  it  but 
be  repugnant  to  his  doctrine  of  Fate?  For  if  that  is  not 
possible  which  either  is  true  or  shall  be  true,  as  Diodorus 
has  it,  but  every  thing  which  is  capable  of  being,  though 
it  never  shall  be,  is  possible,  there  will  be  many  things 
possible  which  will  never  be  according  to  invincible,  in- 
violable, and  all-conquering  Fate.  And  thus  either  Fate 
will  lose  its  power ; or  if  that,  as  Chrysippus  thinks,  has 


474 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


existence,  that  which  is  susceptible  of  being  will  often  fall 
out  to  he  impossible.  And  every  thing  indeed  which  is 
true  will  be  necessary,  being  comprehended  by  the  prin- 
cipal of  all  necessities ; and  every  thing  that  is  false  will 
be  impossible,  having  the  greatest  cause  to  oppose  its  ever 
being  true.  For  how  is  it  possible  that  he  should  be  sus- 
ceptible of  dying  on  the  land,  who  is  destined  to  die  at 
sea  \ And  how  is  it  possible  for  him  who  is  at  Megara  to 
come  to  Athens,  if  he  is  prohibited  by  Fate  ? 

47.  But  moreover,  the  things  that  are  boldly  asserted  by 
him  concerning  fantasies  or  imaginations  are  very  opposite 
to  Fate.  For  desiring  to  show  that  fantasy  is  not  of  itself 
a perfect  cause  of  consent,  he  says,  that  the  Sages  will 
prejudice  us  by  imprinting  false  imaginations  in  our  minds, 
if  fantasies  do  of  themselves  absolutely  cause  consent ; for 
wise  men  often  make  use  of  falsity  against  the  wicked, 
representing  a probable  imagination,  — which  is  yet  not 
the  cause  of  consent,  for  then  it  would  be  also  a cause  of 
false  apprehension  and  error.  Any  one  therefore,  trans- 
ferring these  things  from  the  wise  man  to  Fate,  may  say, 
that  consents  are  not  caused  by  F ate ; for  if  they  were, 
false  consents  and  opinions  and  deceptions  would  also  be 
by  Fate,  and  men  would  be  endamaged  by  Fate.  Thus  the 
reason  which  exempts  the  wise  man  from  doing  hurt  also 
demonstrates  at  the  same  time  that  Fate  is  not  the  cause  of 
all  things.  For  if  men  neither  opine  nor  are  prejudiced 
by  Fate,  it  is  manifest  also  that  they  neither  act  rightly  nor 
are  wise  nor  remain  firm  in  their  sentiments  nor  have  util- 
ity by  Fate,  but  that  there  is  an  end  of  Fate’s  being  the 
cause  of  all  things.  Now  if  any  one  shall  say  that  Chry- 
sippus  makes  not  Fate  the  absolute  cause  of  all  things,  but 
only  a procatcirctical  (or  antecedent)  one,  he  will  again 
show  that  he  is  contradictory  to  himself,  since  he  exces- 
sively praises  Homer  for  saying  of  Jupiter, 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


475 


1 Receive  whatever  ill  or  good 

He  sends  to  each  of  you ; * 

as  also  Euripides  for  these  words, 

O Jove,  how  can  I say  that  wretched  we, 

Poor  mortals,  aught  do  understand  ? On  thee 
We  all  depend,  and  nothing  can  transact, 

But  as  thy  sacred  wisdom  shall  enact.t 

And  himself  writes  many  things  agreeable  to  these.  In 
tine,  he  says  that  nothing,  be  it  never  so  little,  either  rests 
or  is  moved  otherwise  than  according  to  the  reason  of  Ju- 
piter, which  is  the  same  thing  with  Fate.  Moreover,  the 
antecedent  cause  is  weaker  than  the  absolute  one,  and 
attains  not  to  its  effect  when  it  is  subdued  by  others  that 
rise  up  against  it.  But  he  himself,  declaring  Fate  to  be  an 
invincible,  unimpeachable,  and  inflexible  cause,  calls  it 
Atropos,  X Adrasteia,  § Necessity,  and  Pepromene  (as  put- 
ting a limit  to  all  things).  Whether  then  shall  we  say,  that 
neither  consents  nor  virtues  nor  vices  nor  doing  well  nor 
doing  ill  is  in  our  power?  Or  shall  we  affirm,  that  Fate  is 
deficient,  that  terminating  destiny  is  unable  to  determine, 
and  that  the  motions  and  habits  of  Jupiter  cannot  accom- 
plish? For  the  one  of  these  two  consequences  will  follow 
from  Fate’s  being  an  absolute,  the  other  from  its  being  only 
antecedent  cause.  For  if  it  is  an  absolute  cause,  it  takes 
away  our  free  will  and  leaves  nothing  in  our  power ; and 
if  it  is  only  antecedent,  it  loses  its  being  unimpeachable 
and  effectual.  For  not  once  or  ten  times,  but  everywhere, 
especially  in  his  Physics,  he  has  written,  that  there  are 
many  obstacles  and  impediments  to  particular  natures  and 
motions,  but  none  to  that  of  the  universe.  And  how  can 
the  motion  of  the  universe,  extending  as  it  does  to  particu- 
lar ones,  be  undisturbed  and  unimpeached,  if  these  are 
stopped  and  hindered?  For  neither  can  the  nature  of  man 

* 11.  XV.  109.  The  words  “ or  good  ” are  not  found  in  Homer.  (G.) 

t Eurip.  Suppliants,  734.  t That  is,  Unchangeable. 

§ That  is,  Unavoidable. 


476 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


be  free  from  impediment,  if  that  of  the  foot  or  hand  is  not 
so ; nor  can  the  motion  of  a ship  but  be  hindered,  if  there 
are  any  obstacles  about  the  sails  or  the  operation  of  the 
oars. 

Besides  all  this,  if  the  fantasies  are  not  according  to  Fate, 
neither  are  they  causes  of  consents ; but  if,  because  it  im- 
prints fantasies  leading  to  consent,  the  consents  are  said  to 
be  according  to  Fate,  how  is  it  not  contrary  to  itself,  im- 
printing in  the  greatest  matters  different  imaginations  and 
such  as  draw  the  understanding  contrary  ways'?  For  (they 
say)  those  who  adhere  to  one  of  them,  and  withhold  not 
their  consent,  do  amiss : if  they  yield  to  obscure  things, 
they  stumble  ; if  to  false,  they  are  deceived ; if  to  such  as 
are  not  commonly  comprehended,  they  opine.  And  yet  one 
of  these  three  is  of  necessity,  — either  that  every  fantasy 
is  not  the  work  of  Fate,  or  that  every  receipt  and  consent 
of  fantasy  is  faultless,  or  that  Fate  itself  is  not  irreprehen- 
sible.  For  I do  not  know  how  it  can  be  blameless,  pro- 
posing to  us  such  fantasies  that  not  the  resisting  or  going 
against  them,  but  the  following  and  yielding  to  them,  is 
blamable.  Moreover,  both  Chrysippus  and  Antipater,  in 
their  disputes  against  the  Academics,  take  not  a little  pains 
to  prove  that  we  neither  act  nor  are  incited  without  con- 
sent, saying,  that  they  build  on  fictions  and  false  supposi- 
tions who  think  that,  a proper  fantasy  being  presented,  we 
are  presently  incited,  without  having  either  yielded  or  con- 
sented. Again,  Chrysippus  says,  that  God  imprints  in  us 
false  imaginations,  as  does  also  the  wise  man ; not  that 
they  would  have  us  consent  or  yield  to  them,  but  only  that 
we  should  act  and  be  incited  with  regard  to  that  which  ap- 
pears ; but  we,  being  evil,  do  through  infirmity  consent  to 
such  fantasies.  Now  the  perplexity  and  discrepancy  of 
these  discourses  among  themselves  are  not  very  difficult  to 
be  discerned.  For  he  that  would  not  have  men  consent 
but  only  act  according  to  the  fantasies  which  he  presents 


THE  CONTRADICTIONS  OF  THE  STOICS. 


477 


unto  them  — whether  he  be  God  or  a wise  man  — knows 
that  the  fantasies  are  sufficient  for  acting,  and  that  consents 
are  superfluous.  For  if,  knowing  that  the  imagination 
gives  us  not  an  instinct  to  work  without  consent,  he  min- 
isters to  us  false  and  probable  fantasies,  he  is  the  voluntary 
cause  of  our  falling  and  erring  by  assenting  to  incompre- 
hensible things. 


OF  THE  WORD  El  ENGRAVEN  OVER  THE  GATE  OF 
APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  AT  DELPHI. 


AMMONIUS,  LAMPRIAS,  PLUTARCH,  THEON,  EUSTROPHUS, 

NICANDER. 

1.  I happened  not  long  since,  dear  Serapion,  on  certain 
not  unelegant  verses,  which  Dicaearchus  supposes  Euri- 
pides to  have  spoken  to  King  Archelaus  : 

Pm  poor,  you  rich,  I’ll  therefore  nothing  give ; 

Lest  me  or  fool  or  beggar  you  believe. 

For  he  who  out  of  his  little  estate  makes  small  presents  to 
those  that  have  great  possessions  does  them  no  pleasure ; 
nay,  being  not  believed  to  give  even  that  little  for  nothing, 
he  incurs  the  suspicion  of  being  of  a sordid  and  ungenerous 
disposition.  But  since  pecuniary  presents  are  both  in 
bounty  and  beauty  far  inferior  to  such  as  proceed  from 
learning  and  wisdom,  it  is  honorable  both  to  make  such 
presents,  and  at  our  giving  them,  to  desire  suitable  returns 
from  the  receivers.  I therefore,  sending  to  you,  — and 
through  you  to  our  friends  in  those  parts,  — as  a first-fruit 
offering,  some  discourses  concerning  the  Pythian  affairs, 
confess  that  I do  in  requital  expect  others,  both  more  and 
better,  from  you,  as  being  persons  conversant  in  a great 
city,  and  enjoying  more  leisure  amongst  many  books  and 
conferences  of  all  sorts.  For  indeed  our  good  Apollo 
seems  to  cure  and  solve  such  difficulties  as  occur  in  the 
ordinary  management  of  our  life,  by  giving  his  oracles  to 
those  that  resort  to  him ; but  as  for  those  which  concern 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


479 


learning,  he  leaves  and  proposes  them  to  that  faculty  of  the 
soul  which  is  naturally  addicted  to  the  study  of  philosophy, 
imprinting  in  it  a desire  leading  to  truth ; as  is  manifest 
both  in  many  other  matters,  and  in  the  consecration  of  this 
inscription  El.  For  it  is  not  probable,  that  it  was  by  chance 
or  by  a lottery  (as  it  were)  of  letters  that  this  word  alone 
was  placed  in  the  principal  seat  in  the  God’s  temple,  and 
received  the  dignity  of  a sacred  donary  and  spectacle ; but 
it  is  highly  credible  that  those  who  at  the  beginning  philos- 
ophized concerning  this  God  gave  it  that  station,  either  as 
seeing  it  in  some  peculiar  and  extraordinary  poAver,  or 
using  it  as  a symbol  to  signify  some  other  thing  worthy  of 
our  attention. 

Having  therefore  often  formerly  declined  and  avoided 
this  discourse,  when  proposed  in  the  school,  I was  lately 
surprised  by  my  own  children  as  I was  debating  with  cer- 
tain strangers,  who  were  on  their  departure  out  of  Delphi, 
so  that  I could  not  in  civility  hold  them  in  suspense  nor 
yet  refuse  discoursing  with  them,  since  they  were  exceed- 
ing earnest  to  hear  something.  Being  therefore  set  down 
by  the  temple,  I began  myself  to  search  into  some  things, 
and  to  ask  them  concerning  others,  being  by  the  place  and 
the  very  talk  put  in  mind  of  those  things  we  had  hereto- 
fore, when  Nero  passed  through  these  parts,  heard  Ammo- 
nius  and  some  others  discourse ; the  same  difficulty  having 
been  then  likewise  in  this  very  place  propounded. 

2.  Since  therefore  this  God  is  no  less  a philosopher  than 
a prophet,  Ammonius  seemed  to  all  of  us  rightly  to  apply 
every  one  of  his  names  to  this  purpose,  and  to  teach  that 
he  is  Pythius  (or  a questionist ) to  those  who  begin  to  learn 
and  enquire ; Delius  and  Phanaeus  (or  a manif ester  and 
prover)  to  those  to  whom  somewhat  of  the  truth  is  already 
manifest  and  shines  forth  ; Ismenius  (or  blowing)  to  those 
that  have  acquired  knowledge ; and  Leschenorius  (or  dis- 
coursing) when  they  practise  and  enjoy  their  science,  mak- 


480 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


ing  use  of  it  to  discourse  and  philosophize  with  one 
another.  Now,  forasmuch  as  to  philosophize  implies  to 
enquire,  to  wonder,  and  to  doubt,  it  is  probable  (he  said) 
that  many  of  the  things  that  concern  God  are  not  unfitly 
concealed  under  enigmas,  and  require  that  one  should  ask 
the  reason  why,  and  seek  to  be  instructed  in  the  causes, 
— as,  why  of  all  wood  fir  only  is  burnt  in  the  eternal  fire, 
why  the  laurel  only  is  used  in  fumigations,  why  there  are 
erected  but  two  statues  of  the  Fates,  they  being  every- 
where else  thought  to  be  three,  why  no  woman  is  per- 
mitted to  have  access  to  the  oracle,  what  is  the  reason  of 
the  tripod,  and  other  such  like  things,  which,  being  pro- 
posed to  those  who  are  not  altogether  irrational  and  soul- 
less, allure  and  incite  them  to  consider,  hear,  and  discourse 
something  about  them.  And  do  but  behold  how  many 
questions  these  inscriptions,  “ Know  thyself”  and  “ Nothing 
too  much,”  have  set  afoot  amongst  the  philosophers,  and 
what  a multitude  of  discourses  has  sprung  up  from  each  of 
them,  as  from  a seed ; than  neither  of  which,  I think  the 
matter  now  in  question  to  be  less  fruitful. 

3.  Ammonius  having  spoken  thus,  Lamprias  the  Del- 
phian said : The  reason  indeed  which  we  have  heard  of 
this  is  plain  and  very  short ; for  they  say  that  those  Sages, 
who  were  by  some  called  Sophister^,  were  but  five,  Chilo, 
Thales,  Solon,  Bias,  and  Pittacus.  But  after  that  Cleobulus 
the  tyrant  of  the  Lindians,  and  Periander  the  Corinthian, 
though  wholly  destitute  of  virtue  and  wisdom,  had  by 
their  power,  friends,  and  courtesy  forced  a reputation,  they 
usurped  the  name  of  Sages,  and  set  forth  and  dispersed 
all  over  Greece  certain  sentences  and  sayings,  not  unlike 
to  those  which  had  been  spoken  by  the  five  former  wise 
men.  The  five,  however,  being  discontented  at  this,  would 
not  reprove  their  arrogancy,  nor  openly  contest  and  enter 
into  quarrels  for  glory  with  men  of  so  great  poAver ; but 
assembling  here  together,  and  consulting  with  one  another, 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


481 


they  consecrated  the  letter  E,  which  is  in  the  order  of  the 
alphabet  the  fifth,  and  signifies  five  in  number,  protesting 
of  themselves  before  the  God  that  they  were  but  five,  and 
rejecting  and  abdicating  the  sixth  and  seventh  as  not  be- 
longing to  them.  Now  that  these,  things  are  not  spoken 
beside  the  cushion,  any  one  might  understand  who  should 
have  heard  those  who  have  care  of  the  temple  naming  the 
golden  El  the  El  of  Livia,  the  wife  of  Augustus  Caesar ; 
and  the  brazen  one  the  El  of  the  Athenians ; but  the  first 
and  ancientest  of  all,  which  is  the  wooden  one,  they  call 
the  El  of  the  Sages,  as  not  being  of  any  one,  but  the 
common  dedication  of  them  all. 

4.  At  this  Ammonius  gently  smiled,  supposing  Lamprias 
to  have  delivered  an  opinion  of  his  own,  but  to  have 
feigned  that  he  had  heard  the  story  from  others,  lest  he 
might  be  obliged  to  give  an  account  of  it.  But  another 
of  those  that  were  present  said  that  this  had  some  affinity 
with  what  a certain  Chaldean  stranger  had  lately  babbled, 
to  wit,  that  there  are  in  the  alphabet  seven  letters  render- 
ing a perfect  sound  of  themselves,  and  in  the  heavens 
seven  stars  moved  by  their  own  proper  motion,  not  bound 
or  linked  to  that  of  the  others ; that  E is  from  the  begin- 
ning the  second  in  order  of  the  vowels,  and  the  sun  the 
second  of  the  planets,  or  next  to  the  moon,  and  that  the 
Greeks  do  unanimously  (so  to  speak)  repute  Apollo  to  be 
the  same  with  the  sun.  But  these  things,  said  he,  wholly 
savor  of  his  counting-table  and  his  trifling.  But  Lamprias, 
it  seems,  was  not  sensible  of  his  having  stirred  up  all 
those  of  the  temple  against  his  discourse.  For  there  was 
not  a man  of  the  Delphians  who  knew  any  thing  of  what 
he  said ; but  they  all  alleged  the  common  and  current 
opinion,  holding  that  neither  the  sight  nor  the  sound  of 
this  writing,  but  the  word  alone  as  it  was  written,  con- 
tained some  symbol  or  secret  signification. 

5.  For  the  syllable  El  ( if ) is,  as  the  Delphians  conceive 

31 


VOL.  IV. 


482 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


it,  and  as  Nicander  the  priest  (who  was  then  present)  also 
said,  a conveyance  and  form  of  prayer  to  the  God,  and 
has  the  leading  place  in  the  questions  of  those  who  at 
every  turn  use  it,  asking  if  they  shall  overcome,  if  they 
shall  marry,  if  it  is  convenient  to  go  to  sea,  if  to  till  the 
ground,  if  to  travel.  And  the  wise  God,  bidding  adieu  to 
the  logicians,  who  think  nothing  at  all  can  be  made  of 
this  particle  El  and  any  clause  following  it,  understands 
and  admits  all  interrogations  annexed  to  it,  as  real  things. 
Now,  because  it  is  proper  for  us  to  consult  him  as  a prophet, 
and  common  to  pray  to  him  as  a God,  they  suppose  that 
this  word  has  no  less  a precatory  than  an  interrogatory 
power.  For  every  one  who  prays  or  wishes  says,  si  yuQ 
mcpslov,  0 if  I were , &c.  And  Archilochus  has  also  this 
expression : 

If  I might  be  so  happy  as  to  touch 

My  Neobule’s  hand. 

And  they  say  that  the  second  syllable  in  the  word  stOs  is 
redundant  like  Of  in  this  of  Sopliron, aAfia  rsy.vav  dsvo^s'va, 
desiring  also  children  ; and  in  this  of  Homer,  '.Q5-  O f y.a\  gov 
Ij'co  Im rco  i usvos,  as  I will  also  foil  thy  strength  ; but  in  the 
word  El  there  is  sufficiently  declared  an  optative  power. 

6.  Nicander  having  delivered  these  words,  our  friend 
Theon,  whom  you  know,  asked  Ammonius  if  he  might 
have  liberty  to  plead  for  logic,  which  was  so  highly  in- 
jured. And  Ammonius  bidding  him  speak  and  defend  it, 
he  said  : Now  that  this  God  is  a most  expert  logician  many 
of  his  oracles  show ; for  it  is,  to  wit,  the  part  of  the  same 
artist  to  dissolve  and  frame  ambiguities.  Moreover,  as 
Plato  said,  when  an  oracle  was  given  to  the  Greeks  that 
they  should  double  the  altar  in  Delos,  which  is  a work  of 
the  utmost  perfection  in  geometry,  that  the  God  did  not 
order  the  doing  of  that  very  thing,  but  commanded  the 
Greeks  to  apply  themselves  to  geometry  ; so  the  same  God, 
by  giving  ambiguous  oracles,  honors  and  recommends  logic, 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


483 


as  necessary  to  those  who  desire  to  understand  him  aright. 
Now  this  conjunction/?/,  or  if,  has  a very  great  efficacy  in 
logic,  as  forming  the  most  rational  proposition ; for  how 
can  it  be  otherwise,  since  the  very  brutes  have  indeed  the 
knowledge  of  the  substance  of  things,  but  to  man  only 
has  Nature  given  the  consideration  and  judgment  of  conse- 
quence 1 For  that  there  is  both  day  and  light,  wolves  and 
dogs  and  birds  are  sensible.  But  that  if  it  is  day  there 
must  be  light,  no  other  animal  understands  but  man,  who 
only  has  the  conception  of  antecedent  and  consequent,  of 
the  significance  and  connection  of  these  things  with  one 
another,  and  of  their  habitude  and  difference,  from  which 
demonstrations  take  their  principal  beginnings.  Now  since 
philosophy  is  conversant  about  truth,  since  the  light  of 
truth  is  demonstration,  and  the  beginning  of  demonstration 
this  connection  of  propositions  ; the  faculty  which  contains 
and  effects  this  was  by  wise  men,  with  good  reason,  con- 
secrated to  the  God  Avho  most  of  all  loves  truth.  Now 
the  God  indeed  is  a prophet,  and  the  art  of  prophesying 
is  a divination  concerning  the  future  from  things  that  are 
present  and  past.  For  neither  is  the  original  of  any  thing 
without  a cause,  nor  the  foreknowledge  of  any  thing  with- 
out reason.  But  since  all  things  that  are  done  follow  and 
are  connected  to  those  that  have  been  done,  and  those  that 
shall  be  done  to  those  that  are  done,  according  to  the  pro- 
gress proceeding  from  the  beginning  to  the  end ; he  who 
knows  how  to  look  into  the  causes  of  this  together,  and 
naturally  connect  them  one  with  another,  knows  also  and 
divines 

What  things  now  are,  shall  be,  or  e’er  have  been.* 

And  Homer  indeed  excellently  well  places  first  things  that 
are  present,  and  afterwards  what  is  future  and  past.  For 
by  the  very  nature  of  the  connection  the  argument  is  based 
on  that  which  now  is.  Thus,  “ if  this  is,  that  preceded  ; ” 


* n.  i.  70. 


484 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


and  again,  “ if  this  is,  that  shall  be.”  For  the  knowledge  of 
the  consequence  is,  as  has  been  said,  an  artificial  and 
rational  thing  ; but  sense  gives  the  assumption  to  reason. 
Whence  (though  it  may  seem  indecent  to  say  it)  I will  not 
be  afraid  to  aver  this,  that  the  tripod  of  truth  is  reason, 
which  recognizes  the  dependence  of  the  consequent  on 
the  antecedent,  and  then,  assuming  the  reality  of  the  ante- 
cedent, infers  the  conclusion  of  the  demonstration.  If  then 
the  Pythian  Apollo  delights  in  music,  and  is  pleased  with 
the  singing  of  swans  and  the  harmony  of  the  lute,  what 
wonder  is  it  that,  for  the  sake  of  logic,  he  embraces  and 
loves  this  argumentative  particle,  which  he  sees  the  philoso- 
phers so  much  and  so  frequently  to  use  I Hercules  indeed, 
not  having  yet  unbound  Prometheus,  nor  conversed  with 
the  sophisters  that  were  with  Chiron  and  Atlas,  but  being 
still  a young  man  and  a plain  Boeotian,  at  first  abolished 
logic  and  derided  this  word  El;  but  afterwards  he  seemed 
by  force  to  have  seized  on  the  tripod,  and  contended  with 
our  God  himself  for  the  pre-eminence  in  this  art ; for  being 
grown  up  in  age,  he  appeared  to  be  the  most  expert  both 
in  divination  and  logic. 

7.  Theon  having  ended  his  speech,  I think  it  was  Eu- 
strophus  the  Athenian  who  said  to  us  : Do  you  not  see 
how  valiantly  Theon  vindicates  logic,  having,  in  a manner, 
got  on  the  lion’s  skin  \ So  it  is  not  right  even  for  us  — 
who  comprehensively  place  all  the  affairs,  nature,  and  prin- 
ciples of  things  both  divine  and  human  in  number,  and 
make  it  most  especially  the  author  and  lord  of  honest  and 
estimable  things  — to  be  at  quiet,  but  we  must  willingly 
offer  the  first-fruits  of  our  dear  mathematics  to  the  God ; 
since  we  think  that  this  letter  E does  not  of  itself  differ 
from  the  other  letters  either  in  power,  figure,  or  expression, 
hut  that  it  has  been  preferred  as  being  the  sign  of  that 
great  number  which  has  an  influence  over  all  things, 
called  the  Quinary  (or  Pemptas),  from  which  the  Sages 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


485 


have  expressed  the  art  of  numbering  by  the  verb  n^nrd^uv 
(signifying  to  account  by  fives).  Now  Eustrophus  spake 
these  things  to  us,  not  in  jest,  but  because  I did  at  that 
time  studiously  apply  myself  to  the  mathematics,  and  per- 
haps also  in  every  thing  to  honor  that  saying,  “Nothing 
too  much,”  as  having  been  conversant  in  the  Academy. 

8.  I answered  therefore  that  Eustrophus  has  excellently 
solved  the  difficulty  by  number.  For  (said  I)  since  all 
number  is  distributed  into  even  and  odd,  unity  is  in  efficacy 
common  to  them  both,  — for  that  being  added  to  an  even 
number,  it  makes  it  odd,  and  to  an  odd,  it  makes  it  even, 
two  constituting  the  beginning  of  the  even,  and  three  of 
the  odd.  Now  the  number  of  five,  composed  of  these 
two,  is  deservedly  honored,  as  being  the  first  compound 
made  of  the  first  simple  numbers,  and  is  called  the  mar- 
riage, for  the  resemblance  of  the  odd  with  the  male,  and 
the  even  with  the  female.  For  in  the  divisions  of  the 
numbers  into  equal  parts,  the  even,  being  wholly  separated, 
leaves  a certain  capacious  beginning  and  space  in  itself ; 
but  in  the  odd,  suffering  the  same  thing,  there  always 
remains  a middle,  of  generative  distribution,  by  which  it  is 
more  fruitful  than  the  other,  and  being  mixed  is  always 
master,  never  mastered.  For  by  the  mixture  of  both, 
even  and  odd  together,  there  is  never  produced  an  even 
number  but  always  an  odd.  But  which  is  more,  either  of 
them  added  to  and  compounded  with  itself  shows  the  dif- 
ference ; for  no  even  joined  with  another  even  ever  pro- 
duced an  odd,  or  went  forth  of  its  proper  nature,  being 
through  weakness  unable  to  generate  another  and  imper- 
fect. But  odd  numbers  mixed  with  odd  do,  through  their 
being  every  way  fruitful,  produce  many  even  ones.  Time 
does  not  now  permit  us  to  set  down  the  other  powers  and 
differences  of  numbers.  Therefore  have  the  Pythago- 
reans, through  a certain  resemblance,  said  that  five  is  the 
marriage  of  the  first  male  and  the  first  female  number.  This 


486 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


also  is  it  for  which  it  is  called  Nature,  by  the  multiplica- 
tion of  itself  determining  again  into  itself.  For  as  Nature, 
taking  a grain  of  wheat  for  seed  and  diffusing  it,  produces 
many  forms  and  species  between,  by  which  she  brings  her 
work  to  an  end,  but  at  last  she  shows  again  a grain  of 
wheat,  restoring  the  beginning  in  the  end  of  all ; so,  while 
the  rest  of  the  numbers,  when  they  are  multiplied  into 
others,  terminate  by  the  increase  only  those  of  five  and 
six,  multiplied  by  themselves,  bring  back  and  preserve 
themselves.  For  six  times  six  makes  thirty-six,  and  five 
times  five  makes  twenty-five.  And  again,  six  does  this 
once,  and  only  after  one  manner,  to  wit,  when  it  is  squared. 
But  this  indeed  befalls  five  both  by  multiplication  and  by 
composition  with  itself,  to  which  being  added,  it  alterna- 
tively makes  itself  and  ten  ; and  this  as  far  as  all  number 
can  extend,  this  number  imitating  the  beginning  or  first 
Cause  which  governs  the  universe.  For  as  that  first  Cause, 
preserving  the  world  by  itself,  does  reciprocally  perfect 
itself  by  the  world,  as  Heraclitus  says  of  fire, 

Fire  turns  to  all  things,  and  all  things  to  fire  ; 

and  as  money  is  changed  for  gold,  and  gold  for  money ; so 
the  congress  of  five  with  itself  is  framed  by  Nature  to  pro- 
duce nothing  imperfect  or  strange,  but  has  limited  changes  ; 
for  it  either  generates  itself  or  ten,  that  is,  either  what  is 
proper  to  itself,  or  what  is  perfect. 

9.  Now  if  any  one  shall  say,  What  is  all  this  to  Apollo  \ 
we  will  answer,  that  it  concerns  not  Apollo  only,  but  Bac- 
chus also,  who  has  no  less  to  do  with  Delphi  than  Apollo 
himself.  For  we  have  heard  the  divines,  partly  in  verse 
partly  in  prose,  saying  and  singing,  that  the  God  is  of  his 
own  nature  incorruptible  and  eternal,  but  yet,  through  a 
certain  fatal  decree  and  reason,  suffers  changes  of  himself, 
having  sometimes  his  nature  kindled  into  a fire,  and  making 
all  things  alike,  and  othenvhiles  becoming  various,  in  dif- 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


487 


ferent  shapes,  passions,  and  powers,  like  unto  the  World, 
and  is  named  by  this  best-known  of  names.  But  the  wiser, 
concealing  from  the  vulgar  the  change  into  fire,  call  him 
both  Apollo  from  his  unity  * and  Phoebus  from  his  purity 
and  unpollutedness.  But  as  for  the  passion  and  change  of 
his  conversion  into  winds,  Avater,  earth,  stars,  and  the  vari- 
ous kinds  of  plants  and  animals,  and  its  order  and  dispo- 
sition, this  they  obscurely  represent  as  a certain  distraction 
and  dismembering ; and  they  uoav  call  him  Dionysus,  Za- 
greus,  Nyctelius,  and  Isodaetes,  exhibiting  and  chanting 
forth  certain  corruptions,  disparitions,  deaths,  and  resurrec- 
tions, Avhich  are  all  riddles  and  fables  suited  to  the  said 
mutations.  To  Dionysus  or  Bacchus  they  sing  dithyrambic 
verses,  full  of  passions  and  change,  joined  with  a certain 
Avandering  and  agitation  baclvAvards  and  forwards ; for,  as 
Aeschylus  says, 

The  dithyramb,  whose  sounds  are  dissonant, 

’Tis  fit  should  wait  on  Bacchus. 

But  to  Apollo  they  sing  the  Avell-ordered  paean  and  a 
discreet  song.  And  Apollo  both  in  their  sculptures  and 
statues  they  always  make  to  be  young  and  never  declining 
to  old  age  ; but  Dionysus  they  represent  in  many  shapes 
and  forms.  Lastly,  to  the  one  they  attribute  equality, 
order,  and  unmixed  gravity  ; but  to  the  other,  a certain 
unequal  mixture  of  sports,  petulancy,  gravity,  and  madness, 
surnaming  him, 

Evius  Bacchus,  who  to  rage  incites 
Women  on  tops  of  mountains,  and  delights 
In  frantic  worship. 

Thus  they  not  unfitly  touch  the  property  of  both  changes. 
Noav  because  the  time  of  the  revolutions  in  these  changes 
is  not  equal,  but  that  of  the  one  which  they  call  Koros 
(that  is,  satiety)  is  longer,  and  that  of  the  other  named 
Chresmosyne  (or  want)  shorter ; observing  in  this  the  pro- 

* Deriving  Apollo  from  a and  wo/lff  (or  7ro/W6f),  much.  (G.) 


488 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


portion,  they  all  the  rest  of  the  year  use  in  their  sacrifices 
the  paean ; but  at  the  beginning  of  winter,  rousing  up  the 
dithyramb,  and  laying  the  paean  to  rest,  they  do  for  three 
months  invocate  Bacchus  instead  of  Apollo,  esteeming  the 
creation  of  the  world  do  be  the  same  in  proportion  of 
time  to  the  conflagration  of  it  as  three  to  one. 

10.  But  these  things  have  perhaps  had  more  than  suffi- 
cient time  spent  on  them.  This,  however,  is  evident,  that 
they  properly  attribute  to  this  God  the  number  of  five, 
saying  that  it  sometimes  of  itself  produces  itself  like  fire, 
and  other  whiles  the  number  of  ten,  like  the  world.  But 
do  we  think  that  this  number  is  not  also  concerned  with 
music,  which  is  of  all  things  most  acceptable  to  this  God? 
For  the  chiefest  operation  of  harmony  is,  as  one  may  say, 
about  symphonies.  Now  that  these  are  five  and  no  more, 
reason  convinces  even  him  who  will  by  his  senses  without 
reasoning  make  trial  either  on  strings  or  pipe-holes.  For 
all  these  accords  take  their  original  in  proportions  of  num- 
ber ; and  the  proportion  of  the  symphony  diatessaron  is 
sesquitertial,  of  cliapente  sesquialter,  of  diapason  duple,  of 
diapason  with  diapente  triple,  and  of  disdiapason  quadru- 
ple. But  as  for  that  which,  transcending  all  measures,  the 
musicians  add  to  these,  naming  it  diapason  with  diatessaron, 
it  is  not  fit  we  should  receive  it,  gratifying  the  unreasona- 
ble pleasure  of  the  ear  against  proportion,  which  is  as  the 
law.  I may  therefore  let  pass  the  five  positions  of  the 
tetrachords,  and  also  the  five  first,  — whether  they  are  to 
be  called  tones,  tropes,  or  harmonies,  — according  to  the 
changes  of  which  by  rising  or  falling,  either  to  more  or 
less,  the  rest  are  bases  or  trebles.  And,  whereas  there  are 
many  or  rather  infinite  intervals,  are  not  five  of  them  only 
used  in  music,  to  wit,  diesis,  hemitonion,  tonos,  triemitonion, 
and  ditonon?  Nor  is  there  in  the  voice  any  other  space, 
either  greater  or  less,  that,  being  distinguished  by  base  or 
treble,  comes  into  melody. 


OF  El  AT  APOLLOS’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


489 


11.  Passing  by  many  other  such  like  things,  said  I,  I 
will  produce  only  Plato  ; who  says,  that  there  is  but  one 
world,  but  that  if  this  were  not  alone,  so  that  there  were 
others  besides  it,  they  would  be  in  all  five  and  no  more. 
For  indeed,  though  there  is  but  this  one  only  world,  as 
Aristotle  is  also  of  opinion,  yet  this  world  is  in  some  sort 
composed  and  assembled  of  five,  of  which  one  indeed  is  of 
earth,  another  of  water,  the  third  of  fire,  the  fourth  of  air, 
and  the  fifth,  being  heaven,  some  call  light  and  others  the 
sky  ; and  some  also  name  this  same  the  fifth  essence, 
which  alone  of  all  bodies  is  naturally  carried  about  in  a 
circle,  and  not  of  necessity  or  otherwise  by  accident. 
Wherefore  Plato,  knowing  that,  of  the  figures  which  are 
in  Nature,  there  are  five  most  excellent  and  perfect,  — to 
wit,  the  pyramid,  the  cube,  the  octahedron,  the  icosahe- 
dron, and  the  dodecahedron,  — has  fitly  accommodated 
each  of  them  to  each  of  these  worlds  or  bodies. 

12.  There  are  some  also  who  apply  the  faculties  of  the 
senses,  being  equal  in  number,  to  these  five  first  bodies, 
seeing  the  touch  to  be  firm  and  earthly,  and  the  taste  to 
perceive  the  qualities  of  savors  by  moisture.  Now  the 
air  being  struck  upon  is  a voice  and  sound  to  the  ear  ; and 
as  for  the  other  two,  — the  scent,  which  the  smell  has  ob- 
tained for  its  object,  being  an  exhalation  and  engendered 
by  heat,  is  fiery  ; and  the  sight,  which  shines  by  reason  of 
its  affinity  to  the  sky  and  light,  has  from  them  a tempera- 
ture and  complexion  equally  mingled  of  both.  Now  neither 
has  any  animal  any  other  sense,  nor  the  world  any  other 
nature  simple  and  unmixed ; but  there  has  been  made,  as 
appears,  a certain  wonderful  distribution  and  congruity  of 
five  to  five. 

13.  Having  here  stopped  a little,  and  made  a small 
pause  between,  I said:  What  a fault,  O Eustrophus,  ivere 
we  like  to  have  committed,  having  almost  passed  by  Homer, 
as  if  he  were  not  the  first  that  distributed  the  world  into 


490 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


five  parts,  who  assigned  the  three  which  are  in  the  midst 
to  three  Gods,  and  left  the  two  extremes,  Olympus  and 
the  Earth  — of  which  one  is  the  limit  of  things  above, 
the  other  of  things  below  — common  and  undistributed* 
But  we  must,  as  Euripides  says,  return  to  our  discourse. 
For  those  who  magnify  the  quaternary,  or  number  of  four, 
teach  not  amiss,  that  every  solid  body  had  its  generation 
by  reason  of  this.  For  since  every  solid  consists  in  length 
and  breadth,  having  withal  a depth ; and  since  before 
length  there  is  extant  a point,  answerable  to  unity,  and 
length  without  breadth  is  called  a line  and  consists  of  two ; 
and  the  motion  of  a line  towards  breadth  exhibits  also  the 
procreation  of  a superficies  in  the  number  three  ; and  the 
argumentation  of  this,  when  depth  is  added  to  it,  goes  on 
to  a solid  in  the  number  four  ; it  is  manifest  to  every  one, 
that  the  quaternary,  having  carried  on  Nature  hitherto, 
and  even  to  the  perfecting  of  a body  and  the  exhibiting  it 
tangible,  massy,  and  solid,  has  yet  at  last  left  it  wanting 
the  greatest  accomplishment.  For  that  which  is  inanimate 
is,  to  speak  sincerely,  orphan-like,  imperfect,  and  fit  for 
nothing  at  all,  unless  there  is  some  soul  to  use  it ; but  the 
motion  or  disposition  introducing  a soul,  being  a change 
made  by  the  number  five,  adds  the  consummation  to  Na- 
ture, and  has  a reason  so  much  more  excellent  than  the 
quaternary,  as  an  animal  differs  in  dignity  from  that  which 
is  inanimate.  Moreover,  the  symmetry  and  power  of  this 
number  five,  having  obtained  greater  force,  has  not  per- 
mitted the  animate  body  to  proceed  to  infinite  sorts,  but 
has  exhibited  five  species  of  all  things  that  have  life.  For 
there  are  Gods,  Genii,  and  heroes,  and  then  after  them  the 
fourth  sort  is  men,  and  the  fifth  and  last  the  irrational  and 
brutish  animal.  Furthermore,  if  you  divide  the  soul  itself 
according  to  its  nature,  its  first  and  most  obscure  part  or 
faculty  is  the  vegetative,  the  second  the  sensitive,  then  the 


* See  II.  XV.  189. 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO'S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


491 


concupiscible,  after  that  the  irascible  ; and  having  brought 
on  and  perfected  Nature  in  the  faculty  of  the  rational,  it 
rests  in  this  fifth,  as  in  the  top  of  all. 

14.  Now  the  generation  of  this  number,  which  has  so 
many  and  so  great  faculties,  is  also  beautiful,  — not  that 
which  we  have  already  discoursed  of,  from  two  and  three, 
but  that  which  the  first  principle  joined  with  the  first 
square  has  exhibited.  For  the  principle  of  all  number  is 
unity,  and  the  first  square  is  the  quaternary ; now  the 
quinary  is  composed  of  these,  as  of  form  and  of  matter  which 
has  attained  to  perfection.  And  if  it  is  right,  which  some 
hold,  that  unity  is  also  square,  as  being  the  power  of 
itself  and  terminating  in  itself ; the  quinary,  being  made 
of  the  first  two  squares,  could  not  have  a more  noble 
original. 

15.  But  as  for  its  greatest  excellency,  I fear,  lest  being 
spoken  it  should  press  our  Plato  as  much  as  he  himself 
said  Anaxagoras  was  pressed  by  the  name  of  the  moon, 
when  he  made  a certain  opinion  concerning  her  illumina- 
tions, which  was  very  ancient,  to  be  an  invention  of  his 
own.  For  has  he  not  said  this  in  his  dialogue  entitled 
Cratylus  \ * 

Yes  indeed,  answered  Eustrophus  ; but  I see  not  any 
thing  that  has  fallen  out  like  it.  And  yet  you  know,  that 
in  the  Sopliister  j*  he  demonstrates  five  principal  begin- 
nings, to  wit,  that  which  is,  or  Ens  (to  or),  the  Same,  the 
Different,  adding  to  these,  for  a fourth  and  fifth,  Motion 
and  Best.  Again,  in  his  dialogue  called  Philebus,  £ using 
another  manner  of  division,  he  says,  that  there  is  one  thing 
Infinite,  and  another  the  End ; and  that  all  generation 
consists  of  these  two  mixed  together.  Then  he  puts  the 
cause  by  which  they  are  mixed  for  the  fourth  kind ; and 
has  left  us  to  conjecture  the  fifth,  by  which  the  things  that 
were  mixed  have  again  a division  and  dissipation.  Now  I 

* See  Cratyl.  p.  409  A.  t See  Sophist,  p.  254  D.  J See  Pliileb.  p.  23  C-E. 


492 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


am  of  opinion  that  these  last  are  delivered  as  the  images 
or  representations  of  those  before,  — to  wit,  the  things 
engendered  of  Ens,  the  Infinite  of  Motion,  the  End  of  Rest, 
the  Mixing  Principle  of  the  Same,  and  the  Separating 
Principle  of  the  Different.  But  if  these  are  different  from 
those,  yet  both  that  way  and  this  way  these  principles  are 
still  distinguished  into  five  kinds  and  differences.  Now 
some  one,  said  he,  being  persuaded  of  these  things  and 
seeing  them  before  Plato,  consecrated  to  the  God  two  E E, 
for  a mark  and  symbol  of  the  number  of  all  things.  And 
having  perhaps  further  understood  that  good  also  appears 
in  five  kinds,  of  which  the  first  is  the  mean,  the  second 
the  commensurate,  the  third  understanding,  the  fourth  the 
sciences,  arts,  and  true  opinions  in  the  soul,  and  the  fifth  a 
certain  pleasure,  pure  and  unmixed  with  sorrow ; he  stops 
there,  subjoining  that  of  Orpheus  : 

In  the  sixth  age  stay  your  desire  of  singing. 

16.  After  what  I have  spoken  to  you,  I said,  Yet  one 
short  word  to  those  about  Nicander, 

I’ll  sing  to  men  of  skill. 

For  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  new  moon,  when  you  introduce 
the  Pythia  into  the  Prytaneum,  the  first  of  the  three  lots 
tends  with  you  towards  five,  casting  neither  three,  nor  two, 
one  to  another.*  For  is  not  this  so? 

It  is  so,  said  Nicander ; but  the  cause  is  not  to  be  told 
to  others. 

Well  then,  said  I smiling,  till  such  time  as  the  God  ad- 
mits us,  being  consecrated,  to  know  the  truth,  this  also 
shall  be  added  to  those  things  that  have  been  spoken  con- 
cerning the  quinary.  This  end,  as  I remember,  had  the 
discourse  of  the  arithmetical  and  mathematical  encomiums 
of  E. 

* I leave  this  corrupt  passage  as  I find  it  in  the  old  translation.  The  Greek 
cannot  be  tortured  into  any  sense.  (G.) 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


493 


17.  But  Ammonius,  who  had  himself  also  bestowed  not 
the  worst  part  of  his  time  in  mathematical  philosophy,  was 
delighted  with  what  had  been  spoken,  and  said : It  is  not 
meet  too  eagerly  to  oppose  these  young  men  about  these 
things,  except  by  saying  that  every  one  of  the  numbers 
will  afford  you,  if  you  desire  to  praise  it,  no  small  subject 
of  commendations.  And  what  need  is  there  to  speak  of 
others'?  For  the  septener,  sacred  to  Apollo,  will  take  up 
a day’s  time,  before  one  can  in  words  run  through  all  its 
powers.  We  shall  therefore  pronounce,  that  the  Sages  do 
at  once  contest  both  against  common  law  and  a long  series 
of  time,  if,  throwing  the  septenary  out  of  its  seat,  they 
consecrate  the  quinary  to  the  God,  as  being  more  suitable 
to  him.  I am  therefore  of  opinion,  that  this  syllable  sig- 
nifies neither  number,  order,  nor  connection,  nor  any  other 
of  the  deficient  parts,  but  is  a self-perfect  appellation  and 
salutation  of  the  God,  which  brings  the  speaker  to  the 
conception  of  the  power  of  the  God  at  the  very  moment 
of  uttering  it.  For  the  God  in  a manner  calls  upon  every 
one  of  us  who  comes  hither,  with  this  salutation,  Know 
thyself,  which  is  nothing  inferior  to  All  hail.  And  we 
again,  answering  the  God,  say  to  him  El,  thou  art ; attrib- 
uting to  him  the  true,  unfeigned,  and  sole  appellation  of 
being,  as  agreeing  to  him  alone. 

18.  For  we  indeed  do  not  at  all  essentially  partake  of 
being ; but  every  mortal  nature,  being  in  the  midst  be- 
tween generation  and  corruption,  exhibits  an  appearance, 
and  an  obscure  and  weak  opinion  of  itself.  And  if  you 
fix  your  thought,  desiring  to  comprehend  it,  — as  the  hard 
grasping  of  water,  by  the  pressing  and  squeezing  together 
that  which  is  fluid,  loses  that  which  is  held,  — so  when 
reason  pursues  too  evident  a perception  of  any  one  of  the 
things  subject  to  passion  and  change,  it  is  deceived  and 
led  away,  partly  towards  its  generation  and  partly  towards 
its  corruption,  being  able  to  apprehend  nothing  either  re- 


494 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


maining  or  really  subsisting.  For  we  cannot,  as  Heracli- 
tus says,  step  twice  into  the  same  river,  or  twice  find  any 
perishable  substance  in  the  same  state ; but  by  the  sudden- 
ness and  swiftness  of  the  change,  it  disperses  and  again 
gathers  together,  comes  and  goes.  Whence  what  is  generat- 
ed of  it  reaches  not  to  the  perfection  of  being,  because. the 
generation  never  ceases  nor  is  at  an  end;  but  always 
changing,  of  seed  it  makes  an  embryo,  next  an  infant,  then 
a child,  then  a stripling,  after  that  a young  man,  then  a 
full-grown  man,  an  elderly  man,  and  lastly,  a decrepit  old 
man,  corrupting  the  former  generations  and  statures  by  the 
latter.  But  we  ridiculously  fear  one  death,  having  already 
so  often  died  and  still  dying.  For  not  only,  as  Heraclitus 
said,  is  the  death  of  fire  the  generation  of  air,  and  the 
death  of  air  the  generation  of  water ; but  you  may  see  this 
more  plainly  in  men  themselves  ; for  the  full-grown  man 
perishes  when  the  old  man  comes,  as  the  youth  terminated 
in  the  full-grown  man,  the  child  in  the  youth,  the  infant  in 
the  child.  So  yesterday  died  in  to-day,  and  to-day  dies  in 
to-morrow ; so  that  none  remains  nor  is  one,  but  we  are 
generated  many,  according  as  matter  glides  and  turns  about 
one  phantasm  and  common  mould.  For  how  do  we,  if  we 
remain  the  same,  delight  now  in  other  things  than  we  de- 
lighted in  before'?  How  do  we  love,  hate,  admire,  and 
contemn  things  contrary  to  the  former  ? How  do  we  use 
other  words  and  other  passions,  not  having  the  same  form, 
figure,  or  understanding?  For  neither  is  it  probable  we 
should  be  thus  differently  affected  without  change,  neither 
is  he  who  changes  the  same.  And  if  he  is  not  the  same, 
neither  is  he  at  all ; but  changing  from  the  same,  he 
changes  also  his  being,  being  made  one  from  another.  But 
the  sense  is  deceived  through  the  ignorance  of  being,  sup- 
posing that  to  be  which  appears. 

19.  What  then  is  it  that  has  really  a being?  That 
which  is  eternal,  unbegotten,  and  incorruptible,  to  which  no 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


495 


time  brings  a change.  For  time  is  a certain  movable  thing 
appearing  in  connection  with  fleeting  matter,  always  flow- 
ing and  unstable,  like  a leaky  vessel  full  of  corruption  and 
generation;  of  which  the  sayings  “ after”  and  “before,”  “ it 
has  been”  and  “ it  shall  be,”  are  of  themselves  a confession 
that  it  has  no  being.  For  to  say  that  what  not  yet  is  or  what 
has  already  ceased  to  be  is  in  being,  how  foolish  and  absurd 
is  it.  And  as  for  that  on  which  we  chiefly  ground  the  under- 
standing of  time,  — saying,  the  instant,  present,  and  now, — 
this  again  reason  wholly  rejects  and  overthrows  ; for  it  is 
lost  between  the  future  and  the  past,  like  a flash  of  light, 
and  is  separated  into  two  when  we  will  behold  it.  Now 
if  the  same  thing  befalls  Nature,  which  is  measured  by 
time,  as  does  the  time  which  measures  it,  there  is  nothing 
in  it  permanent  or  subsistent,  but  all  things  are  either 
breeding  or  dying,  according  to  their  commixture  with 
time.  Whence  also  it  is  not  lawful  to  say  of  any  thing 
which  is,  that  it  was  or  shall  be  ; for  these  are  inclinations 
and  departures  and  changes  of  that  whose  nature  is  not  to 
continue  in  being. 

20.  But  God,  we  must  say,  is,  and  he  is  not  in  any  time, 
but  in  eternity,  which  is  immovable  without  time,  and  free  ) 
from  inclination,  in  which  there  is  nothing  first,  or  last,  or 
newer;  but  being  one,  it  has  filled  its  eternal  duration  with 
one  only  “ now  ” ; and  that  only  is  which  is  really  according 
to  this,  of  which  it  cannot  be  said,  that  it  either  was  or 
shall  be,  or  that  it  begins  or  shall  end.  Thus  ought  those 
who  worship  to  salute  and  invocate  this  Eternal  Being,  or 
else  indeed,  as  some  of  the  ancients  have  done,  with  this 
expression  El  tv,  Thou  art  one.  For  the  Divinity  is  not 
many,  as  every  one  of  us  is  made  of  ten  thousand  differ- 
ences in  affections,  being  a confused  heap,  filled  with  all 
diversities.  But  that  which  is  must  be  one,  as  one  must 
have  a being.  But  diversity,  which  is  esteemed  to  be  differ- 
ent from  being,  goes  forth  to  the  generation  of  that  which 


496 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


is  not.  Whence  both  the  first  of  his  names  agrees  rightly 
with  this  God,  as  do  also  the  second  and  third.  For  he  is 
called  Apollo,  as  denying  plurality  and  rejecting  multitude ; 
and  Ieios,  as  being  only  one  ; and  Phoebus  was  the  name 
given  by  the  ancients  to  every  thing  that  is  pure  and  chaste ; 
as  the  Thessalians  even  to  this  day,  if  I am  not  mistaken, 
say  of  their  priests,  when  on  vacant  days  they  abstain  from 
the  temples  and  keep  themselves  retired,  that  they  purify 
themselves  (cpotfiovonETodca).  Now  that  which  is  one  is  sincere 
and  pure.  For  pollution  is  by  the  mixture  of  one  thing 
with  another  ; as  Homer,  speaking  of  a piece  of  ivory  dyed 
red,  said  it  was  “ polluted  ” by  the  dye,  and  dyers  say  of 
mixed  colors  that  they  are  corrupted,  and  call  the  mixture 
itself  corruption.  It  is  therefore  always  requisite  for  that 
which  is  incorruptible  and  pure  to  be  one  and  unmixed. 

21.  Now,  as  for  those  who  think  Apollo  and  the  Sun  to 
be  the  same,  they  are  to  be  caressed  and  loved  for  their 
ingenuity,  as  placing  the  notion  of  God  in  that  which  they 
most  reverence,  of  all  things  that  they  know  and  desire. 
And  now,  as  if  they  were  dreaming  of  God  the  most  glorious 
dream,  let  us  stir  up  and  exhort  them  to  ascend  higher,  and 
to  contemplate  his  reality  and  his  essence ; but  to  honor 
also  this  his  image  (the  Sun),  and  to  venerate  that  genera- 
tive faculty  he  has  placed  in  it,  since  it  exhibits  in  some 
sort  by  its  brightness  — as  far  as  it  is  possible  for  a sensi- 
ble thing  to  represent  an  intellectual,  and  a movable  thing 
that  which  is  permanent  — certain  manifestations  and  re- 
semblances of  his  benignity  and  blessedness.  But  as  for 
those  his  sallyings  out  and  changes,  when  he  casts  forth 
fire,  . . . and  when  he  again  draws  himself  in,  afterwards 
extending  himself  into  the  earth,  sea,  winds,  animals,  and 
strange  accidents  both  of  animals  and  plants,  they  cannot 
so  much  as  be  hearkened  to  without  impiety ; or  else  God 
will  be  worse  than  the  child  in  the  poet,  — who  made 
himself  sport  with  a heap  of  sand,  first  raised  and  then 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI.  497 

again  scattered  abroad  by  himself,  — if  he  shall  do  the  same 
in  respect  of  the  universe,  first  framing  the  world  when  it 
was  not,  and  then  destroying  it  when  made.  On  the  con- 
trary, whatsoever  of  him  is  in  any  sort  infused  into  the 
world,  that  binds  together  its  substance,  and  restrains  the 
corporeal  weakness  which  tends  to  corruption.  And  it 
seems  to  me  that  this  word  is  chiefly  opposed  to  that 
doctrine,  and  that  El,  Thou  art,  is  spoken  to  this  God,  as 
testifying  that  there  is  never  in  him  any  going  forth  or 
change.  But  to  do  and  suffer  this  agrees  to  one  of  the  other 
Gods,  or  rather  Daemons,  ordained  to  take  care  about  Na- 
ture in  generation  and  corruption ; as  is  immediately  mani- 
fest from  their  names,  being  wholly  contrary  and  of  different 
significations.  For  the  one  is  called  Apollo  (or  not  many), 
the  other  Pluto  (or  many)  ; the  one  Delius  (from  clear- 
ness), the  other  Aidoneus  (from  obscurity) ; the  one  Phoe- 
bus (or  shining),  the  other  Scotius  (or  dark) ; with  the  one 
are  the  Muses  and  Mnemosyne  (or  song  and  memory) 
with  the  other  Lethe  and  Siope  (or  forgetfulness  and 
silence).  Ihe  one  is  (from  contemplating  and  showing) 
named  Theorius  and  Phanaeus ; the  other  is 

Prince  of  dark  night  and  sluggish  sleep,  whose  fate 
Is  that  men  him  most  of  all  Gods  do  hate. 

Of  Apollo  also  Pindar  not  unpleasantly  sung,  that  he 

The  gentlest  of  all  Gods  to  mortals  is  declared. 

And  therefore  Euripides  rightly  also  said : 

These  mournful  songs  suit  well  with  men  deceased, 

With  which  gold-haired  Apollo’s  no  way  pleased. 

And  before  him  Stesichorus  : 

Apollo  joys  in  sports  and  pleasant  tones  ; 

But  Pluto  takes  delight  in  griefs  and  moans. 

Sophocles  also  evidently  attributes  to  either  of  them  his 
proper  instruments,  in  these  words  : 

Neither  the  lute  nor  psaltery  is  fit 
For  mournful  matters. 


VOL.  IV. 


32 


498 


OF  El  AT  APOLLO’S  TEMPLE  IN  DELPHI. 


For  it  is  but  very  lately,  and  in  a manner  of  yesterday,  that 
the  pipe  has  dared  to  introduce  itself  into  delightful  mat- 
ters; having  in  former  times  drawn  men  to  mourning,  and 
possessing  about  these  things  no  very  honorable  or  splendid 
employment.  But  afterwards  all  was  brought  into  con- 
fusion, which  was  due  especially  to  those  who  confounded 
the  affairs  of  the  Gods  with  those  of  the  Genii. 

But  the  sentence,  Know  thyself,  seems  in  one  respect  to 
contradict  this  word  El,  and  in  another  to  agree  with  it. 
For  the  one  is  pronounced  with  admiration  and  veneration 
to  God,  as  being  eternal ; and  the  other  is  a remembrance 
to  mortal  men  of  their  nature  and  infirmity. 


WHETHER  VICE  IS  SUFFICIENT  TO  RENDER  A MAN 

UNHAPPY* 


[ The  beginning  is  lost.~\ 

1.  He  suffers  much,  who  for  a dowry  has 
His  body  sold,  

as  Euripides  says  ; for  he  gets  but  small  matters  by  it,  and 
those  very  uncertain.  But  to  him  who  passes  not  through 
much  ashes,  but  through  a certain  regal  pile  of  fire,  being 
perpetually  short  breathed,  full  of  fear,  and  bathed  in 
sw  eat  as  if  he  had  crossed  the  seas  to  and  fro,  she  gives  at 
last  a certain  Tantalian  wealth,  which  he  cannot  enjoy  by 
reason  of  the  continual  turmoil  that  encumbers  him.  For 
that  Sicyonian  horse-courser  was  well  advised,  who  pre- 
sented the  king  of  the  Achaeans  with  a swift-footed  mare, 

That  to  proud  Ilium’s  siege  he  might  not  go,t 

but  stay  at  home  and  take  his  pleasure,  wallowing  in  the 

* Tho  this  tract  is  so  defective,  both  in  the  beginning  and  end,  that  they 
cannot,  even  to  this  present,  be  so  much  as  guess’d  at ; yet  the  title  and  fragment 
we  have  left  sufficiently  discover  the  author’s  intention.  Now  as,  from  the  ruins  of 
an  old  regal  palace,  our  imagination  does  in  some  sort  represent  to  us,  how  beauti- 
ful it  was  whilst  it  stood  entire  ; so  this  little  remnant  suffices  to  show  the  greatness 
of  our  loss.  But  though  the  injury  of  time  has  depriv’d  us  of  this  benefit,  and 
many  others  of  like  nature  ; yet  this  remainder,  as  imperfect  as  it  is,  may  be  profit- 
able to  us,  and  serve  to  put  us  in  mind  of  our  duty.  Our  author  having,  in  the 
beginning,  describ’d  the  misery  of  a covetous  person,  and  of  a courtier,  adds,  in 
prosecution  of  his  principal  design,  that  Vice  is  the  absolute  effector  of  infelicity, 
having  need  of  no  instruments  or  servants,  to  render  a man  miserable ; whence  lie 
collects,  that  there  is  no  danger  or  calamity  which  we  ought  not  rather  to  choose 
than  to  be  vicious.  He  answers  the  objections  made  to  the  contrary,  and  concludes 
that  no  adversity  can  prejudice  us,  if  it  be  not  accompany’d  with  Vice  IS  W 1 
t II.  XXIII.  297.  ' ' ' '' 


500 


WHETHER  VICE  IS  SUFFICIENT 


depth  of  his  riches,  and  giving  himself  up  to  an  unmolested 
ease. 

But  those  who  now  seem  to  be  without  trouble  and  men 
of  action  do,  without  being  called  to  it,  thrust  themselves 
headlong  into  the  courts  of  princes,  where  they  must  be 
obliged  to  tedious  attending  and  watching,  that  they  may 
gain  an  horse,  a chain,  or  some  such  blessed  favor. 

In  the  mean  time  the  wife,  of  joy  bereft, 

Sits  tearing  her  fair  cheeks,  the  house  is  left 

Imperfect  and  half  built ; 

whilst  the  husband  is  drawn  and  hurried  about,  wandering 
amongst  others,  allured  by  hopes  of  which  he  is  often 
disappointed,  suffering  disgrace  and  shame.  But  if  he 
happens  to  obtain  any  of  those  things  he  so  eagerly  desires, 
after  he  has  been  turned  about  and  made  dizzy  with  being 
Fortune’s  sport,  he  seeks  a dismission,  and  declares  those  to 
be  happy  who  live  obscure  and  safe  ; whilst  they,  in  the 
mean  time,  have  the  same  opinion  of  him  whom  they  see 
mounted  so  far  above  them. 

2.  So  absolutely  does  Vice  dispose  of  all  men,  being 
such  a self-sufficient  worker  of  infelicity,  that  it  has  no  need 
either  of  instruments  or  servants.  Other  tyrants,  endeav- 
oring to  render  those  men  miserable  whom  they  punish, 
maintain  executioners  and  tormentors,  devise  searing-irons 
and  racks,  to  plague  the  reasonless  soul.  But  Vice,  with- 
out any  preparation  of  engines,  as  soon  as  it  enters  into  the 
soul,  torments  and  dejects  it,  filling  a man  with  grief,  la- 
mentations, sorrow,  and  repentance.  For  a sign  that  this 
is  so,  you  may  observe  that  many  being  cut  are  silent,  being 
scourged  take  it  patiently,  and  being  racked  and  tormented 
by  their  lords  and  tyrants  send  not  forth  the  least  shriek, 
since  the  soul,  repressing  the  voice  by  reason,  restrains  and 
keeps  it  in  as^vith  the  hand  ; but  you  will  scarce  ever  be 
able  to  quiet  anger  or  to  silence  sorrow ; nor  can  you  per- 
suade one  that  is  in  a fright  to  stand  still,  or  one  that  is 


TO  RENDER  A MAN  UNHAPPY 


501 


stung  with  remorse  of  conscience  to  forbear  exclaiming, 
tearing  his  hair,  and  smiting  his  thigh.  So  much  is  Vice 
more  violent  than  either  fire  or  sword. 

3.  Cities,  when  by  fixing  up  of  writings  they  publish 
their  intentions  of  building  temples  or  erecting  colossuses, 
hear  the  proposals  of  different  artists,  contending  about  the 
undertaking  of  the  work,  and  bringing  in  their  accounts 
and  models ; after  which,  they  choose  him  who  will  per- 
form it  best,  quickest,  and  with  the  least  expense.  Now 
imagine,  that  we  also  set  forth  a proclamation  of  a purpose 
to  make  a wretched  man  or  a miserable  life,  and  that  For- 
tune and  Vice  come  with  differing  proposals  to  offer  their 
service  for  the  performance  of  this  design.  The  one  (to 
wit,  Fortune)  is  provided  with  abundance  of  various  instru- 
ments and  costly  furniture,  to  render  human  life  miserable 
and  unhappy.  She  draws  after  her  robberies,  wars,  the 
murders  of  tyrants,  storms  from  the  sea,  and  lightnings 
from  the  air.  She  mixes  hemlock,  brings  in  swords,  hires 
slanderers,  kindles  fevers,  jingles  shackles,  and  builds  up 
prisons  round  about ; although  most  of  these  things  are 
rather  from  Vice  than  Fortune.  But  let  us  suppose  them 
to  be  all  from  Fortune ; and  let  Vice,  standing  naked  and 
wanting  no  exterior  things  against  man,  ask  Fortune  how 
she  will  make  a man  unhappy  and  faint-hearted. 

Fortune,  let  her  say,  dost  thou  threaten  poverty?  Me- 
trocles  laughs  at  thee,  who  sleeping  in  the  winter  amongst 
the  sheep,  and  in  the  summer  in  the  porches  of  the  tem- 
ples, challenged  the  kings  of  the  Persians,  that  wintered  in 
Babylon  and  passed  the  summer  in  Media,  to  vie  with  him 
for  happiness.  Dost  thou  bring  on  servitude,  bonds,  and 
the  being  sold  for  a slave  ? Diogenes  contemns  thee,  who 
being  exposed  to  sale  by  pirates,  cried  out,  Who  will  buy  a 
master  ? Dost  thou  brew  a cup  of  poison  ? Didst  thou 
not  offer  such  a one  to  Socrates  ? And  yet  he  mildly  and 
meekly,  without  trembling  or  changing  either  color  or 


502 


WHETHER  VICE  IS  SUFFICIENT 


countenance,  drank  it  briskly  up ; whilst  those  who  sur- 
vived esteemed  him  happy,  as  one  that  would  not  be  even 
in  the  other  world  without  a divine  portion.  Moreover,  as 
for  thy  fire,  Decius  the  Roman  general  prevented  it,  when, 
having  caused  a great  fire  to  be  made  in  the  midst  between 
two  armies,  he  sacrificed  himself  to  Saturn,  according  to  a 
vow  made  for  the  aggrandizing  of  the  Romans’  dominion. 
And  amongst  the  Indians,  such  chaste  wives  as  are  true 
lovers  of  their  husbands  strive  and  contend  with  one  an- 
other for  the  fire,  and  all  the  rest  sing  forth  the  happiness 
of  her  who,  having  obtained  the  victory,  is  burnt  with  her 
deceased  husband.  And  of  the  Sages  in  those  parts,  there 
is  not  one  esteemed  a holy  and  most  blessed  man,  if  he  did 
not,  whilst  he  was  yet  living  and  in  the  perfect  enjoyment 
of  his  health  and  understanding,  separate  by  fire  his  soul 
from  his  body,  and  purging  away  what  was  mortal,  depart 
pure  out  of  the  flesh. 

But  thou  wilt  reduce  one  from  great  wealth,  a stately 
house,  a well-furnished  table,  and  abundance  of  all  things, 
to  a threadbare  coat,  a wallet,  and  begging  of  his  daily 
food.  These  things  were  to  Diogenes  the  beginnings  of 
happiness,  and  to  Crates  of  liberty  and  glory.  But  thou 
wilt,  perhaps,  fasten  one  to  the  cross,  or  impale  him  on  a 
stake.  Now  what  cares  Theodoras,  whether  it  is  above 
or  under  ground  that  he  putrefies  1 These  were  the  happy 
sepultures  of  the  Scythians  ; and  amongst  the  Hyrcanians, 
dogs  — amongst  the  Bactrians,  birds  — do  according  to  the 
laws  devour  the  dead  bodies  of  those  who  have  made  a 
blessed  end. 

4.  Whom  then  do  these  things  render  unhappy'?  The 
unmanly  and  irrational,  the  effeminate  and  unexercised, 
with  such  as  retain  the  foolish  and  frightful  opinions  they 
received  in  their  infancy.  Fortune  then  does  not  perfectly 
produce  infelicity,  unless  it  has  Vice  to  co-operate  with  it. 
For  as  a thread  will  cut  in  sunder  a bone  that  has  been 


TO  RENDER  A MAN  UNHAPPY. 


503 


steeped  in  ashes  and  vinegar,  and  as  workmen  bend  and 
fashion  ivory  as  they  please,  after  it  has  been  softened  and 
rendered  pliable  by  beer,  when  it  is  otherwise  inflexible ; 
so  Fortune,  coming  upon  that  which  is  already  ill-affected 
of  itself  and  rendered  soft  by  Vice,  pierces  into  it  and  hol- 
lows it.  And  as  the  paroecus,  — though  hurtful  to  no 
other,  nor  any  way  prejudicing  those  who  touch  it  or  bear 
it  about  them,  if  any  one  who  is  wounded  is  but  brought 
into  the  place  where  it  is,  immediately  kills  him,  being 
already  by  his  wound  predisposed  to  receive  the  defluxion ; 
so  the  soul  which  is  to  be  overthrown  by  Fortune  must 
have  in  itself  some  ulcer  of  its  own,  and  some  malady  Avith- 
in  its  flesh,  that  it  may  render  those  accidents  which  come 
from  abroad  miserable  and  lamentable. 

5.  Is  then  Vice  also  such  that  it  should  stand  in  need 
of  Fortune’s  help  for  the  working  of  infelicity?  By  no 
means.  She  does  not  make  the  sea  SAvell  with  storms  and 
tempests,  she  besets  not  the  deserts  lying  at  the  feet  of  the 
mountains  Avith  robbers,  she  pours  not  down  storms  of 
hail  on  the  fruitful  fields,  she  raises  not  up  Meletus,  Any- 
tus,  and  Callixenus,  to  be  calumniators,  she  takes  not  away 
Avealth,  she  hinders  not  any  from  the  command  of  armies, 
that  she  may  make  men  unhappy ; but  she  renders  them 
rich,  abounding  in  Avealth,  having  great  inheritances  on 
the  earth;  she  bears  them  company  at  sea;  she  sticks 
close  to  them,  pining  them  Avith  lust,  inflaming  them  Avith 
wrath,  overwhelming  them  Avith  superstitions,  drawing 
them  by  their  eyes.  . . . 

f The  rest  is  wanting .] 


WHETHER  THE  PASSIONS  OF  THE  SOUL  OR  DISEASES 
OF  THE  BODY  ARE  WORSE. 


1.  Homer,  having  contemplated  the  various  kinds  of 
mortal  animals,  and  compared  them  one  with  another  in 
respect  to  their  lives  and  habits,  cried  out : 

What  wretched  creature  of  what  wretched  kind, 

Than  man  more  weak,  calamitous,  and  blind ! * 

attributing  to  man  that  unhappy  primacy  of  having  the 
superiority  in  miseries.  But  we,  considering  man  as  hav- 
ing already  gained  the  victory  for  infelicity,  and  being 
publicly  declared  the  most  miserable  of  all  animals,  will 
compare  him  with  himself  in  a contention  about  his  own 
calamities,  not  unprofitably  but  even  altogether  necessarily 
dividing  his  soul  from  his  body ; that  we  may  thence  learn, 
whether  we  live  more  miserably  on  account  of  Fortune  or 
of  ourselves.  For  sickness  is  indeed  engendered  in  the 
body  by  Nature  ; but  vice  and  malice  in  the  soul  are  first 
its  own  work,  afterward  its  passion.  Now  it  is  of  no  small 
advantage  towards  content  of  mind,  if  that  which  is  the 
worse  is  curable,  and  lighter  and  less  violent  in  its  attacks 
than  we  feared. 

2.  The  fox  in  Aesop,  disputing  with  the  panther  for 
the  superiority  in  beautiful  variety,  — when  this  latter  had 
shown  his  body,  and  its  superficies  curiously  stained  and 
spotted,  whereas  the  fox’s  tawny  skin  was  ill-favored  and 
unpleasant  to  the  sight,  — said  thus : “ But  if  you,  sir 


* II.  XVII.  446. 


PASSIONS  OF  THE  SOUL. 


505 


judge,  will  look  within  me,  you  will  find  me  much  fuller 
of  variety  than  this  leopard ; ” manifesting  the  nimble  sub- 
tlety of  his  natural  disposition,  frequently  changing  as 
occasions  require.  Let  us  then  say  also  to  ourselves : Thy 
body,  O man,  naturally  of  itself  breeds  many  diseases  and 
passions,  and  many  it  receives  befalling  it  from  without ; 
but  if  thou  slialt  open  thy  interior,  thou  wilt  find  a certain 
various  and  abundantly  furnished  storehouse  and  (as  De- 
mocritus says)  treasury  of  evils,  not  flowing  into  it  from 
abroad,  but  having  as  it  were  their  inbred  and  original 
springs,  which  vice,  exceedingly  affluent  and  rich  in  pas- 
sions, causes  to  break  forth.  Now,  whereas  the  diseases 
in  the  flesh  are  discerned  by  the  pulses,  and  the  flushings 
in  the  color  of  the  skin,  and  discovered  by  unusual  heats 
and  sudden  pains,  and  these  maladies  of  the  soul  lie  hid 
from  many  who  are  affected  with  them ; these  are  there- 
fore worse,  as  removing  from  them  the  sense  of  the  patient. 
For  if  the  reason  is  sound,  it  is  sensible  of  the  body’s 
diseases ; but  being  itself  diseased  with  those  of  the  soul, 
it  has  no  judgment  in  what  it  suffers ; for  it  suffers  by 
what  it  judges.  We  ought  therefore  to  account,  that  the 
first  and  greatest  of  the  soul  s diseases  is  folly,  by  which 
vice  being  rendered  incurable  cohabits,  lives,  and  dies  to- 
gether with  most  men.  For  the  beginning  of  the  cure  is 
the  sense  of  the  disease,  leading  the  patient  to  the  use  of 
what  is  helpful ; but  he  who,  through  his  not  believing 
himself  sick,  is  ignorant  of  his  own  necessities,  though  a 
remedy  is  presented  him,  refuses  it.  For  also  amongst  the 
diseases  of  the  body,  those  are  indeed  the  worst  which  are 
accompanied  with  a stupefaction  of  the  senses,  — as  lethar- 
gies, headaches,  epilepsies,  apoplexies,  and  those  burning 
fevers  which,  carrying  on  the  inflammation  even  to  the  loss 
of  the  wits,  and  disturbing  the  senses,  as  it  were  in  a 
musical  instrument,  “ move  the  heart-strings  till  then  un- 
touched.” 


506 


WHETHER  THE  PASSIONS  OF  THE  SOUL 


3.  Wherefore  the  physicians  do  in  the  first  place  indeed 
desire  that  a man  should  not  be  sick,  and  next,  that  being 
sick  he  should  not  be  ignorant  that  he  is  so  ; which  never- 
theless befalls  all  the  diseases  of  the  soul.  For  neither 
those  who  are  mad,  those  that  are  lascivious,  nor  those  who 
act  unjustly,  think  that  they  sin ; nay,  some  of  them  are 
on  the  contrary  persuaded  even  that  they  do  well.  Never 
yet  did  any  man  call  a fever  health,  a consumption  a good 
constitution  of  body,  the  gout  swift-footedness,  or  the  wan- 
ness of  the  face  a fresh  color ; but  many  there  are  who 
term  anger  courage,  unchaste  love  amity,  envy  emulation, 
j and  cowardice  cautiousness.  Moreover,  those  who  are 
troubled  with  corporeal  sickness  send  for  physicians,  for 
they  are  sensible  what  they  stand  in  need  of  for  the  cure 
of  their  diseases ; but  these  who  are  sick  in  mind  shun 
philosophers,  because  they  think  themselves  to  act  excel- 
lently in  those  very  things  in  which  they  most  offend. 
For  making  use  of  this  reasoning,  we  affirm  that  the  blear- 
ness or  soreness  of  the  eyes  is  a less  malady  than  madness, 
and  the  gout  in  the  feet  than  a frenzy  in  the  brain ; for 
in  the  one  a man  is  sensible  of  his  distemper,  and  crying 
out  calls  for  the  physician,  to  whom,  when  he  is  come,  he 
shows  his  eye  to  be  anointed,  stretches  out  his  vein  to  be 
opened,  and  gives  up  his  head  to  be  cured ; but  on  the 
contrary,  you  hear  Agave,  when  seized  with  madness, 
through  the  violence  of  her  passion  not  knowing  the  dear- 
est pledges  of  her  womb,  to  cry  out: 

From  the  hill’s  top  into  the  plain, 

Bring  me  this  young  fawn,  newly  slain, 

Which  happily’s  become  our  prey.* 

For  he  who  is  sick  in  body,  presently  yielding  and  betak- 
ing himself  to  his  bed,  lies  there  quiet,  till  he  is  cured  ; 
and  if  the  accession  of  some  violent  hot  fit  makes  him  a little 


* Eurip.  Bacch.  1170. 


OR  OF  THE  BODY  ARE  WORSE. 


507 


tumble  and  toss  his  body,  any  one  of  those  who  are  by 
saying  to  him, 

Lie  still  at  ease,  poor  wretch,  keep  in  thy  bed,* 

easily  stays  and  retains  him ; but  those,  on  the  other  side, 
who  are  surprised  with  the  passions  of  the  soul  are  then 
most  active,  then  least  at  quiet ; for  the  impulses  of  the 
mind  are  the  principal  causes  of  actions,  and  passions  are 
the  violent  fits  of  such  impulses.  Wherefore,  they  suffer 
not  the  soul  to  be  at  rest ; but  when  a man  has  most  need 
of  patience,  silence,  and  retirement,  then  is  he  drawn 
fojth  into  the  light,  then  is  he  chiefly  discovered  by  his 
choleric  humors,  his  eagerness  in  contending,  his  dishonest 
loves,  and  his  heart-breaking  sorrows,  which  force  him  to 
commit  many  irregular  actions,  and  speak  many  words  un- 
fitting for  the  times. 

4.  As  therefore  that  storm  which  hinders  a ship  from 
entering  into  the  port  is  more  dangerous  than  that  which 
suffers  it  not  to  sail ; so  the  tempests  of  the  soul  are  more 
difficult,  which  permit  not  a man  to  restrain  himself,  nor  to 
settle  his  disturbed  reason,  so  that,  being  without  pilot  or 
cables,  he  is  through  tumult  and  deceit  hurried  headlong 
by  rash  and  pernicious  courses,  till  he  falls  into  some  terri- 
ble shipwreck,  where  he  casts  away  his  life.  So  that  also 
for  these  reasons  it  is  worse  to  be  sick  in  the  soul  than 
body ; for  to  the  one  it  happens  only  to  suffer,  but  to  the 
other  both  to  suffer  and  do  amiss.  And  what  need  is  there  to 
reckon  up  the  greater  number  of  our  passions  ? This  very 
nick  of  time  is  a sufficient  remembrance.  Do  you  see 
this  vast  and  promiscuous  multitude,  here  crowding  and 
thrusting  each  other  about  the  tribunal  and  forum  ? They 
are  not  assembled  to  sacrifice  to  their  country  Gods,  nor  to 
paiticipate  together  in  the  sacred  ceremonies.  They  are 
not  come  to  offer  up  to  Jupiter  Ascraeus  the  first  of  the 

* Eurip.  Orest.  258. 


508  PASSiONS  OP  THE  SOUL  AND  OP  THE  BODY. 


Lydian  fruits,  nor  to  celebrate  the  solemnities  of  Bacchus 
by  the  observance  of  festival  nights  and  common  revellings  ; 
but  a mighty  pestilence,  as  it  were  by  yearly  revolutions 
irritating  Asia,  drives  them  hither  to  manage  their  pro- 
cesses and  suits  at  law  ; and  a multitude  of  affairs,  as  it 
were  of  impetuous  torrents,  fall  into  one  market-place, 
where  they  grow  hot  and  are  eagerly  prosecuted  both  by 
those  that  destroy  and  by  those  that  are  destroyed.  Of 
what  fevers,  of  what  agues,  are  these  the  effects?  What 
lodgements,  what  irruptions,  what  distemperature  of  heat, 
what  superfusion  of  humors  produces  them  ? Should  you 
ask  every  suit  at  law  as  if  it  were  a man,  whence  it  had  its 
original,  whence  it  proceeded ; yon  would  find,  that  auda- 

Icious  anger  generated  one,  furious  obstinacy  another,  and 
unjust  covetousness  a third.  . . . 


end  op  vol.  rv. 


/ * ' 

/i'J 

jlL  ~2». 


