Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 

University  of  Illinois  Urbana-Champaign  Aiternates 


https://archive.org/detaiis/essaysoninteiiec00reid_1 


•■'Hi 

'£Ml 


% 


.4^ 


ESSAYS 


ON  THE 

INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OE  MAN. 


BY 


THOMAS  REID,  D.  D.,  F.  R.  S.  E. 

ABRIDGED. 

WITH  NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS  FROM  SIR  WILLIAM  HAMILTON 
AND  OTHERS. 


EDITED 

"By  JAMES  WALKER,  D.D., 

PROFESSOR  OP  INTELLECTUAL  AND  MORAL  PHILOSOPHY  IN  HARVARD  COLLEGE. 


OK  ’ ^ 

! 3 i c £ 

ummm  cr  iumis 

Second  Hlftfon. 


CAMBRIDGE: 

PUBLISHED  BY  JOHN  BARTLETT. 

ISooftscUer  to  tjie  Knfbecsfts. 

1851. 


Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1850,  by 
John  Bartlett, 

in  the  Clerk’s  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  District  of  Massachusetts. 


CAMBRIDGE: 

STEREOTYPED  AND  PRINTED  BY 


METCALF  AND  COMPANY, 
PRINTERS  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY. 


EDITOR’S  NOTICE. 


The  psychology  generally  taught  in  England  and  this 
country  for  the  last  fifty  years  has  been  that  of  the  Scotch 
school,  of  which  Dr.  Reid  is  the  acknowledged  head.  The 
influence  of  the  same  doctrines  is  also  apparent  in  the  im- 
proved state  of  philosophy  in  several  of  the  Continental 
nations,  and  particularly  in  France.  Sir  W.  Hamilton  ded- 
icates his  annotated  edition  of  Reid’s  works  to  M.  Cousin,  the 
distinguished  philosopher  and  statesman  “ through  whom  Scot- 
land has  been  again  united  intellectually  to  her  old  political 
ally,  and  the  author’s  writings  (the  best  result  of  Scottish 
speculation)  made  the  basis  of  academical  instruction  in  phi- 
losophy throughout  the  central  nation  of  Europe.” 

, The  name  of  Reid,  therefore,  historically  considered,  is 
^second  to  none  among  British  psychologists  and  metaphy- 
’^  sicians,  with  perhaps  the  single  exception  of  Locke.  His 
J Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man  have  likewise 
intrinsic  and  peculiar  merits,  especially  as  a manual  to  be 
J used  by  those  who  are  just  entering  on  the  study.  The 
spirit  and  tone  are  unexceptionable  ; the  style  has  a fresh- 
ness and  an  interest  which  betoken  the  original  thinker ; 
technicalities  are  also  avoided  to  a great  degree,  by  which 
means,  and  by  the  frequent  use  of  familiar  and  sometimes 


795589 


IV 


editor’s  notice. 


homely  comparisons  and  illustrations,  much  of  the  obscurity 
and  perplexity,  commonly  objected  to  in  metaphysical  discus- 
sion, is  removed. 

The  notes  are  intended  either  to  correct  mistakes  and  sup- 
ply defects  in  the  text,  or  to  bring  down  the  history  of  the 
speculation  to  the  present  day.  Most  of  them  are  from  Sir 
W.  Hamilton’s  edition  of  Reid,  mentioned  above,  and  are 
marked  by  his  initial.  These,  together  with  the  extracts  oc- 
casionally made  from  the  supplementary  dissertations,  can 
hardly  fail  to  convince  the  reader,  that,  when  the  whole  of 
that  work,  as  yet  incomplete,  is  given  to  the  public,  it  will 
constitute  one  of  the  most  important  contributions  ever  made 
to  intellectual  science. 

In  order  to  make  room  for  these  additions,  and,  at  the 
same  time,  keep  the  volume  within  the  limits  proper  for  a 
text-book,  it  has  been  found  necessary  materially  to  abridge 
some  portions  of  the  original ; but  the  omitted  passages  con- 
sist almost  exclusively  of  repetitions,  or  of  historical  or  merely 
critical  digressions,  in  which  the  author  did  not  excel.  On 
account  of  these  changes,  the  division  and  numbering  of 
the  chapters  have  been  altered  in  several  instances,  and  some 
passages  have  been  transposed.  To  give  greater  distinctness 
to  the  argument  or  exposition,  sections  have  also  been  in- 
troduced. 

The  references  in  the  notes  are  generally  for  beginners, 
and  not  for  proficients.  They  will  be  found  convenient  where 
students  are  required,  under  the  form  of  dissertations  or  foren- 
sics, to  collect  and  weigh  the  various  opinions  which  have  been 
entertained  respecting  the  disputed  question. 


Cambridge,  February  15,  1850. 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE, ix 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS, 1 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  HYPOTHESES, 10 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  ANALOGY, 17 

CHAPTER  IV. 


ON  THE  PROPER  MEANS  OF  KNOWING  THE  OPERA- 
TIONS OF  THE  MIND, 23 

CHAPTER  V. 

DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND,  . . .28 

ESSAY  II. 

OF  THE  POWERS  WE  HAVE  BY  MEANS  OF  OUR  EX- 
TERNAL SENSES. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE, 32 

CHAPTER  II. 

hartley’s  THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS,  . 


40 


VI 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  III. 

FALSE  CONCLUSIONS  DRAWN  FROM  THE  CONNECTION 
BETWEEN  PERCEPTION  AND  IMPRESSIONS  MADE  ON 
THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE, 

CHAPTER  IV. 

OF  PERCEPTION,  PROPERLY  SO  CALLED,  .... 

CHAPTER  V. 

THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION, 

CHAPTER  VI. 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  COMMON  THEORY  OF  IDEAS,  . 

CHAPTER  VII. 

OF  SENSATION, 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION, 

CHAPTER  IX. 

OF  MATTER  AND  SPACE, 

CHAPTER  X. 

OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE,  AND  OF  BELIEF  IN  GEN- 
ERAL, ........... 

CHAPTER  XI. 

OF  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES, 

CHAPTER  XII. 

OF  THE  ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES, 


ESSAY  III. 

OF  MEMORY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS  OF  THIS  FACULTY, 


48 

55 

63 

127 

140 

150 

168 

181 

189 

199 

211 


CONTENTS.  Vii 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE  NATURE  AND  ORIGIN  OF  OUR  NOTION  OF  DURA- 
TION,   228 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  ORIGIN  OF  OUR  NOTION  OF 

PERSONAL  IDENTITY, 241 


ESSAY  IV. 

OF  CONCEPTION. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN  GEN- 
ERAL,   254 

CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND  3 OR  MEN- 
TAL ASSOCIATION, 279 


ESSAY  V. 

OF  ABSTRACTION. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  GENERAL  WORDS, 298 

CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS,  . 306 

CHAPTER  III. 

OPINIONS  OF  PHILOSOPHERS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALS,  . 321 


ESSAY  VI. 

OF  JUDGMENT. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL, 331 


Vlll 


CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  COMMON  SENSE, 349 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  FIRST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL,  . . . . . 364 


ESSAY  VII. 

OF  REASONING. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  REASONING  IN  GENERAL,  AND  OF  DEMONSTRATION,  422 

CHAPTER  II. 

OF  PROBABLE  REASONING, 436 

CHAPTER  III. 

OF  MR.  HUMe’s  skepticism  WITH  REGARD  TO  REASON,  444 


ESSAY  VIII. 

OF  TASTE. 

CHAPTER  I. 

OF  TASTE  IN  GENERAL, 455 

CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  TASTE, 459 


APPENDIX. 

SIR  w.  Hamilton’s  doctrine  of  common  sense  and 

THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION.  NATURAL  REALISM. 

PRESENTATIVE  KNOWLEDGE, 


PREFACE. 


I.  Distribution  of  the  Sciences.]  Human  knowledge 
may  be  reduced  to  two  general  heads,  according  as  it 
relates  to  body  or  to  mind;  to  things  material,  or  to 
things  intellectual. 

The  whole  system  of  bodies  in  the  universe,  of  which 
we  know  but  a very  small  part,  may  be  called  the  ma- 
terial world  ; the  whole  system  of  minds,  from  the  in- 
finite Creator  to  the  meanest  creature  endowed  with 
thought,  may  be  called  the  intellectual  world.  These 
are  the  two  great  kingdoms  of  nature*  that  fall  within 
our  notice  ; and  about  the  one  or  the  other,  or  things 
pertaining  to  them,  every  art,  every  science,  and  every 
human  thought  are  employed  ; nor  can  the  boldest 
flight  of  imagination  carry  us  beyond  their  limits. 

Many  things  there  are,  indeed,  regarding  the  nature 
and  the  structure  both  of  body  and  of  mind,  which  our 
faculties  cannot  reach ; many  difficulties  which  the 


* The  term  nature  is  used  sometimes  in  a wider,  sometimes  in  a nar- 
rower extension.  When  employed  in  its  most  extensive  meaning,  it  em- 
braces the  two  worlds  of  mind  and  matter.  When  employed  in  its  more 
restricted  signification,  it  is  a synonyme  for  the  latter  only,  and  is  then 
used  in  contradistinction  to  the  former.  In  the  Greek  philosophy,  the 
word  (f>v(rLs  was  general  in  its  meaning ; and  the  great  branch  of  philoso- 
phy styled  physical  or  physiological  included  under  it,  not  only  the  sciences 
of  matter,  but  also  those  of  mind.  With  us  the  term  nature  is  more  vague- 
ly extensive  than  the  terms  physics^  physical^  physiology  ^physiological,  or  even 
than  the  adjective  natural ; whereas,  in  the  philosophy  of  Germany,  Natur, 
and  its  correlatives,  whether  of  Greek  or  Latin  derivation,  are,  in  general, 
expressive  of  the  world  of  matter,  in  contrast  to  the  world  of  intelligence. 
— H. 


X 


PREFACE. 


ablest  philosopher  cannot  resolve  ; but  of  other  natures, 
if  any  other  there  be,  we  have  no  knowledge,  no  con- 
ception at  all. 

That  every  thing  that  exists  must  be  either  corporeal 
or  incorporeal,  is  evident.  But  it  is  not  so  evident,  that 
every  thing  that  exists  must  either  be  corporeal  or  en- 
dowed with  thought.  Whether  there  be  in  the  universe 
beings  which  are  neither  extended,  solid,  and  inert,  like 
body,  nor  active  and  intelligent,  like  mind,  seems  to  be 
beyond  the  reach  of  our  knowledge.  There  appears  to 
be  a vast  interval  between  body  and  mind ; and  whether 
there  be  any  intermediate  nature  that  connects  them  to- 
gether, we  know  not. 

We  have  no  reason  to  ascribe  intelligence,  or  even 
sensation,  to  plants ; yet  there  appears  in  them  an  ac- 
tive force  and  energy,  which  cannot  be  the  result  of  any 
arrangement  or  combination  of  inert  matter.  The 
same  thing  may  be  said  of  those  powers  by  which  ani- 
mals are  nourished  and  grow^  by  which  matter  gravi- 
tates^ by  which  rnagnetical  and  electrical  bodies  attract 
and  repel  each  other,  and  by  which  the  parts  of  solid 
bodies  cohere. 

Some  have  conjectured,  that  the  phenomena  of  the 
material  world  which  require  active  force  are  produced 
by  the  continual  operation  of  intelligent  beings.  Others 
have  conjectured,  that  there  may  be  in  the  universe 
beings  that  are  active  without  intelligence^  which,  as  a 
kind  of  incorporeal  machinery,  contrived  by  the  Su- 
preme Wisdom,  perform  their  destined  task  without 
any  knowledge  or  intention.  But,  laying  aside  conjec- 
ture, and  all  pretences  to  determine  in  things  beyond 
our  reach,  we  must  rest  in  this,  — that  body  and  mind 
are  the  only  kinds  of  being  of  which  we  can  have  any 
knowledge,  or  can  form  any  conception.  If  there  be 
other  kinds,  they  are  not  discoverable  by  the  faculties 
which  God  has  given  us  ; and,  with  regard  to  us,  are  as 
if  they  were  not. 

As,  therefore,  aU  our  knowledge  is  confined  to  body 
and  mind,  or  things  belonging  to  them,  there  are  two 
great  branches  of  philosophy,  one  relating  to  body,  the 


PREFACE. 


XI 


other  to  mind.  The  properties  of  body,  and  the  laws 
that  obtain  in  the  material  system,  are  the  objects  of 
natural  jjhilosophy^  as  that  term  is  now  used.  The 
branch  which  treats  of  the  nature  and  operations  of 
minds  has  by  some  been  called  pneumatology  * And  to 
the  one  or  the  other  of  these  branches,  the  principles  of 
all  the  sciences  belong. 

What  variety  there  may  be  of  minds  or  thinking 
beings  throughout  this  vast  universe,  we  cannot  pre- 
tend to  say.  We  dwell  in  a little  corner  of  God’s  do- 
minion, disjoined  from  the  rest  of  it.  The  globe  which 
we  inhabit  is  but  one  of  seven  planets  that  encircle  our 
sun.  What  various  orders  of  beings  may  inhabit  the 
other  six,  their  secondaries,  and  the  comets  belonging 
to  our  system,  and  how  many  other  suns  may  be  en- 
circled with  like  systems,  are  things  altogether  hid  from 
us.  Although  human  reason  and  industry  have  dis- 
covered, with  great  accuracy,  the  order  and  distances 
of  the  planets,  and  the  laws  of  their  motion,  we  have 
no  means  of  corresponding  with  them.  That  they 
may  be  the  habitation  of  animated  beings  is  very  prob- 
able ; but  of  the  nature  or  powers  of  their  inhabitants, 
we  are  perfectly  ignorant.  Every  man  is  conscious  of 
a thinking  principle  or  mind  in  himself,  and  we  have 
sufficient  evidence  of  a like  principle  in  other  men. 
The  actions  of  brute  animals  show  that  they  have 
some  thinking  principle,  though  of  a natm’e  far  inferior 
to  the  human  mind.  And  every  thing  about  us  may 
convince  us  of  the  existence  of  a Supreme  Mind,  the 
Maker  and  Governor  of  the  universe.  These  are  all 
the  minds  of  which  reason  can  give  us  any  certain 
knowledge. 

II.  General  Prejudice  against  the  Study  of  Psycholo- 
gy,]  The  mind  of  man  is  the  noblest  work  of  God 
which  reason  discovers  to  us,  and  therefore,  on  account 


* Now  properly  superseded  by  the  term  psychology ; to  which  no  com- 
petent objection  can  be  made,  aud  which  affords  — what  the  various 
clumsy  periphrases  in  use  do  not  — a convenient  adjective,  psychological. 
— H. 


XU 


PREFACE. 


of  its  dignity,  deserves  our  study.  It  must,  indeed,  be 
acknowledged,  that  although  it  is  of  all  objects  the 
nearest  to  us,  and  seems  the  most  within  our  reach, 
it  is  very  difficult  to  attend  to  its  operations,  so  as  to 
form  a distinct  notion  of  them  ; and  on  that  account 
there  is  no  branch  of  knowledge  in  which  the  inge- 
nious and  speculative  have  fallen  into  so  great  errors, 
and  even  absurdities.  These  errors  and  absurdities 
have  given  rise  to  a general  prejudice  against  all  in- 
quiries of  this  nature ; and  because  ingenious  men 
have,  for  many  ages,  given  different  and  contradictory 
accounts  of  the  powers  of  the  mind,  it  is  concluded  that 
all  speculations  concerning  them  are  chimerical  and 
visionary. 

But  whatever  effect  this  prejudice  may  have  with 
superficial  thinkers,  the  judicious  will  not  be  apt  to  be 
carried  away  with  it.  About  two  hundred  years  ago 
the  opinions  of  men  in  natural  philosophy  were  as 
various  and  as  contradictory  as  they  are  now  concern- 
ing the  powers  of  the  mind.  Galileo,  Torricelli,  Kep- 
ler, Bacon,  and  Newton  had  the  same  discouragement 
in  their  attempts  to  throw  light  upon  the  material  sys- 
tem, as  we  have  with  regard  to  the  intellectual.  If 
they  had  been  deterred  by  such  prejudices,  we  should 
never  have  reaped  the  benefit  of  their  discoveries,  which 
do  honor  to  human  nature,  and  will  make  their  names 
immortal.  The  motto  which  Lord  Bacon  prefixed  to 
some  of  his  writings  was  worthy  of  his  genius,  Inve- 
niam  viam  aut  faciam. 

There  is  a natural  order  in  the  progress  of  the  sci- 
ences, and  good  reasons  may  be  assigned  why  the 
philosophy  of  body  should  be  elder  si^er  to  that  of 
mind,  and  of  a quicker  growth  ; but  the  last  has  the 
principle  of  life  no  less  than  the  first,  and  will  grow 
up,  though  slowly,  to  maturity.  The  remains  of  an- 
cient philosophy  upon  this  subject  are  venerable  ruins, 
carrying  the  marks  of  genius  and  industry,  sufficient 
to  inflame,  but  not  to  satisfy,  our  curiosity.  In  later 
ages,  Descartes  was  the  first  that  pointed  out  the 
road  we  ought  to  take  in  these  dark  regions.  Male- 


PREFACE* 


Xlll 


branche,  Arnauld,  Locke,  Berkeley,  Buffier,  Hutche- 
son, Butler,  Hume,  Price,  Lord  Karnes,  have  labored 
to  make  discoveries ; nor  have  they  labored  in  vain. 
For,  however  different  and  contrary  their  conclusions 
are,  however  skeptical  some  of  them,  they  have  all 
given  new  light,  and  helped  to  clear  the  way  for  their 
successors. 

We  ought  never  to  despair  of  human  genius,  but 
rather  to  hope,  that,  in  time,  it  may  produce  a system 
of  the  powers  and  operations  of  the  human  mind,  no 
less  certain  than  those  of  optics  or  astronomy. 

HI.  Grounds  on  which  the  Study  is  recommended,'] 
This  is  the  more  devoutly  to  be  wished,  as  a distinct 
knowledge  of  the  powers  of  the  mind  would  undoubt- 
edly give  great  light  to  many  other  branches  of  science. 
Mr.  Hume  has  justly  observed,  that  “ all  the  sciences 
have  a relation  to  human  nature ; and,  however  wide 
any  of  them  may  seem  to  run  from  it,  they  still  re- 
turn back  by  one  passage  or  another.  This  is  the  cen- 
tre and  capitol  of  the  sciences,  which  being  once  masters 
of,  we  may  easily  extend  our  conquests  everywhere.” 

The  faculties  of  our  minds  are  the  tools  and  engines 
we  must  use  in  every  disquisition ; and  the  better  we 
understand  their  nature  and  force,  the  more  success- 
fully we  shall  be  able  to  apply  them.  Mr.  Locke  gives 
this  account  of  the  occasion  of  his  entering  upon  his 
Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding : — “ Five  or 
six  friends,”  says  he,  meeting  at  my  chamber,  and 
discoursing  on  a subject  very  remote  from  this,  found 
themselves  quickly  at  a stand,  by  the  difficulties  that 
rose  on  every  side.  After  we  had  for  a while  puzzled 
ourselves,  without  coming  any  nearer  to  a resolution 
of  those  doubts  that  perplexed  us,  it  came  into  my 
thoughts  that  we  took  a wrong  course  ; and  that, 
before  we  set  ourselves  upon  inquiries  of  that  nature, 
it  was  necessary  to  examine  our  own  abilities,  and 
see  what  objects  our  understandings  were  fitted  or  not 
fitted  to  deal  with.  This  I proposed  to  the  company, 
who  all  readily  assented ; and  thereupon  it  was  agreed 
b 


XIV 


PREFACE. 


that  this  should  be  our  first  inquiry.”  If  this  be  com- 
monly the  cause  of  perplexity  in  those  disquisitions 
which  have  least  relation  to  the  mind,  it  must  be  so 
much  more  in  those  that  have  an  immediate  connec- 
tion with  it. 

The  scierues  may  be  distinguished  into  two  classes, 
according  as  they  pertain  to  the  material  or  to  the  in- 
tellectual world.  The  various  parts  of  natural  philoso- 
phy, the  mechanical  arts,  chemistry,  medicine,  and 
agriculture,  belong  to  the  first ; but  to  the  last  belong 
grammar,  logic,  rhetoric,  natural  theology,  morals,  ju- 
risprudence, law,  politics,  and  the  fine  arts.  The 
knowledge  of  the  human  mind  is  the  root  from  which 
these  grow  and  draw  their  nourishment.*  Whether, 
therefore,  we  consider  the  dignity  of  this  subject,  or  its 
subserviency  to  science  in  general,  and  to  the  noblest 
branches  of  science  in  particular,  it  highly  deserves  to 
be  cultivated. 


* It  is  justly  observed  by  M.  JoufFroy,  that  the  division  here  enounced 
is  not  in  principle  identical  with  that  previously  propounded.  — H. 

Jouffroy  objects  to  the  distinction  made  by  the  Scotch  philosophers  be- 
tween the  physical  sciences,  and  the  moral  or  philosophical  sciences,  as  not 
being  sufficiently  exact  and  precise.  He  says  ; — “ In  this  world  there  are 
two  orders  of  phenomena  perfectly  distinct,  — physical  phenomena,  and  in- 
tellectual and  moral  phenomena,  which  I shall  call,  for  brevity’s  sake,  ma- 
terial phenomena  and  mental  phenomena.  It  is  by  the  senses  and  in  the  ex- 
ternal world  that  we  apprehend  and  know  the  first ; it  is  by  consciousness 
and  within  our  own  minds  that  we  attain  to  the  second,  for  in  the  theatre 
of  consciousness  alone  are  we  able  to  observe  them  immediately  and  in 
themselves.  Elsewhere  we  see  the  effects  or  the  material  symbols  of  men- 
tal phenomena,  but  we  could  not  comprehend  the  cause  of  these  effects,  or 
the  meaning  of  these  symbols,  except  by  the  knowledge  which  we  fii'st  ac- 
quire in  ourselves  of  this  order  of  phenomena.  Now  every  possible  scien- 
tific question  is  resolved  by  a knowledge  of  the  laws  of  one  or  the  other  of 
these  two  orders  of  phenomena.  Every  question  which  finds  its  solution 
in  the  laws  of  material  phenomena  belongs  to  physics;  every  question 
which  finds  its  solution  in  the  laws  of  mental  phenomena  belongs  to  philos- 
ophy; every  question,  in  fine,  the  solution  of  which  presupposes  at  the 
same  time  a knowledge  of  the  laws  of  some  material  phenomena  and  of 
some  mental  phenomena,  is  mixedy  and  partakes  of  the  double  nature  of 
philosophical  questions  and  physical  questions.  On  what,  then,  depends 
the  nature  of  any  given  question,  and  consequently  that  of  the  science 
which  is  to  resolve  it  ? On  the  nature  of  the  phenomena ; and  as  these 
phenomena  are  perfectly  distinct,  and  apprehended  by  faculties  which  are 
equally  so,  the  separation  established  by  common  sense  between  the  philo- 
sophical sciences  and  the  physical  sciences  is  at  once  completely  justified, 
and  clearly  explained  and  defined.” — Preface  to  his  (Euvres  Completes  dt 
Jliomas  Jieidy  p.  xlii.  — Ed. 


PREFACE. 


XV 


A very  elegant  writer  on  the  sublime  and  beautiful 
concludes  his  account  of  the  passions  thus  : — ‘‘  The 
variety  of  the  passions  is  great,  and  worthy,  in  every 
branch  of  that  variety,  of  the  most  diligent  investiga- 
tion. The  more  accurately  we  search  into  the  human 
mind,  the  stronger  traces  we  everywhere  find  of  His 
wisdom  who  made  it  If  a discourse  on  the  use  of 
the  parts  of  the  body  may  be  considered  as  a hymn 
to  the  Creator,  the  use  of  the  passions,  which  are  the 
organs  of  the  mind,  cannot  be  barren  of  praise  to  Him, 
nor  unproductive  to  ourselves  of  that  noble  and  un- 
common union  of  science  and  admiration,  which  a 
contemplation  of  the  works  of  Infinite  Wisdom  alone 
can  afford  to  a rational  mind  ; whilst  referring  to  Him 
whatever  we  find  of  right,  or  good,  or  fair,  in  our- 
selves, discovering  his  strength  and  wisdom  even  in 
our  own  weakness  and  imperfection,  honoring  them 
where  we  discover  them  clearly,  and  adoring  their 
profundity  where  we  are  lost  in  our  search,  we  may  be 
inquisitive  without  impertinence,  and  elevated  without 
pride  ; we  may  be  admitted,  if  I may  dare  to  say  so, 
into  the  counsels  of  the  Almighty,  by  a consideration 
of  his  works.  This  elevation  of  the  mind  ought  to  be 
the  principal  end  of  all  our  studies,  which,  if  they  do 
not  in  some  measure  effect,  they  are  of  very  little  ser- 
vice to  us.”  * 


* Burke’s  Origin  of  our  Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful^  Part  I.  Sect. 

For  ampler  discussion  of  the  topics  in  this  Preface,  see  Descartes,  Dis- 
cours de  la  Mkhode.  Stewart,  Elements  of  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind^  Introduction ; and  Philosophical  Essays,  Preliminary  Dissertation. 
Brown,  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  the  Humayi  Mind,  Lect.  I.  - IV.  Cou- 
sin, Cours  de  1828,  Lemons  I.  et  II.  This  volume  has  been  translated  into 
English  by  Mr.  Linberg,  under  the  title  of  Introduction  to  the  History  of 
Philosophy.  Jouffroy,  Prefaces  to  his  Esquisses  de  Philosophie  Morale  de 
Dugald  Stewart,  and  (Euvres  de  Reid.  Mr.  Eipley  has  given  an  English 
version  of  the  former  in  his  Philosophical  Miscellanies,  Vol.  II.  Sir  W. 
Hamilton  says  also  of  the  latter,  that  it  “ will  soon  be  made  generally  ac- 
cessible to  the  British  public  by  a highly  competent  translator.” 

On  the  division  and  organization  of  the  sciences,  and  the  relation  of  psy- 
chology to  the  rest,  compare  Jouffroy,  Nouveaux  Melanges  Philosophiques. 
Comte,  Philosophie  Positive,  Leqon  II.  Coleridge,  General  Introduction  to 
llie  Encyclopaedia  Metropolitana.  — Ep. 


Kf 

■ 


‘n 


■ 


» 


* • ./’  V,  , , 

• ^ •'  ^ ,t.  ':,.  • 

'■  '••"  ■ 

•”  ••“»■  , • ' , 7;;  : 

. f r-;v^  f v.-y  . i 


ESSAYS 


ON  THE 

INTELLECTUAL  POWERS  OF  MAN. 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 

CHAPTER  I. 

EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS. 

I.  On  the  Definition  of  Terms,]  There  is  no  greater 
impediment  to  the  advancement  of  knowledge  than  the 
ambiguity  of  words.  To  this  chiefly  it  is  owing  that 
we  find  sects  and  parties  in  rnost  branches  of  science, 
and  disputes,  which  are  carried  on  from  age  to  age, 
without  being  brought  to  an  issue. 

Sophistry  has  been  more  effectually  excluded  from 
mathematics  and  natural  philosophy  than  from  other 
sciences.  In  mathematics  it  had  no  place  from  the 
beginning ; mathematicians  having  had  the  wisdom  to 
define  accurately  the  terms  they  use,^  and  to  lay  down,  as 
axioms,  the  first  principles  on  which  their  reasoning  is 
grounded.  Accordingly,  we  find  no  parties  among- 
mathematicians,  and  hardly  any  disputes.* 

In  natural  philosophy  there  was  no  less  sophistry,  no 
less  dispute  and  uncertainty,  than  in  other  sciences, 
until,  about  a century  and  a half  ago,  this  science 
began  to  be  built  upon  the  foundation  of  clear  defini- 

* It  was  not  the  superior  wisdom  of  mathematicians,  but  the  simple  and 
palpable  character  of  their  object-matter,  which  determined  the  differ- 
ence.— H. 

1 


2 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


tions  and  self-evident  axioms.  Since  that  time,  the 
science,  as  if  watered  with  the  dew  of  heaven,  has 
grown  apace ; disputes  have  ceased,  truth  has  prevailed, 
and  the  science  has  received  greater  increase  in  two 
centuries  than  in  two  thousand  years  before. 

It  were  to  be  wished  that  this  method,  which  has 
been  so  successful  in  those  branches  of  science,  were 
attempted  in  others ; for  definitions  and  axioms  are  the 
foundations  of  all  science.  But  that  definitions  may 
not  be  sought  where  no  definition  can  be  given,  nor 
logical  definitions  be  attempted  where  the  subject  does 
not  admit  of  them,  it  may  be  proper  to  lay  down  some 
general  principles  concerning  definition,  for  the  sake  of 
those  who  are  less  conversant  in  this  branch  of  logic. 

When  one  undertakes  to  explain  any  art  or  science, 
he  will  have  occasion  to  use  many  wt)rds  that  are  com- 
mon to  all  who  use  the  same  language,  and  some  that 
are  peculiar  to  that  art  or  science.  Words  of  the  last 
kind  are  called  terms  of  the  art^  and  ought  to  be  dis- 
tinctly explained,  that  their  meaning  may  be  under- 
stood. 

A definition  is  nothing  else  but  an  explication  of  the 
meaning  of  a word,  by  words  whose  meaning  is  already 
known.  Hence  it  is  evident,  that  every  word  cannot  be 
defined ; for  the  definition  must  consist  of  words ; and 
there  could  be  no  definition,  if  there  were  not  words 
previously  understood  without  definition.  Common 
words,  therefore,  ought  to  be  used  in  their  common  ac- 
ceptation ; and  when  they  have  different  acceptations 
in  common  language,  these,  when  it  is  necessary,  ought 
to  be  distinguished.  But  they  require  no  definition. 
It  is  sufficient  to  define  words  that  are  uncommon,  or 
that  are  used  in  an  uncommon  meaning. 

It  may  further  be  observed,  that  there  are  many 
words  which,  though  they  may  need  explication,  cannot 
be  logically  defined.  A logical  definition,  that  is,  a 
strict  and  proper  definition,  must  express  the  kind 
{genus)  of  the  thing  defined,  and  the  specific  difference 
by  which  the  species  defined  is  distinguished  from  every 
other  species  belonging  to  that  kind.  It  is  natural  to 


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS. 


3 


the  mind  of  man  to  class  things  under  various  kinds, 
and  again  to  subdivide  every  kind  into  its  various 
species.  A species  may  often  be  subdivided  into  sub- 
ordinate species,  and  then  it  is  considered  as  a kind. 

From  what  has  been  said  of  logical  definition,  it  is 
evident  that  no  word  can  be  logically  defined  which 
does  not  denote  a species ; because  such  things  only 
can  have  a specific  difference ; and  a specific  difference 
is  essential  to  a logical  definition.  On  this  account 
there  can  be  no  logical  definition  of  individual  ihingi^^ 
such  as  London  or  Paris.  Individuals  are  distinguished 
either  by  proper  names,  or  by  accidental  circumstances 
of  time  or  place ; but  they  have  no  specific  difference ; 
and  therefore,  though  they  may  be  known  by  proper 
names,  or  may  be  described  by  circumstances  or  rela- 
tions, they  cannot  be  defined.  It  is  no  less  evident, 
that  the  most  general  ivords  cannot  be  logically  defined, 
because  there  is  not  a more  general  term  of  which  they 
are  a species. 

Nay,  we  cannot  define  every  species  of  things^  be- 
cause it  happens  sometimes  that  we  have  not  words  to 
express  the  specific  difference.  Thus  a scarlet  color  is, 
no  doubt,  a species  of  color;  but  how  shall  we  express 
the  specific  difference  by  whicfi  scarlet  is  distinguished 
from  green  or  blue  ? The  difference  between  them  is 
immediately  perceived  by  the  eye ; but  we  have  not 
words  to  express  it.  These  things  we  are  taught  by 
logic. 

Without  havmg  recourse  to  the  principles  of  logic, 
we  may  easily  be  satisfied  that  words  cannot  be  defined 
which  signify  things  perfectly  simple,  and  void  of  all 
^ composition.  This  observation,  I think,  was  first  made 
by  Descartes,  and  afterwards  more  fully  illustrated  by 
Locke.*  But  however  obvious  it  appears  to  be,  many 


* This  is  incorrect.  Descartes  has  little  and  Locke  no  title  to  praise 
for  this  observation.  It  had  been  made  by  Aristotle,  and  after  him  by 
many  others ; while,  subsequent  to  Descartes,  and  previous  to  Locke^  Pas- 
cal and  the  Port-Royal  logicians,  to  say  nothing  of  a paper  of  Leibnitz,  in 
1681,  had  reduced  it  to  a matter  of  commonplace.  In  this  instance  Locke 
can,  indeed,  be  proved  a borrower.  Mr.  Stewart,  Philosophical  Essays^  Note 


4 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


instances  may  be  given  of  great  philosophers  who 
have  perplexed  and  darkened  the  subjects  they  have 
treated,  by  not  knowing  or  not  attending  to  it. 

When  men  attempt  to  define  things  which  cannot 
be  defined,  their  definitions  will  always  be  either  ob- 
scure or  false.  It  was  one  of  the  capital  defects  of 
Aristotle’s  philosophy,  that  he  pretended  to  define  the 
simplest  things,  which  neither  can  be  nor  need  to  be 
defined ; such  as  time  and  motion.  Among  modern 
philosophers,  I know  none  that  has  abused  definition 
so  much  as  Wolf,  the  famous  German  philosopher, 
who,  in  a work  on  the  human  mind,  called  Psychologia 
Empirica^  consisting  of  many  hundred  propositions, 
fortified  by  demonstrations,  with  a proportional  accom- 
paniment of  definitions,  corollaries,  and  scholia,  has 
given  so  many  definitions  of  things  which  cannot  be 
defined,  and  so  many  demonstrations  of  things  self- 
evident,  that  the  greatest  part  of  the  work  consists  of 
tautology,  and  ringing  changes  upon  words. 

II.  Explication  of  some  of  the  most  frequently  recur- 
ring Terms  in  Psychology,]  There  is  no  subject  in 
which  there  is  more  frequent  occasion  to  use  words 
that  cannot  be  logically  defined,  than  in  treating  of  the 
powers  and  operations  of  the  mind.  The  simplest 
operations  of  our  minds  must  all  be  expressed  by  words 
of  this  kind.  No  man  can  explain  by  a logical  defini- 
tion what  it  is  to  think^  to  apprehend^  to  believe^  to  will^ 
to  desire.  Every  man  who  understands  the  language 
has  some  notion  of  the  meaning  of  tfiese  words ; and 
every  man  who  is  capable  of  reflection  may,  by  attend- 
ing to  the  operations  of  his  own  mind  which  are  signi- 
fied by  them,  form  a clear  and  distinct  notion  of  them ; 
but  they  cannot  be  logically  defined. 

Since,  therefore,  it  is  often  impossible  to  define  words 
which  we  must  use  on  this  subject,  we  must  as  much 


A,  is  wrong  in  thinking  that,  after  Descartes,  Lord  Stair  is  the  earliest 
philosopher  by  whom  this  logical  principle  was  enounced  j for  Stair,  as 
a writer,  is  subsequent  to  the  authors  adduced.  — H. 


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS. 


5 


as  possible  use  common  words  in  their  common  accepta- 
tion^ pointing  out  their  various  senses  where  they  are 
ambiguous  ; and  when  we  are  obliged  to  use  words  less 
common,  we  must  endeavour  to  explain  them  as  well 
as  we  can,  without  affecting  to  give  logical  definitions, 
when  the  nature  of  the  thing  does  not  admit  of  them. 

The  following  observations  on  the  meaning  of  cer- 
tain words  are  intended  to  supply,  as  far  as  we  can, 
the  want  of  definitions,  by  preventing  ambiguity  or 
obscurity  in  the  use  of  them. 

1.  The  Mind,  — By  the  mind  of  a man  we  under- 
stand that  in  him  which  thinks,  remembers,  reasons, 
wills.  The  essence  both  of  body  and  of  mind  is  un- 
known to  us.  We  know  certain  properties  of  the  first, 
and  certain  operations  of  the  last,  and  by  these  only 
we  can  define  or  describe  them.  We  define  body  to  be 
that  which  is  extended,,  solid,,  movable,,  divisible.  In  like 
manner  we  define  mind  to  be  that  ivhich  thinks.  We 
are  conscious  that  we  think,  and  that  we  have  a variety 
of  thoughts  of  different  kinds ; such  as  seeing,  hearing, 
remembering,  deliberating,  resolving,  loving,  hating, 
and  many  other  kinds  of  thought,  all  which  we  are 
taught  by  nature  to  attribute  to  one  internal  principle ; 
and  this  principle  of  thought  we  call  the  mind  or  soul 
of  a man. 

2.  Operations  of  the  Mind,  — By  the  operations  * of 
the  mind,  we  understand  every  mode  of  thinking  of 
which  we  are  conscious. 

It  deserves  our  notice,  that  the  various  modes  of 
thinking  have  always,  and  in  all  languages,  as  far  as 
we  know,  been  called  by  the  name  of  operations  of  the 
mind,,  or  by  names  of  the  same  import.  To  body  we 
ascribe  various  properties,,  but  not  operations,  properly 
so  called  ; it  is  extended,  divisible,  movable,  inert;  it 
continues  in  any  state  in  which  it  is  put;  every  change 
of  its  state  is  the  effect  of  some  force  impressed  upon 
it,  and  is  exactly  proportional  to  the  force  impressed, 


* Operation^  act^  energy^  are  nearly  convertible  terms ; and  are  opposed  to 
faculty  (of  which  anon),  as  the  actual  to  potential.  — 


6 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY, 


and  in  the  precise  direction  of  that  force.  These  are 
the  general  properties  of  matter,  and  these  are  not 
operations ; on  the  contrary,  they  all  imply  its  being  a 
dead,  inactive  thing,  which  moves  only  as  it  is  moved, 
and  acts  only  by  being  acted  upon. 

But  the  mind  is,  from  its  very  nature,  a living  and 
active  being.  Every  thing  we  know  of  it  implies  life 
and  active  energy ; and  the  reason  why  all  its  modes 
of  thinking  are  called  its  operations  is,  that  in  all,  or'^in 
•most  of  them,  it  is  not  merely  passive,  as  body  is,  but 
is  really  and  properly  active. 

In  all  ages,  and  in  all  languages,  ancient  and  modern, 
the  various  modes  of  thinking  have  been  expressed  by 
words  of  active  signification,  such  as  seeing,  hearing, 
reasoning,  willing,  and  the  like.  It  seems,  therefore,  to 
be  the  natural  judgment  of  mankind,  that  the  mind  is 
active  in  its  various  ways  of  thinking ; and  for  this 
reason  they  are  called  its  operations^  and  are  expressed 
by  active  verbs. 

It  may  be  made  a question.  What  regard  is  to  be 
paid  to  this  natural  judgment?  May  it  not  be  a vul- 
gar error  ? Philosophers  who  think  so  have,  no  doubt, 
a right  to  be  heard.  But  until  it  is  proved  that  the 
mind  is  not  active  in  thinking,  but  merely  passive,  the 
common  language  with  regard  to  its  operations  ought 
to  be  used,  and  ought  not  to  give  place  to  a phraseology 
invented  by  philosophers,  which  implies  its  being  merely 
passive. 

3.  Powers  and  Faculties  of  the  Mind.  — The  words 
power  and  faculty.)  which  are  often  used  in  speaking  of 
the  mind,  need  little  explication.  Every  operation 
supposes  a power  in  the  being  that  operates  ; for  to 
suppose  any  thing  to  operate  which  has  no  power  to 
operate  is  manifestly  absurd.  But,  on  the  other  hand, 
there  is  no  absurdity  in  supposing  a being  to  have 
power  to  operate  when  it  does  not  operate.  Thus,  I 
may  have  power  to  walk  when  I sit,  or  to  speak  when 
I am  silent.  Every  operation,  therefore,  implies  power ; 
but  the  power  does  not  imply  the  operation. 

The  faculties  of  the  mind,  and  its  powers.^  are  often 


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS. 


7 


used  as  synonymous  expressions.  But  as  most  syno- 
nymes  have  some  minute  distinction  that  deserves 
notice,  I apprehend  that  the  word  faculty  is  most  prop- 
erly applied  to  those  powers  of  the  mind  which  are 
original  and  natural^  and  which  make  a part  of  the 
constitution  of  the  mind.  There  are  other  powers 
which  are  acquired  by  use,  exercise,  or  study,  which  are 
not  called  faculties,  but  habits.  There  must  be  some- 
thing in  the  constitution  of  the  mind  necessary  to  our 
being  able  to  acquire  habits,  and  this  is  commonly 
called  capacity,"^ 

4.  Subject  and  Object,  — We  frequently  meet  with  a 
distinction,  in  writers  upon  this  subject,  between  things 
in  the  mind  and  things  external  to  the  mind.  The 
powers,  faculties,  and  operations  of  the  mind  are  things 
in  the  mind.  Every  thing  is  said  to  be  in  the  mind  of 
which  the  mind  is  the  subject.  It  is  self-evident,  that 
there  are  some  things  which  cannot  exist  without  a 
subject  to  which  they  belong,  and  of  which  they  are 
attributes.  Thus,  color  must  be  in  something  colored ; 
figure  in  something  figured;  thought  can  only  be  in 
something  that  thinks ; wisdom  and  virtue  cannot  exist 
but  in  some  being  that  is  wise  and  virtuous.  When, 
therefore,  we  speak  of  things  in  the  mind,  we  under- 
stand by  this,  things  of  which  the  mind  is  the  subject. 
Excepting  the  mind  itself  and  things  in  the  mind,  all 
other  things  are  said  to  be  external.  It  ought,  there- 
fore, to  be  remembered,  that  this  distinction  between 
things  in  the  mind  and  things  external  is  not  meant  to 
signify  the  p/ace  of  the  things  we  speak  of,  but  their 
subject. 

There  is  a figurative  sense  in  which  things  are  said 
to  be  in  the  mind,  which  it  is  sufficient  barely  to  men- 
tion. We  say.  Such  a thing  was  not  in  my  mind. 


* These  terms  properly  stand  in  the  following  relations : — powers  are 
active  and  passive^  natural  and  acquired.  Powers  natural  and  active  are 
called  faculties ; powers  natural  and  passive,  capacities  or  receptivities ; 
powers  acquired  are  habits.,  and  habit  is  used  both  in  an  active  and  in  a 
passive  sense.  The  power,  again,  of  acquiring  a habit,  is  called  a dispo- 
sition. — H. 


8 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


meaning  no  more  than  that  we  had  not  the  least  thought 
of  it.  By  a figure,  we  put  the  thing  for  the  thought  of 
it.  In  this  sense,  external  things  are  in  the  mind  as 
often  as  they  are  the  objects  of  our  thought. 

Most  of  the  operations  of  the  mind,  from  their  very 
nature,  must  have  objects  to  which  they  are  directed, 
and  about  which  they  are  employed.  He  that  perceives 
must  perceive  something ; and  that  which  he  perceives 
is  called  the  object  of  his  perception.  To  perceive, 
without  having  any  object  of  perception,  is  impossible. 
The  mind  that  perceives,  the  object  perceived,  and  the 
operation  of  perceiving  that  object,  are  distinct  things, 
and  are  distinguished  in  the  structure  of  all  languages. 
In  this  sentence,  ‘‘  I see  or  perceive  the  moon,”  I is  the 
person  or  mind;  the  active  verb  see  denotes  the  operation 
of  that  mind,  and  the  moon  denotes  the  object.  What 
we  have  said  of  perceiving  is  equally  applicable  to 
most  operations  of  the  mind.  Such  operations  are,  in 
all  languages,  expressed  by  active  transitive  verbs ; and 
we  know  that,  in  all  languages,  such  verbs  require  a 
thing  or  person,  which  is  the  agent,  and  a noun  follow- 
ing in  an  oblique  case,  which  is  the  object.  Whence 
it  is  evident  that  all  mankind,  both  those  who  have 
contrived  language,  and  those  who  use  it  with  under- 
standing, have  distinguished  these  three  things  as  dif- 
ferent, — to  wit,  the  operations  of  the  mind,  which  are 
expressed  by  active  verbs,  the  mind  itself,  which  is  the 
nominative  to  those  verbs,  and  the  object^  which  is,  in 
the  oblique  case,  governed  by  them.* 


* Subject  and  object  are  correlative  terms.  The  former  is  properly  id  in 
quo ; the  latter,  id  circa  quod.  Hence,  in  psychological  language,  the  sub- 
ject^ absolutely,  is  the  mind  that  knows  or  thinks,  — i.  e.  the  mind  con- 
sidered as  the  subject  of  knowledge  or  thought ; the  object,  that  which  is 
known,  or  thought  about.  The  adjectives  subjective  and  objective  are  con- 
venient, if  not  indispensable  expressions. 

The  antithesis  between  myself  and  what  is  not  myself  sometimes  express- 
ed by  an  awkward  use  of  the  pronoun  I.  In  English  we  cannot  say  the  I 
and  the  not-I  so  happily  as  the  French  le  moi  and  le  non-moi,  or  even  the 
German  das  Ich  and  das  nicht-Tch.  The  ambiguity  arising  from  the  iden- 
tity of  sound  between  the  I and  the  eye  would  of  itself  preclude  the  ordi- 
nary em})loyment  of  the  former.  The  ego  and  the  non-ego  are  the  best 
terms  we  can  use;  and  as  the  expressions  are  scientific,  it  is  perhaps  no  loss 
that  their  technical  precision  is  guarded  by  their  non-vernacularity.  — H. 


EXPLICATION  OF  WORDS. 


9 


5.  Idea.  — When,  in  common  language,  we  speak  of 
having  an  idea  of  any  thing,  we  mean  no  more  by  that 
expression  than  thinking  of  it.  The  vulgar  allow,  that 
this  expression  implies  a mind  that  thinks,  an  act  of 
that  mind  which  we  call  thinking,  and  an  object  about 
which  it  thinks.  But,  besides  these  three,  the  philoso- 
pher conceives  that  there  is  a fourth,  — to  wit,  the  idea., 
which  is  the  immediate  object.  The  idea  is  in  the  mind 
itself,  and  can  have  no  existence  but  in  the  mind  that 
thinks;  but  the  remote  or  mediate  object  may  be  some- 
thing external,  as  the  sun  or  moon ; it  may  be  some- 
thing past  or  future ; it  may  be  something  which  never 
existed.  This  is  the  philosophical  meaning  of  the 
word  idea;  and  we  may  observe,  that  this  meaning  of 
that  word  is  built  upon  a philosophical  opinion  ; for,  if 
philosophers  had  not  believed  that  there  are  such  im- 
mediate objects  of  all  our  thoughts  in  the  mind,  they 
would  never  have  used  the  word  idea  to  express  them.* 

I shall  only  add  on  this  article,  that,  although  I may 
have  occasion  to  use  the  word  idea  in  this  philosophical 
sense  in  explaining  the  opinions  of  others,  I shall  have 
no  occasion  to  use  it  in  expressing  my  own,  because  I 
believe  ideas.,  taken  in  this  sense,  to  be  a mere  fiction 
of  philosophers.  And  in  the  popular  meaning  of  the 
word  there  is  the  less  occasion  to  use  it,  because  the 
English  words  thought.,  notion.,  apprehension.,  answer  the 
purpose  as  well  as  the  Greek  word  idea.,  with  this  ad- 
vantage, that  they  are  less  ambiguous.  There  is,  indeed, 
a meaning  of  the  word  idea,  which  I think  most  agree- 
able to  its  use  in  ancient  philosophy,  and  which  I would 
willingly  adopt,  if  use,  the  arbiter  of  language,  did  per- 
mit. But  this  will  come  to  be  explained  afterwards. 

I have  premised  these  observations  on  the  meaning 
of  certain  words  that  frequently  occur  in  treating  of 
this  subject,  for  two  reasons:  that  I maybe  the 


* As  we  proceed,  we  shall  have  frequent  occasion  to  notice  the  limited 
meaning  attached  by  Reid  to  the  term  idea^  viz.  something  in  or  present  to 
the  mind,  but  not  a mere  modification  of  the  mind ; and  also  his  error  in 
supposing  that  all  the  philosophers  who  "accepted  the  theory  of  ideas  ac- 
cepted it  under  this  crude  form.  — Ed. 


10 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


better  understood  when  I use  them ; and  secondly^  that 
those  who  would  make  any  progress  in  this  branch  of 
science  may  accustom  themselves  to  attend  very  care- 
fully to  the  meaning  of  words  that  are  used  in  it.  They 
may  be  assured  of  this,  that  the  ambiguity  of  words^ 
and  the  vague  and  improper  application  of  them,  have 
thrown  more  darkness  upon  this  subject  than  the  sub- 
tilty  and  intricacy  of  things. 

When  we  use  common  words,  we  ought  to  use  them 
in  the  sense  in  which  they  are  most  commonly  used  by 
the  best  and  purest  writers  in  the  language ; and  when 
we  have  occasion  to  enlarge  or  restrict  the  meaning  of 
a common  word,  or  to  give  it  more  precision  than  it 
has  in  common  language,  the  reader  ought  to  have 
warning  of  this,  otherwise  we  shall  impose  upon  our- 
selves and  upon  him. 

Other  words  that  need  explication  shall  be  explained 
as  they  occur.* 


CHAPTER  II. 
or  HYPOTHESES. 

I.  Proneness  of  Philosophers  to  build  on  Hypotheses,] 
Every  branch  of  human  knowledge  has  its  proper  prin- 
ciples, its  proper  foundation  and  method  of  reasoning ; 
and  if  we  endeavour  to  build  it  upon  any  other  foun- 
dation, it  will  never  stand  firm  and  stable.  Thus  the 
historian  builds  upon  testimony,  and  rarely  indulges 
conjecture.  The  antiquarian  mixes  conjecture  with 
testimony ; and  the  former  often  makes  the  larger  in- 
gredient. The  mathematician  pays  not  the  least  regard 


* As  a convenient  manual  for  the  explication  of  technical  terms  in  psy- 
chology we  can  recommend  Isaac  Taylor’s  Elements  of  Thought ; or^  Con- 
cise Explanations  {alphabetically  arranged)  of  the  Principal  Terms  employed 
in  the  Several  Branches  of  Intellectual  Philosophy.  Still  better  for  this  pur- 
pose is  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Philosophiques^  now  in  course  of  publi- 
cation. — Ed. 


OF  HYPOTHESES. 


11 


either  to  testimony  or  conjecture,  but  deduces  every 
thing,  by  demonstrative  reasoning,  from  his  definitions 
and  axioms.  Indeed,  whatever  is  built  upon  conjec- 
ture is  improperly  called  science ; for  conjecture  may 
beget  opinion,  but  cannot  produce  knowledge.  Natu- 
ral philosophy  must  be  built  upon  the  phenomena  of 
the  material  system,  discovered  by  observation  and  ex- 
periment. 

When  men  first  began  to  philosophize,  that  is,  to 
carry  their  thoughts  beyond  the  objects  of  sense,  and  to 
inquire  into  the  causes  of  things,  and  the  secret  opera- 
tions of  nature,  it  was  very  natural  for  them  to  indulge 
conjecture  ; nor  was  it  to  be  expected  that,  in  many 
ages,  they  should  discover  the  proper  and  scientific  way 
of  proceeding  in  philosophical  disquisitions.  Accord- 
ingly, we  find  that  the  most  ancient  systems  in  every 
branch  of  philosophy  were  nothing  but  the  conjectures 
of  men  famous  for  their  wisdom,  whose  fame  gave 
authority  to  their  opinions.  Thus,  in  early  ages,-' wise 
men  conjectured  that  this  earth  is  a vast  plain,  sur- 
rounded on  all  hands  by  a boundless  ocean ; that  from 
this  ocean  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars  emerge  at  their 
rising,  and  plunge  into  it  again  at  their  setting. 

With  regard  to  the  mind,  men  in  their  rudest  state 
are  apt  to  conjecture,  that  the  principle  of  life  in  a man 
is  his  breath ; because  the  most  obvious  distinction  be- 
tween a living  and  a dead  man  is,  that  the  one  breathes 
and  the  other  does  not.  To  this  it  is  owing,  that?  in 
ancient  languages,  the  word  which  denotes  the  soul  is 
that  which  properly  signifies  breath  or  air. 

As  men  advance  in  knowledge,  their  first  conjectures 
appear  silly  and  childish,  and  give  place  to  others  which 
tally  better  with  later  observations  and  discoveries. 
Thus,  one  system  of  philosophy  succeeds  another,  with- 
out any  claim  to  superior  merit  but  this,  that  it  is  a 
more  ingenious  system  of  conjectures,  and  accounts 
better  for  common  appearances. 

To  omit  many  ancient  systems  of  this  kind,  Des- 
cartes, about  the  middle  of  the  last  century,  dissatisfied 
with  the  materia  prima^  the  substantial  forms^  and  the 


12 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


occult  qualities  of  the  Peripatetics,  conjectured  boldly, 
that  the  heavenly  bodies  of  our  system  are  carried 
round  by  a vortex  or  whirlpool  of  subtile  matter,  just 
as  straws  and  chaff  are  carried  round  in  a tub  of  water. 
He  conjectured  that  the  soul  is  seated  in  a small  gland 
in  the  brain,  called  the  pineal  gland;  that  there,  as  in 
her  chamber  of  presence,  she  receives  intelligence  of 
every  thing  that  affects  the  senses,  by  means  of  a subtile 
fluid  contained  in  the  nerves,  called  the  animal  spirits  ; 
and  that  she  despatches  these  animal  spirits,  as  her 
messengers,  to  put  in  motion  the  several  muscles  of  the 
body,  as  there  is  occasion.*  By  such  conjectures  as 
these,  Descartes  could  account  for  every  phenomenon 
in  nature  in  such  a plausible  manner  as  gave  satisfac- 
tion to  a great  part  of  the  learned  world  for  more  than 
half  a century. 

Such  conjectures  in  philosophical  matters  have  com- 
monly got  the  name  of  hypotheses  or  theories.^  And 
the  invention  of  an  hypothesis,  founded  on  some  slight 
probabilities,  which  accounts  for  many  appearances  of 
nature,  has  been  considered  as  the  highest  attainment 
of  a philosopher.  If  the  hypothesis  hangs  well  to- 
gether, is  embellished  by  a lively  imagination,  and 
serves  to  account  for  common  appearances,  it  is  con- 
sidered by  many  as  having  all  the  qualities  that  should 
recommend  it  to  our  belief,  and  all  that  ought  to  be 
required  in  a philosophical  system. 

There  is  such  proneness  in  men ..  of  genius  to  invent 


* It  is  not,  however,  to  be  supposed  that  Descartes  allowed  the  soul  to 
be  seated  by  local  presence  in  any  part  of  the  body ; for  the  smallest  point 
of  body  is  still  extended,  and  mind  is  absolutely  simple  and  incapable  of 
occupying  place.  The  pineal  gland,  in  the  Cartesian  doctrine,  is  only 
analogically  called  the  seat  of  the  soul,  inasmuch  as  this  is  viewed  as  the 
central  point  of  the  corporeal  organism ; but  while  through  this  point  the 
mind  and  body  are  mutually  connected,  that  connection  is  not  one  of  a 
mere  physical  dependence,  as  they  do  not  operate  on  each  other  by  direct 
and  natural  causation.  — H. 

t Reid  uses  the  terms  theory^  hypothesis^  and  conjecture  as  convertible,  and 
always  in  an  unfavorable  acceptation.  Herein  there  is  a double  inaccu- 
racy. But  of  this  again.  — H. 

Almost  every  theory^  e.  g.  that  of  gravitation,  or  the  Copernican  system, 
was  an  hypothesis  in  the  beginning,  but  after  being  verified  by  facts  it 
ceased  to  be  an  hypothesis.  — Ed. 


OF  HYPOTHESES. 


13 


hypotheses^  and  in  others  to  acquiesce  in  them  as  the 
utmost  which  the  human  faculties  can  attain  in  philoso- 
phy, that  it  is  of  the  last  consequence  to  the  progress 
of  real  knowledge,  that  men  should  have  a clear  and 
distinct  understanding  of  the  nature  of  hypotheses  in 
philosophy,  and  of  the  regard  that  is  due  to  them. 

II.  A priori  Improbability  of  such  Hypotheses,]  Al- 
though some  conjectures  may  have  a considerable  de- 
gree of  probability,  yet  it  is  evidently  in  the  nature  of 
conjecture  to  be  uncertain.  In  every  case,  the  assent 
ought  to  be  proportioned  to  the  evidence  ; for  to  believe 
firmly  what  has  but  a small  degree  of  probability  is  a 
manifest  abuse  of  our  understanding.  Now,  though 
we  may,  in  many  cases,  form  very  probable  conjectures 
concerning  the  works  of  men,  every  conjecture  we  can 
form  with  regard  to  the  works  of  God  has  as  little 
probability  as  the  conjectures  of  a child  with  regard  to 
the  works  of  a man.  The  wisdom  of  God  exceeds 
that  of  the  wisest  man,  more  than  that  of  the  wisest 
man  exceeds  the  wisdom  of  a child.  If  a child  were 
to  conjecture  how  an  army  is  to  be  formed  in  the  day 
of  battle,  how  a city  is  to  be  fortified,  or  a state  gov- 
erned, what  chance  has  he  to  guess  right  ? As  little 
chance  has  the  wisest  man,  when  he  pretends  to  con- 
jecture how  the  planets  move  in  their  courses,  how  the 
sea  ebbs  and  flows,  and  how  our  minds  act  upon  our 
bodies. 

If  a thousand  of  the  greatest  wits  that  ever  the  world 
produced  were,  without  any  previous  knowledge  in 
anatomy,  to  sit  down  and  contrive  how,  and  by  what 
internal  organs,  the  various  functions  of  the  human 
body  are  carried  on,  — how  the  blood  is  made  to  circu- 
late, and  the  limbs  to  move,  — they  would  not  in  a 
thousand  years  hit  upon  any  thing  like  the  truth.*  Of 


* “ Nothing  can  be  juster  than  this  remark ; but  does  it  authorize  the 
conclusion,  that,  to  an  experienced  and  skilful  anatomist^  conjectures  founded 
on  analogy  and  the  consideration  of  uses  are  of  no  avail  as  media  of  dis- 
covery 'I  The  logical  inference,  indeed,  from  Dr.  Reid’s  own  statement  is, 
not  against  anatomical  conjectures  in  general,  hut  against  the  anatomical 

3 


11 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


all  the  discoveries  that  have  been  made  concerning  the 
inward  structure  of  the  human  body,  never  one  was 
made  by  conjecture.  Accurate  observations  of  anato- 
mists have  brought  to  light  innumerable  artifices  of 
nature  in  the  contrivance  of  this  machine  of  the  human 
body,  which  we  cannot  but  admire  as  excellently 
adapted  to  their  several  purposes.  But  the  most  sa- 
gacious physiologist  never  dreamed  of  them  till  they 
were  discovered.  On  the  other  hand,  innumerable 
conjectures,  formed  in  different  ages,  with  regard  to 
the  structure  of  the  body,  have  been  confuted  by  ob- 
servation, and  none  ever  confirmed.  What  we  have 
said  of  the  internal  structure  of  the  human  body  may 
be  said,  with  justice,  of  every  other  part  of  the  works 
of  God,  wherein  any  real  discovery  has  been  made. 
Such  discoveries  have  always  been  made  by  patient 
observation,  by  accurate  experiments,  or  by  conclusions 
drawn  by  strict  reasoning  from  observations  and  ex- 
periments ; and  such  discoveries  have  always  tended  to 
refute,  and  not  to  confirm,  the  theories  and  hypotheses 
which  ingenious  men  had  invented. 

As  this  is  a fact  confirmed  by  the  history  of  philos- 
ophy in  all  past  ages,  it  ought  to  have  taught  men, 
long  ago,  to  treat  with  just  contempt  hypotheses  in 
every  branch  of  philosophy,  and  to  despair  of  ever  ad- 
vancing real  knowledge  in  that  way.  The  Indian  phi- 
losopher, being  at  a loss  to  know  how  the  earth  was 
supported,  invented  the  hypothesis  of  a huge  elephant ; 
and  this  elephant  he  supposed  to  stand  upon  the  back 
of  a huge  tortoise.  This  hypothesis,  however  ridiculous 
it  appears  to  us,  might  seem  very  reasonable  to  other 
Indians,  who  knew  no  more  than  the  inventor  of  it; 
and  the  same  will  be  the  fate  of  all  hypotheses  invent- 
ed by  men  to  account  for  the  works  of  God : they  may 
have  a decent  and  plausible  appearance  to  those  who 
are  not  more  knowing  than  the  inventor;  but  when 


conjectures  of  those  who  are  ignorant  of  anatomy.”  — Stewart’s  Elements^ 
Part  II.  Chap.  IX.  § 2.  Harvey’s  theory  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood 
began  in  a conjecture  founded  on  the  doctrine  of  final  causes.  — Ep. 


OF  HYPOTHESES. 


Ir5 

men  come  to  be  more  enlightened,  they  will  always 
appear  ridiculous  and  childish. 

This  has  been  the  case  with  regard  to  hypotheses 
that  have  been  revered  by  the  most  enlightened  part  of 
mankind  for  hundreds  of  years ; and  it  will  always  be 
the  case  to  the  end  of  the  world.  For  until  the  wis- 
dom of  men  bear  some  proportion  to  the  wisdom  of 
God,  their  attempts  to  find  out  the  structure  of  his 
works  by  the  force  of  their  wit  and  genius  will  be  vain. 

The  world  has  been  so  long  befooled  by  hypotheses 
in  all  parts  of  philosophy,  that  it  is  of  the  utmost  con- 
sequence to  every  man,  who  would  make  any  progress 
in  real  knowledge,  to  treat  them  with  just  contempt, 
as  the  reveries  of  vain  and  fanciful  men,  whose  pride 
makes  them  conceive  themselves  able  to  unfold  the 
mysteries  of  nature  by  the  force  of  their  genius.  A 
learned  man,  in  an  epistle  to  Descartes,  has  the  follow- 
ing observation,  which  very  much  deserved  the  atten- 
tion of  that  philosopher,  and  of  all  that  come  after  him: 
— « When  men,  sitting  in  their  closet,  and  consulting 
only  their  books,  attempt  disquisitions  into  nature, 
they  may,  indeed,  tell  how  they  would  have  made  the 
world,  if  God  had  given  them  that  in  commission ; 
that  is,  they  may  describe  chimeras  which  correspond 
with  the  imbecility  of  their  own  minds,  no  less  than 
the  admirable  beauty  of  the  universe  corresponds  with 
the  infinite  perfection  of  its  Creator;  but  without  an 
understanding  truly  divine,  they  can  never  form  such 
an  idea  to  themselves  as  the  Deity  had  in  creating 
things.” 

III.  The  only  Legitimate  Rules  of  Philosophizing.] 
Let  us,  therefore,  lay  down  this  as  a fundamental  prin- 
ciple in  our  inquiries  into  the  structure  of  the  mind 
and  its  operations,  that  no  regard  is  due  to  the  conjec- 
tures or  hypotheses  of  philosophers,  however  ancient, 
however  generally  received.  Let  us  accustom  our- 
selves to  try  every  opinion  by  the  touchstone  of  fact 
and  experience.  What  can  fairly  be  deduced  from 
facts  duly  observed,  or  sufficiently  attested,  is  genuine 


16 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


and  pure ; it  is  the  voice  of  God,  and  no  fiction  of  hu- 
man imagination. 

The  first  rale  of  philosophizing  laid  down  by  the 
great  Newton  is  this : — Causas  rerum  naturalium^  non 
plures  admitti  debere^  quam  quce  et  vera  sint^  et  earum 
phcenomenis  explicandis  sufficiant^  — ‘‘No  more  causes, 
nor  any  other  causes  of  natural  effects,  ought  to  be  ad- 
mitted, but  such  as  are  both  true,  and  are  sufficient  for 
explaining  their  appearances.’’  This  is  a golden  rule ; 
it  is  the  true  and  proper  test,  by  which  what  is  sound 
and  solid  in  philosophy  may  be  distinguished  from 
what  is  hollow  and  vain.* 

If  a philosopher,  therefore,  pretend  to  show  us  the 
cause  of  any  natural  effect,  whether  relating  to  matter 
or  to  mind,  let  us  first  consider  whether  there  be  suffi- 
cient evidence  that  the  cause  he  assigns  does  really  exist. 
If  there  be  not,  reject  it  with  disdain,  as  a fiction  which 
ought  to  have  no  place  in  genuine  philosophy.  If  the 
cause  assigned  really  exist,  consider  in  the  next  place 
whether  the  effect  it  is  brought  to  explain  necessarily 
follows  from  it.  Unless*  it  have  these  two  conditions, 
it  is  good  for  nothing. 

When  Newton  had  shown  the  admirable  effects  of 
gravitation  in  our  planetary  system,  he  must  have  felt 
a strong  desire  to  know  its  cause.  He  could  have  in- 
vented a hypothesis  for  this  purpose,  as  many  had 
done  before  him.  But  his  philosophy  was  of  another 
complexion.  Let  us  hear  what  he  says : — Rationem 
harum  gravitatis  proprietatum  ex  phcenomenis  non  potui 
deducere^  et  hypotheses  non  fingo.  Quicquid  enim  ex 
phcenomenis  non  deducitur^  hypothesis  vocanda  est.  Et 
hypotheses^  seu  metaphysicce^  seu  physicce^  seu  qualitatum 
occultarium^  seu  mechanicw^  in  philosophia  experimentali 
locum  non  habent.^ 


* For  this  rule  we  are  not  indebted  to  Newton.  It  is  only  the  old  law 
of  parsimony,  and  that  ambiguously  expressed.  For  in  their  plain  mean- 
ing, the  words  et  vera  sint  are  redundant ; or  what  follows  is  redundant, 
and  the  whole  rule  a barren  truism.  — H.  [Compare  Whewell,  Philosophy 
of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  Book  XII.  Chap.  XIII.  — Fd.] 

t “ I have  not  been  able  to  deduce  from  phenomena  the  cause  of  these 
properties  of  gravity,  and  I do  not  frame  hypotheses.  For  whatever  is  not 


OF  ANALOGY. 


17 


CHAPTER  III. 

OF  ANALOGY. 

I.  Nature  and  Uses  of  Analogical  Reasoning,]  It  is 
natural  to  men  to  judge  of  things  less  known  by  some 
similitude  they  observe,  or  think  they  observe,  between 


deduced  from  phenomena  must  be  termed  hypothesis.  And  hypotheses, 
whether  regarding  physics,  metaphysics,  occult  qualities,  or  mechanics, 
have  no  place  in  experimental  philosophy.” 

On  the  use  of  hypotheses,  with  its  just  limitations,  compare  Stewart, 
Elements.,  Part  II.  Chap.  IX.  § 2 ; Herschel,  Preliminary  Discourse,  Part  II. 
Chap.  VII.;  Mill,  System  of  Logic^  Book  III.  Chap.  XIII.  §§  4-7.  The 
latter  observes : — “ When  Newton  said.  Hypotheses  non  fingo.  he  did  not 
mean,  that  he  deprived  himself  of  the  facilities  of  investigation  afforded  by 
assuming,  in  the  first  instance,  what  he  hoped  ultimately  to  be  able  to 
prove.  Without  such  assumptions,  science  could  never  have  attained  its 
present  state  : they  are  necessary  steps  in  the  progress  to  something  more 
certain;  and  nearly  every  thing  which  is  now  theory  was  once  hypothesis. 
Even  in  purely  experimental  science,  some  inducement  is  necessary  for 
trying  one  experiment  rather  than  another;  and  although  it  is  abstractedly 
possible  that  all  the  experiments  which  have  been  tried  might  have  been 
produced  by  the  mere  desire  to  ascertain  what  would  hapi)en  in  certain 
circumstances,  without  any  previous  conjecture  as  to  the  result,  yet,  in 
point  of  fact,  those  unobvioiis,  delicate,  and  often  cumbrous  and  tedious 
processes  of  experiment,  which  have  thrown  most  light  upon  the  general 
constitution  of  nature,  would  hardly  ever  have  been  uncleriaken  by  the 
persons  or  at  the  time  they  were,  unless  it  had  seemed  to  depend  on  them 
whether  some  general  doctrine  or  theory  which  had  been  suggested,  but 
not  yet  proved,  should  be  admitted  or  not.  If  this  be  true  even  of  merely 
experimental  inquiry,  the  conversion  of  experimental  into  inductive  truths 
could  still  less  have  been  effected  without  large  temporary  assistance  from 
hypotheses.  The  process  of  tracing  regularity  in  any  complicated,  and  at 
first  sight  confused,  set  of  appearances,  is  necessarily  we  begin 

by  making  any  supposition,  even  a false  one,  to  see  what  consequences 
will  follow  from  it ; and  by  observing  how  these  differ  from  the  real  phe- 
nomena, we  learn  W'hat  corrections  to  make  in  our  supposition.  Let  any 
one  watch  the  manner  in  which  he  himself  unravels  any  complicated  mass 
of  evidence ; let  him  observe  how,  for  instance,  he  elicits  the  true  history 
of  any  occurrence  from  the  involved  statements  of  one  or  of  many  wit- 
nesses. He  will  find,  that  he  does  not  take  all  the  items  of  evidence  into 
his  mind  at  once,  and  attempt  to  weave  them  together : the  human  facul- 
ties are  not  equal  to  such  an  undertaking ; he  extemporizes,  from  a few  of 
the  particulars,  a first  rude  theory  of  the  mode  in  which  the  facts  took 
place,  and  then  looks  at  the  other  statements,  one  by  one,  to  try  whether 
they  can  he  reconciled  with  that  provisional  theory,  or  what  corrections  or 
additions  it  requires  to  make  it  square  with  them.  In  this  way,  which,  as 
M.  Comte  remarks,  has  some  resemblance  to  the  methods  of  approxirna- 


18 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


them  and  things  more  familiar  or  better  known.  In 
many  cases,  we  have  no  better  way  of  judging.  And 
where  the  things  compared  have  really  a great  simili- 
tude in  their  nature,  when  there  is  reason  to  think  that 
they  are  subject  to  the  same  laws,  there  may  be  a con- 
siderable degree  of  probability  in  conclusions  drawn 
from  analogy. 

Thus,  we  may  observe  a very  great  similitude  be- 
tween this  earth  which  we  inhabit,  and  the  other  plan- 
ets, Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury.  They 
all  revolve  round  the  sun,  as  the  earth  does,  although  at 
different  distances,  and  in  different  periods.  They  bor- 
row all  their  light  from  the  sun,  as  the  earth  does. 
Several  of  them  are  known  to  revolve  round  their  axes 
like  the  earth,  and,  by  that  means,  must  have  a like 
succession  of  day  and  night.  Some  of  them  have 
moons,  that  serve  to  give  them  light  in  the  absence  of 
the  sun,  as  our  moon  does  to  us.  They  are  all,  in 
their  motions,  subject  to  the  same  law  of  gravitation 
as  the  earth  is.  From  all  this  similitude,  it  is  not  un- 
reasonable to  think,  that  those  planets  may,  like  our 


tion  of  mathematicians,  we  arrive,  by  means  of  hypotheses,  at  conclusions 
not  hypothetical.” 

In  a note  he  adds : — “ The  attempt  to  localize,  in  different  regions  of  the 
brain,  the  physical  organs  of  our  different  mental  faculties  and  propensi- 
ties, was,  on  the  part  of  its  original  author,  a strictly  legitimate  example  of 
a scientific  hypothesis ; and  we  ought  not,  therefore,  to  blame  him  for  the 
extremely  slight  grounds  on  which  he  often  proceeded,  in  an  operation 
which  could  only  be  tentative,  though  we  may  regret  that  materials  barely 
sufficient  for  a first  rude  hypothesis  should  have  been  hastily  worked  up 
by  his  successors  into  the  vain  semblance  of  a science.  Whatever  there  may 
be  of  reality  in  the  connection  between  the  scale  of  mental  endowments 
and  the  various  degrees  of  complication  in  the  cerebral  system  (and  that 
there  is  some  such  connection,  comparative  anatomy  seems  strongly  to  in- 
dicate), it  was  in  no  other  way  so  likely  to  be  brought  to  light  as  by  fram- 
ing, in  the  first  instance,  an  hypothesis  similar  to  that  of  Gall.  But  the 
verification  of  any  such  hypothesis  is  attended,  from  the  peculiar  nature  of 
the  phenomena,  with  difficulties  which  phrenologists  have  not  hitherto 
shown  themselves  even  competent  to  appreciate,  much  less  to  overcome.” 

That  Dr.  Reid  has  pushed  his  objections  too  far  must  be  admitted. 
Still,  the  very  example  which  Mr.  Mill  has  given  of  a legitimate  hypothe- 
sis admonishes  us  with  how  much  danger  to  science  the  resort  is  attended, 
and  strengthens  our  conviction  that  the  spirit  which  dictated  these  objec- 
tions, and  which  they,  in  turn,  are  adapted  to  inspire,  cannot  be  too  highly 
commended.  — Ed. 


OF  ANALOGY. 


19 


earth,  be  the  habitation  of  various  orders  of  living  crea- 
tures. There  is  some  probability  in  this  conclusion 
from  analogy. 

In  medicine,  physicians  must,  for  the  most  part,  be 
directed  in  their  prescriptions  by  analogy.  The  con- 
stitution of  one  human  body  is  so  like  to  that  of 
another,  that  it  is  reasonable  to  think,  that  what  is  the 
cause  of  health  or  sickness  to  one  may  have  the  same 
effect  upon  another.  And  this  generally  is  found  true, 
though  not  without  some  exceptions. 

In  politics  we  reason,  for  the  most  part,  from  analo- 
gy. The  constitution  of  human  nature  is  so  similar  in 
different  societies  or  commonwealths,  that  the  causes 
of  peace  and  war,  of  tranquillity  and  sedition,  of  riches 
and  poverty,  of  improvement  and  degeneracy,  are  much 
the  same  in  all. 

Analogical  reasoning,  therefore,  is  not  in  all  cases  to 
be  rejected.  It  may  afford  a greater  or  a less  degree 
of  probability,  according  as  the  things  compared  are 
more  or  less  similar  in  their  nature.  But  it  ought  to 
be  observed,  that,  as  this  kind  of  reasoning  can  afford 
only  probable  evidence  at  best,  so,  unless  great  caution 
be  used,  we  are  apt  to  be  led  into  error  by  it.  For 
men  are  naturally  disposed  to  conceive  a greater  simili- 
tude in  things  than  there  really  is* * * § 

To  give  an  instance  of  this.  Anatomists,  in  ancient 
ages,  seldom  dissected  human  bodies ; but  very  often 
the  bodies  of  those  quadrupeds  whose  internal  struc- 
ture was  thought  to  approach  nearest  to  that  of  the 
human  body.  Modern  anatomists  have  discovered 
many  mistakes  the  ancients  were  led  into,  by  their 
conceiving  a greater  similitude  between  the  structure 
of  men  and  of  some  beasts  than  there  is  in  reality.  By 
this,  and  many  other  instances  that  might  be  given,  it 
appears  that  conclusions  built  on  analogy  stand  on  a 


* Berkeley  says : — “We  should . proceed  warily  in  such  things,  for  we 

are  apt  to  lay  too  great  a stress  on  analogies^  and,  to  the  prejudice  of  truth, 
humor  that  eagerness  of  mind  whereby  it  is  carried  to  extend  its  knowl- 

edge into  general  theorems.”  — Principles  of  Human  Knowledge^  Fart  I. 

§ 106.  — Ed. 


20 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


slippery  foundation ; and  that  we  ought  never  to  rest 
upon  evidence  of  this  kind,  when  we  can  have  more 
direct  evidence. 

I know  no  author  who  has  made  a more  just  and  a 
more  happy  use  of  this  mode  of  reasoning  than  Bishop 
Butler,  in  his  Analogy  of  Religion^  Natural  and  Re- 
vealed^ to  the  Constitution  and  Course  of  Nature,  In 
that  excellent  work,  the  author  does  not  ground  any  of 
the  truths  of  religion  upon  analogy,  as  their  proper 
evidence.  He  only  makes  use  of  analogy  to  answer 
objections  against  them.  When  objections  are  made 
against  the  truths  of  religion,  which  may  be  made  with 
equal  strength  against  what  we  know  to  be  true  in  the 
course  of  nature,  such  objections  can  have  no  weight. 

Analogical  reasoning,  therefore,  may  be  of  excellent 
use,  (1.)  in  answering  objections  against  truths  which 
have  other  evidence.  It  may  likewise  (2.)  give  a greater 
or  a less  degree  of  probability  in  cases  where  we  can 
find  no  other  evidence.  But  all  arguments  drawn  from 
analogy  are  still  the  weaker,  the  greater  disparity  there 
is  between  the  things  compared ; and  therefore  must 
be  weakest  of  all  when  we  compare  body  with  mind, 
because  there  are  no  two  things  in  nature  more  un- 
like. 

II.  Why  a frequent  Source  of  Error  in  Mental  Sci- 
ence,] There  is  no  subject  in  which  men  have  always 
been  so  prone  to  form  their  notions  by  analogies  of  this 
kind  as  in  what  relates  to  the  mind.  We  form  an  early 
acquaintance  with  material  things  by  means  of  our 
senses,  and  are  bred  up  in  a constant  familiarity  with 
them.  Hence  we  are  apt  to  measure  all  things  by 
them,  and  to  ascribe  to  things  most  remote  from  matter 
the  qualities  that  belong  to  material  things.  It  is  for 
this  reason,  that  mankind  have,  in  all  ages,  been  so 
prone  to  conceive  the  mind  itself  to  be  some  subtile  land 
of  matter ; that  they  have  been  disposed  to  ascribe  hu- 
man figure,^  and  human  organs,,  not  only  to  angels,,  but 
even  to  the  Deity,-  Though  we  are  conscious  of  the 
operations  of  our  own  minds  when  they  are  exerted. 


OF  ANALOGY. 


21 


and  are  capable  of  attending  to  them  so  as  to  form  a 
distinct  notion  of  them,  this  is  so  difficult  a work  to 
men  whose  attention  is  constantly  solicited  by  external 
objects,  that  we  give  them  names  from  things  that  are 
familiar^  and  which  are  conceived  to  have  some  simili- 
tude to  them ; and  the  notions  we  form  of  them  are  no 
less  analogical  than  the  names  we  give  them.  Almost 
all  the  words  by  which  we  express  the  operations  of 
the  mind  are  borrowed  from  material  objects.  To  un- 
derstand^ to  conceive^  to  imagine^  to  comprehend^  to  de- 
liberate^ to  infer ^ and  many  others,  are  words  of  this 
kind ; so  that  the  very  language  of  mankind,  with 
regard  to  the  operations  of  our  minds,  is  analogical. 
Because  bodies  are  affected  only  by  contact  and  pres- 
sure, we  are  apt  to  conceive  that  what  is  an  immediate 
object  of  thought,  and  affects  the  mind^  must  be  in  con- 
tact with  it^  and  make  some  impression  upon  it.  When 
we  imagine  any  thing,  the  very  word  leads  us  to  think 
that  there  must  be  some  image  in  the  mind  of  the  thing 
conceived.  It  is  evident  that  these  notions  are  drawn 
from  some  similitude  conceived  between  body  and 
mind,  and  between  the  properties  of  body  and  the  oper- 
ations of  mind. 

To  illustrate  more  fully  that  analogical  reasoning 
from  a supposed  similitude  of  mind  to  body,  which  I 
conceive  to  be  the  most  fruitful  source  of  errors  with 
regard  to  the  operations  of  our  minds,  I shall  give  an 
instance  of  it. 

When  a man  is  urged  by  contrary  motives,  those  on 
one  hand  inciting  him  to  do  some  action,  those  on  the 
other  to  forbear  it,  he  deliberates  about  it,  and  at  last 
resolves  to  do  it,  or  not  to  do  it.  The  contrary  motives 
are  here  compared  to  the  weights  in  the  opposite  scales 
of  a balance ; and  there  is  not,  perhaps,  any  instance 
that  can  be  named  of  a more  striking  analogy  between 
body  and  mind.  Hence  the  phrases  of  weighing  motives^ 
of  deliberating  upon  actions,  are  common  to  all  lan- 
guages. 

From  this  analogy  some  philosophers  draw  very  im- 
portant conclusions.  They  say,  that,  as  the  balance 


22 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


cannot  incline  to  one  side  more  than  the  other,  when 
the  opposite  weights  are  equal,  so  a man  cannot  pos- 
sibly determine  himself,  if  the  motives  on  both  hands 
are  equal ; and,  as  the  balance  must  necessarily  turn  to 
that  side  which  has  most  weight,  so  the  man  must 
necessarily  be  determined  to  that  hand  where  the  mo- 
tive is  strongest.  And  on  this  foundation,  some  of  the 
schoolmen*  maintained,  that,  if  a hungry  ass  were 
placed  between  two  bundles  of  hay  equally  inviting, 
the  beast  must  stand  still  and  starve  to  death,  being 
unable  to  turn  to  either,  because  there  are  equal  mo- 
tives to  both.  This  is  an  instance  of  that  analogical 
reasoning  which  I conceive  ought  never  to  be  trusted  ; 
for  the  analogy  between  a balance  and  a man  deliber- 
ating, though  one  of  the  strongest  that  can  be  found 
between  matter  and  mind,  is  too  weak  to  support  any 
argument.  A piece  of  dead,  inactive  matter,  and  an 
active,  intelligent  being,  are  things  very  unlike ; and 
because  the  one  would  remain  at  rest  in  a certain  case, 
it  does  not  follow  that  the  other  would  be  inactive  in  a 
case  somewhat  similar.  The  argument  is  no  better 
than  this : that,  because  a dead  animal  moves  only  as 
it  is  pushed,  and,  if  pushed  with  equal  force  in  con- 
trary directions,  must  remain  at  rest,  therefore  the  same 
thing  must  happen  to  a living  animal ; for  surely  the 
similitude  between  a dead  animal  and  a living  is  as 
great  as  that  between  a balance  and  a man. 

The  conclusion  I would  draw  from  all  that  has  been 
said  on  analogy  is,  that,  in  our  inquiries  concerning  the 


* This  illustration  is  specially  associated  with  Joannes  Buridanus,  a 
celebrated  nominalist  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  one  of  the  acutest 
reasoners  on  the  great  question  of  moral  liberty.  The  supposition  of  the 
ass,  &c.,  is  not,  however,  as  1 have  ascertained,  to  be  found  in  his  writings. 
Perhaps  it  was  orally  advanced  in  disputation  or  in  lecturing  as  an  ex- 
ample in  illustration  of  his  determinism ; perhaps  it  was  employed  by  his 
opponents  as  an  instance  to  reduce  that  doctrine  to  absurdity.  AYith  this 
latter  view,  a.  similar  refutation  of  the  principles  of  our  modern  fatalists 
was  ingeniously  essayed  by  Beid’s  friend  and  kinsman.  Dr.  James  Greg- 
ory. — H. 

For  further  illustrations  of  the  grounds  and  scope  of  analogical  reason- 
ing, see  Archbishop  Whately’s  Rhetoric^  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  § 6,  and  Mill’s 
System  of  Loyic^  Book  III.  Chap.  XX.  — Ed. 


MEANS  OF  KNOWING  THE  MIND. 


23 


mind  and  its  operations,  (1.)  we  ought  never  to  trust  to 
reasonings  drawn  from  some  supposed  similitude  of  body 
to  mind;  and  (2.)  that  we  ought  to  be  very  much  upon 
our  guard,  that  we  be  not  imposed  upon  by  those  an- 
alogical terms  and  phrases  by  which  the  operations  of 
the  mind  are  expressed  in  all  languages.  ^ 


CHAPTER  IV.  ' 

ON  THE  PROPER  MEANS  OF  KNOWING  THE  OPERA- 
TIONS OF  THE  MIND. 

I.  Subsidiary  Sources  of  Knowledge  respecting  the 
Mind.]  Since  we  ought  to  pay  no  regard  to  hypothe- 
ses, and  to  be  very  suspicious  of  analogical  reasoning, 
it  may  be  asked.  From  what  source  must  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  mind  and  its  faculties  be  drawn? 

I answer,  the  chief  and  proper  source  of  this  branch 
of  knowledge  is  accurate  reflection  upon  the  operations 
of  our  own  minds.  Of  this  source  we  shall  speak 
more  fully,  after  making  some  remarks  upon  two  others 
that  may  be  subservient  to  it. 

1.  The  first  of  them  is  attention  to  the  structure  of 
language.  The  language  of  mankind  is  expressive  of 
their  thoughts,  and  of  the  various  operations  of  their 
minds.  The  various  operations  of  the  understanding, 
will,  and  passions,  which  are  common  to  mankind,  have 
various  forms  of  speech  corresponding  to  them  in  all 
languages,  which  are  the  signs  of  them,  and  by  which 
they  are  expressed ; and  a due  attention  to  the  signs 
may,  in  many  cases,  give  considerable  light  to  the 
things  signified  by  them. 

There  are  in  all  languages  modes  of  speech  by  which 
men  signify  their  judgment  or  give  their  testimony; 
by  which  they  accept  or  refuse ; by  which  they  ask  in- 
formation or  advice;  by  which  they  command,  or 
threaten,  or  supplicate;  by  which  they  plight  their  faith 


24 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


in  promises  and  contracts.  If  such  operations  were 
not  common  to  mankind,  we  should  not  find  in  all 
languages  forms  of  speech  by  which  they  are  expressed. 
All  languages,  indeed,  have  their  imperfections ; they 
can  never  be  adequate  to  all  the  varieties  of  human 
thought ; and  therefore  things  may  be  really  distinct  in 
their  nature,  and  capable  of  being  distinguished  by  the 
human  mind,  which  are  not  distinguished  in  common 
language.  We  can  only  expect,  in  the  structure  of 
languages,  those  distinctions  which  all  mankind  in  the 
common  business  of  life  have  occasion  to  make.  There 
may  be  peculiarities  in  a particular  language,  of  the 
causes  of  which  we  are  ignorant,  and  from  which, 
therefore,  we  can  draw  no  conclusion.  But  whatever 
we  find  common  to  all  languages  must  have  a common 
cause ; must  be  owing  to  some  common  notion  or  senti- 
ment  of  the  human  mind. 

2.  Another  source  of  information  on  this  subject  is 
a due  attention  to  the  course  of  human  actions  and  opin- 
ions. The  actions  of  men  are  effects ; their  sentiments, 
their  passions,  and  their  affections  are  the  causes  of 
those  effects ; and  we  may,  in  many  cases,  form  a 
judgment  of  the  cause  from  the  effect.  The  behaviour 
of  parents  towards  their  children  gives  sufficient  evi- 
dence, even  to  those  who  never  had  children,  that  the 
parental  affection  is  common  to  mankind.  It  is  easy 
to  see,  from  the  general  conduct  of  men,  what  are  the 
natural  objects  of  their  esteem,  their  admiration,  their 
love,  their  approbation,  their  resentment,  and  of  all  their 
other  original  dispositions.  It  is  obvious,  from  the  con- 
duct of  men  in  all  ages,  that  man  is,  by  his  nature,  a 
social  animal;  that  he  delights  to  associate  with  his 
species, — to  converse  and  to  exchange  good  offices 
with  them. 

Not  only  the  actions^  but  even  the  opinions.,  of  men 
may  sometimes  give  light  into  the  frame  of  the  human 
mind.  The  opinions  of  men  may  be  considered  as  the 
effects  of  their  intellectual  powers,  as  their  actions  are 
the  effects  of  their  active  principles.  Even  the  preju- 
dices and  errors  of  mankind,  when  they  are  general, 


MEANS  OF  KNOWING  THE  MIND. 


25 


must  have  some  cause  no  less  general,  the  discovery  of 
which  will  throw  some  light  upon  the  frame  of  the 
human  understanding. 

I conceive  this  to  be  the  principal  use  of  the  history 
of  philosophy.  When  we  trace  the  history  of  the  vari- 
ous philosophical  opinions  that  have  sprung  up  among 
thinking  men,  we  are  led  into  a labyrinth  of  fanciful 
opinions,  contradictions,  and  absurdities,  intermixed 
with  some  truths ; yet  we  may  sometimes  find  a clew 
to  lead  us  through  the  several  windings  of  this  laby- 
rinth ; we  may  find  that  point  of  view  which  presented 
things  to  the  author  of  the  system  in  the  light  in  which 
they  appeared  to  him.  This  will  often  give  a consis- 
tency to  things  seemingly  contradictory,  and  some 
degree  of  probability  to  those  that  appeared  most  fan- 
ciful.* The  history  of  philosophy,  considered  as  a map 
of  the  intellectual  operations  of  men  of  genius,  must 
always  be  entertaining,  and  may  sometimes  give  us 
views  of  the  human  understanding  which  could  not 
easily  be  had  any  other  way. 

II.  Consciousness  and  Reflection.]  I return  to  what 
I mentioned  as  the  main  source  of  information  on  this 
subject,  — attentive  reflection  upon  the  operations  of  our 
own  minds. 

All  the  notions  we  have  of  mind  and  of  its  opera- 
tions are,  by  Mr.  Locke,  called  ideas  of  reflection.^  A 
man  may  have  as  distinct  notions  of  remembrance,  of 
judgment,  of  will,  of  desire,  as  he  has  of  any  object 
whatever.  Such  notions,  as  Mr.  Locke  justly  observes, 
are  got  by  the  power  of  reflection.  But  what  is  this 
power  of  reflection?  It  is,  says  the  same  author,  that 
power  by  which  the  mind  turns  its  view  inward,  and 
observes  its  own  actions  and  operations.”  He  observes 
elsewhere,  that  the  understanding,  like  the  eye,  whilst 
it  makes  us  see  and  perceive  all  other  things,  takes  no 

* “Every  error,”  says  Bossuet,  “ is  a truth  abused.”  — H. 
t Locke  is  not  (as  Reid  seems  to  think,  and  as  Mr.  Stewart  expressly 
says)  the  first  who  introduced  reflection^  either  as  a psychological  term  or 
as  a psychological  principle.  See  Note  I.  — H. 

3 


26 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


notice  of  itself;*  and  that  it  requires  art  and  pains  to 
set  it  at  a distance,  and  make  it  its  own  object. 

This  reflection  oug’ht  to  be  distinguished  from  con- 
sciousness^ with  which  it  is  too  often  confounded,  even 
by  Mr.  Locke.  From  infancy,  till  we  come  to  the 
years  of  understanding,  we  are  employed. solely  about 
external  objects ; and,  although  the  mind  is  conscious 
of  its  operations,  it  does  not  attend  to  them ; its  atten- 
tion is  turned  solely  to  the  external  objects  about  which 
those  operations  are  employed.  Thus,  when  a man  is 
angry,  he  is  conscious  of  his  passion ; but  his  atten- 
tion is  turned  to  the  person  who  offended  him,  and  the 
circumstances  of  the  offence,  while  the  passion  of  anger 
is  not  in  the  least  the  object  of  his  attention. 

I conceive  this  is  sufficient  to  show  the  difference 
between  consciousness  of  the  operations  of  our  minds, 
and  reflection  upon  them ; and  to  show  that  we  may 
have  the  former  without  any  degree  of  the  latter.  The 
difference  between  consciousness  and  reflection  is  like  to 
the  difference  between  a superficial  view  of  an  object 
which  presents  itself  to  the  eye  while  we  are  engaged 
about  something  else,  and  that  attentive  examination 
which  we  give  to  an  object  when  we  are  wholly  em- 
ployed in  surveying  it.  Attention  is  a voluntary  act ; 
it  requires  an  active  exertion  to  begin  and  to  continue 
it,  and  it  may  be  continued  as  long  as  we  will ; but 
consciousness  is  involuntary  and  of  no  continuance, 
changing  with  every  thought. 

The  power  of  reflection  upon  the  operations  of  their 
own  minds  does  not  appear  at  all  in  children.  Men 
must  be  come  to  some  ripeness  of  understanding  be- 
fore they  are  capable  of  it.  Of  all  the  powers  of  the 
human  mind,  it  seems  to  be  the  last  that  unfolds  it- 
self. Most  men  seem  incapable  of  acquiring  it  in  any 
considerable  degree.  Like  all  our  other  powers,  it 
is  greatly  improved  by  exercise ; and,  until  a man 
has  got  the  habit  of  attending  to  the  operations  of  his 


* After  Cicero  : — “At  ut  oculus,  sic  animus  se  non  videns  alia  cernit.” 
Tusc.^  I.  28.  — Ed. 


MEANS  OF  KNOWING  THE  MIND. 


27 


own  mind,  he  can  never  have  clear  and  distinct  notions 
of  them,  nor  form  any  steady  judgment  concerning 
them.  His  opinions  must  be  borrowed  from  others, 
his  notions  confused  and  indistinct,  and  he  may  easily 
be  led  to  swallow  very  gross  absurdities.  To  acquire 
this  habit  is  a work  of  time  and  labor,  even  in  those 
who  begin  it  early,  and  whose  natural  talents  are  tol- 
erably fitted  for  it ; but  the  difficulty  will  be  daily  di- 
minishing, and  the  advantage  of  it  is  great.  They  will 
thereby  be  enabled  to  think  with  precision  and  accu- 
racy on  every  subject,  especially  on  those  subjects  that 
are  more  abstract.  They  will  be  able  to  judge  for 
themselves  in  many  important  points,  wherein  others 
must  blindly  follow  a leader.* 


* Consciousness  is  not  a special  faculty  coordinate  with  perception  and 
memory,  but  a general  condition  of  mind  considered  as  self-knowing,  by 
which  all  the  mental  faculties  are  made  available.  Through  consciousness 
the  mind  not  only  knows  itself  and  the  changes  it  undergoes,  but  also 
whatever  it  knows  by  means  of  any  of  its  special  faculties.  We  are  con- 
scious of  remembering  as  we  do  ; we  are  conscious  of  perceiving  as  we  do  ; 
we  are  conscious  of  feeling  as  we  do.  Accordingly,  as  Sir  W.  Hamilton 
intimates  elsewhere,  the  various  faculties  may  be  regarded  as  special  modifi- 
cations of  consciousness.  If  consciousness  fails,  all  the  special  faculties  fail. 
Very  frequently,  however,  the  term  is  used  in  a restricted  sense,  signifying 
the  notice  which  the  mind  takes  of  itself  and  its  operations  and  affections  ; 
or  internal  observation  in  contradistinction  to  external  observation^  its  acts 
being  called  by  some,  not  perceptions,  but  apperceptions.  So  understood, 
consciousness  is  the  witness  and  authority  of  all  proper  psychological  facts. 

Thus  Jouffroy  ; — “ What  is  consciousness  ? It  is  the  feeling  which  the 
intelligent  principle  has  of  itself.  This  principle  has  the  feeling  of  itself, 
and  hence  the  consciousness  of  all  the  changes,  all  the  modifications, 
which  it  undergoes.  The  only  phenomena,  then,  of  which  it  can  have  tlie 
consciousness,  are  those  which  are  produced  within  itself.  Those  whh  h 
are  produced  beyond  itself,  it  can  see ; but  it  cannot  feel  them.  It  can,  then, 
have  the  consciousness  of  its  sensations,  because  it  is  itself  which  enjoys  or 
suffers ; or  of  its  thoughts,  its  determinations,  because  it  is  itself  wliich 
thinks  and  determine*:  but  it  can  have  no  consciousness  of  muscular  con- 
traction, of  digestion,  of  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  because  it  is  the  mus- 
cle which  contracts,  the  stomach  which  digests,  the  blood  which  circulates, 
and  not  itself.  These  phenomena,  then,  are  precisely  in  the  same  relation 
to  it  as  the  phenomena  of  external  nature;  they  are  produced  beyond  it, 
and  it  can  have  no  consciousness  of  them.  Such  is  the  true  reason  of  the 
incapahility  of  the  consciousness  to  seize  a multitude  of  phenomena  which 
take  place  in  the  body,  but  which,  on  that  account,  are  none  the  less  exte- 
rior to  the  intelligent  principle,  to  the  real  me  [eyo].  On  the  other  hand, 
the  phenomena  of  consciousness  being  only  the  inward  modifications  of 
the  intelligent  principle,  that  alone  can  perceive  them,  because  it  is  that 
alone  which  experiences  them,  and  because,  in  order  to  perceive  them,  it 


28 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


CHAPTER  V. 

DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND. 

1.  Division  of  the  Mental  Powers  into  Understanding 
and  Will]  The  powers  of  the  mind  are  so  many,  so 
various,  and  so  connected  and  complicated  in  most  of 
its  operations,  that  there  never  has  been  any  division  of 
them  proposed  which  is  not  liable  to  considerable  ob- 
jection. We  shall  therefore  take  that  general  divis- 
ion which  is  the  most  common,  into  the  powers  of 
understanding  and  those  of  will.  Under  the  will  we 
comprehend  our  active  powers,  and  all  that  lead  to 
action,  or  influence  the  mind  to  act,  such  as  appetites, 
passions,  affections.  The  understanding  comprehends 
our  contemplative  powers;  by  which  we  perceive  ob- 
jects; by  which  we  conceive  or  remember  them;  by 
which  we  analyze  or  compound  them ; and  by  which 
we  judge  and  reason  concerning  them. 

is  necessary  to  feel  them.  For  this  reason,  the  phenomena  of  conscious- 
ness necessarily  escape  all  external  observation.”  — Ripley’s  Philosophical 
Miscellanies^  Vol.  11.  p 15. 

To  the  same  effect  Cousin : — “ But  is  a knowledge  of  human  nature,  is 
psychology,  possible  1 Without  doubt  it  is ; for  it  is  an  undeniable  fact, 
that  nothing  passes  within  us  which  we  do  not  know,  of  which  we  have 
not  a consciousness.  Consciousness  is  a witness  which  gives  us  informa- 
tion of  every  thing  which  takes  place  in  the  interior  of  our  minds.  It  is 
not  the  principle  of  any  of  our  faculties,  but  is  a light  to  them  all.  It  is 
not  because  we  have  the  consciousness  of  it,  that  any  thing  goes  on  within 
us  ; but  that  which  goes  on  within  us  would  be  to  us  as  though  it  did  not 
take  place,  if  it  were  not  attested  by  consciousness.  It  is  not  by  conscious- 
ness that  we  feel,  or  will,  or  think  ; but  it  is  by  it  that  we  know  that  we  do 

all  this Consciousness  is  indeed  more  or  less  distinct,  more  or  less 

vivid,  but  it  is  in  all  men.  No  one  is  unknown  to  himself,  although  very 
few  know  themselves  perfectly,  because  all,  or  nearly  all,  make  use  of  con- 
sciousness without  applying  themselves  to  perfect,  unfold,  and  understand 
it,  hy  voluntary  effort  and  attention.  In  all  men  consciousness  is  a natural 
process  ; some  elevate  this  natural  process  to  the  degree  of  an  art,  a meth- 
od, by  reflection,  which  is  a sort  of  second  consciousness,  a free  reproduc- 
tion of  the  first ; and  as  consciousness  gives  to  all  men  a knowledge  of  what 
passes  within  them,  so  reflection  gives  the  philosopher  a certain  knowledge 
of  every  thing  which  falls  under  the  eye  of  consciousness.  It  is  to  be  ob- 
served, that  the  question  here  is  not  concerning  hypotheses  or  conjectm'es ; 
for  it  is  not  even  a question  concerning  a process  of  reasoning.  It  is  solely 


DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND.  29 

Although  this  general  division  may  be  of  use  in 
order  to  our  proceeding  more  methodically  in  our  sub- 
ject, we  are  not  to  understand  it  as  if,  in  those  opera- 
tions which  are  ascribed  to  the  understanding,  there 
were  no  exertion  of  will  or  activity,  or  as  if  the  under- 
standing were  not  employed  in  the  operations  ascribed 
to  the  will ; for  I conceive  there  is  no  operation  of  the 
understanding  wherein  the  mind  is  not  active  in  some 
degree.  We  have  some  command  over  our  thoughts, 
and  can  attend  to  this  or  that,  of  many  objects  which 
present  themselves  to  our  senses,  to  our  memory,  or  to 
our  imagination.  We  can  survey  an  object  on  this 
side  or  that,  superficially  or  accurately,  for  a longer  or 
a shorter  time ; so  that  our  contemplative  powers  are 
under  the  guidance  and  direction  of  the  active;  and 
the  former  never  pursue  their  object,  without  being  led 
and  directed,  urged  or  restrained,  by  the  latter:  and 
because  the  understanding  is  always  more  or  less  di- 
rected by  the  will,  mankind  have  ascribed  some  degree 
of  activity  to  the  mind  in  its  intellectual  operations,  as 
well  as  in  those  which  belong  to  the  will,  and  have  ex- 

a question  of  facts,  and  of  facts  that  are  equally  capable  of  being  observed 
as  those  which  come  to  pass  on  the  scene  of  the  outward  world.  The 
only  difference  is,  the  one  is  exterior,  the  other  interior;  and  as  the  natu- 
ral action  of  our  faculties  carries  us  outward,  it  is  more  easy  to  observe  the 
one  than  the  other.  But  with  a little  attention,  voluntary  exertion,  and 
practice,  one  may  succeed  in  internal  observation  as  well  as  in  external. 
The  talent  for  the  latter  is  not  more  common  than  for  the  former.  The 
number  of  Bacons  is  not  greater  than  the  number  of  Descarteses.” 

In  a note  the  translator,  Professor  Henry, adds : — “In  regard  to  the  dis- 
tinction between  the  natural  or  spontaneous,  and  the  philosophical  or  re- 
flected consciousness,  it  may  be  remarked,  that,  while  Locke  uses  the  word 
reflection  to  signify  the  natural  consciousness  common  to  all  reflecting  be- 
ings, Cousin  uses  it  above  to  imply  a particular  determination  of  conscious- 
ness by  the  will.  Coleridge  makes  the  same  distinction  with  Cousin  ; but 
he  does  not  consider  the  power  of  philosophical  insight  to  be  as  common 
as  Cousin  would  make  it.  ‘ It  is  neither  possible,’  says  he,  ‘ nor  necessary 
for  all  men,  or  for  many,  to  be  philosophers.  There  is  a philosophic  (and, 
inasmuch  as  it  is  actualized  by  an  effort  of  freedom,  an  artiflcial)  con- 
sciousness which  lies  beneath,  or,  as  it  were,  behind,  the  spontaneous  con- 
sciousness natural  to  all  reflecting  beings.’” — Elements  of  Psycholorjy., 
Chap.  I.  Compare  Brown,  Lectures.,  Lect.  XI.;  Fearn, on  Con- 
sciousness, p.  l^eiseq.;  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Philosophiq^es,  Art.  Co7i- 
science;  also,  in  Blackwood's  Edinburgh  Magazine.,  Vol.  XLIII.  - XLV.,  a 
series  of  ingenious  papers,  entitled  An  Introduction  to  the  Philosophy  of 
Consciousness.  — Ed. 

3* 


30 


PRELIMINARY  ESSAY. 


pressed  them  by  active  verbs,  such  as  seeing^  hearings 
judging^  reasonings  and  the  like. 

And  as  the  mind  exerts  some  degree  of  activity  even 
in  the  operations  of  understanding,  so  it  is  certain  that 
there  can  be  no  act  of  will  which  is  not  accompanied 
with  some  act  of  understanding.  The  will  must  have 
an  object,  and  that  object  must  be  apprehended  or 
conceived  in  the  understanding.  It  is  therefore  to  be 
remembered,  that  in  most,  if  not  all,  operations  of  the 
mind,  both  faculties  concur  ; and  we  range  the  operation 
under  that  faculty  which  has  the  largest  share  in  it.* 

II.  Subdivision  of  the  Powers  of  the  Understanding.] 
There  is  not  a more  fruitful  source  of  error  in  this 
branch  of  philosophy,  than  divisions  of  things  which 

* It  would  be  out  of  place  to  enter  on  the  extensive  field  of  history  and 
discussion  relative  to  the  distribution  of  our  mental  powers.  It  is  suffi- 
cient to  say,  that  the  vulgar  division  of  the  faculties,  adopted  by  Peid,  into 
those  of  the  understanding  and  those  of  the  wilt^  is  to  be  traced  to  the  classi- 
fication, taken  in  the  Aristotelic  school,  of  the  powers  into  gnostic^  or  cog- 
nitive, and  orectic^  or  appetent.  On  this  the  reader  may  consult  the  admi- 
rable introduction  of  Philoponus  — or  rather  of  Ammonius  Hermige  — to 
the  books  of  Aristotle  Upon  the  Soul.  — H. 

The  threefold  division  of  the  mind  into  intellect.,  sensibility.,  and  will — to 
think,  to  feel,  and  to  act  — is  now  generally  adopted  by  psychologists. 
See  it  stated  and  defended  in  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Philosophiques,  Art. 
Facultes  de  VAme.  Also  in  Upham’s  Mental  Philosophy.,  Introduction, 
Chap.  IV. 

Another  classification  is  given  by  Jouffroy:  — “In  the  actual  state  of 
human  knowledge,  the  irreducible  capacities  of  the  human  mind  appear  to 
me  to  be  the  following.  First,  the  personal  faculty,  or  the  supreme  power 
of  taking  possession  of  ourselves  and  of  our  capacities,  and  of  controlling 
them : this  faculty  is  known  by  the  name  of  liberty  or  will,  which  desig- 
nates it  but  imperfectly.  Secondly,  the  primitive  indinations  of  our  nature, 
or  that  aggregate  of  instincts  or  tendencies  which  impel  us  towards  certain 
ends  and  in  certain  directions,  prior  to  all  experience,  and  which  at  once 
suggest  to  reason  the  destiny  of  our  being,  and  animate  our  activity  to 
})ursue  it.  Thirdly,  the  locomotive  faculty,  or  that  energy  by  means  of  which 
we  move  the  locomotive  nerves,  and  produce  all  the  voluntary  bodily 
movements.  Fourthly,  the  expressive  faculty,  or  the  power  of  representing 
by  external  signs  that  which  takes  place  within  us,  and  of  thus  holding 
communication  with  our  fellow-men.  Fifthly,  sensibility,  or  the  capacity  of 
being  agreeably  or  disagreeably  affected  by  all  external  or  internal  causes, 
and  of  reacting  in  relation  to  them  by  movements  of  love  or  hatred,  of 
desire  or  aversion,  which  are  the  principle  of  all  passion.  Sixthly,  the  in- 
tellectual faculties:  this  term  comprises  many  distinct  faculties,  which  can 
only  be  enumerated  and  described  in  a treatise  on  Intelligence  — Pipley’s 
Philosophical  Miscellanies,  Vol.  I.  p.  382.  — Ed. 


DIVISION  OF  THE  POWERS  OF  THE  MIND.  31 

are  taken  to  be  complete  when  they  are  not  really  so. 
To  make  a perfect  division  of  any  class  of  things,  a 
man  ought  to  have  the  whole  under  his  view  at  once. 
But  the  greatest  capacity  very  often  is  not  sufficient 
for  this.  Something  is  left  out  which  did  not  come 
under  the  philosopher’s  view  when  he  made  his  divis- 
ion ; and  to  suit  this  to  the  division,  it  must  be  made 
what  nature  never  made  it.  This  has  been  so  com- 
mon a fault  of  philosophers,  that  one  who  would  avoid 
error  ought  to  be  suspicious  of  divisions,  though  long 
received  and  of  great  authority,  especially  when  they 
are  grounded  on  a theory  that  may  be  called  in  ques- 
tion. In  a subject  imperfectly  known,  we  ought  not  to 
pretend  to  perfect  divisions,  but  to  leave  room  for  such 
additions  or  alterations  as  a more  perfect  view  of  the 
subject  may  afterwards  suggest. 

I shall  not,  therefore,  attempt  a complete  enumera- 
tion of  the  powers  of  the  human  understanding,  I shall 
only  mention  those  which  I propose  to  explain,  and 
they  are  the  following : — 

Firsts  The  powers  we  have  by  means  of  our  exter- 
nal senses.  Secondly^  Memory.  Thirdly^  Conception. 
Fourthly,,  The  powers  of  resolving  and  analyzing  com- 
plex objects,  and  compounding  those  that  are  more 
simple.  Fifthly^  Judging.  Sixthly^  Reasoning.  Sev~ 
enthly,,  Taste.* 


* To  these  Dr.  Reid  added,  — Eighthly^  Moral  Perception ; and,  last  of 
all,  Consciousness.”  I omit  the  clause,  because  Moral  Perception  is  not 
treated  by  him  in  this  work,  but  in  another.  On  the  Active  Powers^  Essay  V. ; 
and  Consciousness  obtains  only  an  incidental  consideration,  under  Judg- 
ment, in  the  sixth  Essay.  On  the  impropriety  of  regarding  consciousness 
as  one  of  the  coordinate  special  faculties  of  the  understanding,  see  p.  27, 
note. 

Dr.  Brown  reduces  all  the  proper  intellectual  powers  (or  “ states,”  as  he 
prefers  to  call  them)  to  simple  and  relative  suggestion.  To  the  former  he  re- 
fers perception  (as  distinguished  from  sensation).,  conception.,  memory.,  imag- 
ination., and  habit ; to  the  judgment.,  reason,  and  abstraction.  Lectures, 

Lect.  XVI.  et  passim.  For  a defence  of  the  same,  see  Payne’s  Elements  of 
Mental  and  Moral  Science,  Chap.  VI.  — Ed. 


ESSAY  II. 


OF  THE  POWERS  WE  HAVE  BY  MEANS  OF  OUR 
EXTERNAL  SENSES. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE. 

I.  General  Remarks,]  Of  all  the  operations  of  our 
minds,  the  perception  of  external  objects  is  the  most  fa- 
miliar. The  senses  come  to  maturity  even  in  infancy, 
when  other  powers  have  not  yet  sprung  up.  They  are 
common  to  us  with  brute  animals,  and  furnish  us  with 
the  objects  about  which  our  other  powers  are  the  most 
frequently  employed.  We  find  it  easy  to  attend  to 
their  operations;  and  because  they  are  familiar,  the 
names  which  properly  belong  to  them  are  applied  to 
other  powers  which  are  thought  to  resemble  them.  For 
these  reasons  they  claim  to  be  first  considered. 

The  perception  of  external  objects  is  one  main  link 
of  that  mysterious  chain  which  connects  the  material 
world  with  the  intellectual.  We  shall  find  many  things 
in  this  operation  unaccountable  ; sufficient  to  convince 
us,  that  we  know  but  little  of  our  own  frame,  and  that 
a perfect  comprehension  of  our  mental  powers,  and  of 
the  manner  of  their  operation,  is  beyond  the  reach  of 
our  understanding. 

In  perception  there  are  impressions  upon  the  organs 
of  sense,  the  nerves,  and  brain,  which,  by  the  laws  of 
our  nature,  are  followed  by  certain  operations  of  mind. 
These  two  things  are  apt  to  be  confounded,  but  ought 
most  carefully  to  be  distinguished.  Some  philosophers, 


OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE, 


33 


without  good  reason,  have  concluded  that  the  impres- 
sions made  on  the  body  are  the  proper  efficient  cause 
of  perception.  Others,  with  as  little  reason,  have  con- 
cluded that  impressions  are  made  on  the  mind  similar 
to  those  made  on  the  body.  From  these  mistakes, 
many  others  have  arisen.  The  wrong  notions  men 
have  rashly  taken  up  with  regard  to  the  senses  have 
led  to  wrong  notions  with  regard  to  other  powers  which 
are  conceived  to  resemble  them.  Many  important 
powers  of  mind  have,  especially  of  late,  been  called  in- 
ternal senses^  from  a supposed  resemblance  to  the  exter- 
nal ; such  as  the  sense  of  beauty^  the  sense  of  harmony^ 
the  moral  sense.  And  it  is  to  be  apprehended,  that 
errors  with  regard  to  the  external  have,  from  analogy, 
led  to  similar  errors  with  regard  to  the  internal ; it  is 
therefore  of  some  consequence,  even  with  regard  to 
other  branches  of  our  subject,  to  have  just  notions  con- 
cerning the  external  senses. 

II.  The  Laws  of  Perception  considered  in  Relation 
to  the  Organs  of  Sense.]  In  order  to  this,  we  shall  be- 
gin with  some  observations  on  the  organs  of  sense,  and 
on  the  impressions  which  in  perception  are  made  upon 
them,  and  upon  the  nerves  and  brain. 

1.  We  perceive  no  external  object  but  by  means  of  cer- 
tain bodily  organs  which  God  has  given  us  for  that  pur- 
pose. The  Supreme  Being  who  made  us,  and  placed 
us  in  this  world,  has  given  us  such  powers  of  mind  as 
he  saw  to  be  suited  to  our  state  and  rank  in  his  crea- 
tion. He  has  given  us  the  power  of  perceiving  many 
objects  around  us,  — the  sun,  moon,  and  stars,  the 
earth  and  sea,  and  a variety  of  animals,  vegetables,  and 
inanimate  bodies.  But  our  power  of  perceiving  these 
objects  is  limited  in  various  ways,  and  particularly  in 
this,  that  without  the  organs  of  the  several  senses  we 
perceive  no  external  object.  We  cannot  see  without 
eyes,  nor  hear  without  ears : it  is  not  only  necessary 
that  we  should  have  these  organs,  but  that  they  should 
be  in  a sound  and  natural  state.  There  are  many  dis- 
orders of  the  eye  that  cause  total  blindness;  others 


34 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


that  impair  the  powers  of  vision,  without  destroying  it 
altogether ; and  the  same  may  be  said  of  the  organs  of 
all  the  other  senses. 

All  this  is  so  well  known  from  experience,  that  it 
needs  no  proof ; but  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  we 
know  it  from  experience  only.  We  can  give  no  reason 
for  it,  but  that  such  is  the  will  of  our  Maker.  No  man 
can  show  it  to  be  impossible  to  the  Supreme  Being  to 
have  given  us  the  power  of  perceiving  external  objects 
without  such  organs.  We  have  reason  to  believe,  that, 
when  we  put  off  these  bodies,  and  all  the  organs  be- 
longing to  them,  our  perceptive  powers  shall  rather  be 
improved  than  destroyed  or  impaired.  We  have  reason 
to  believe  that  the  Supreme  Being  perceives  every  thing 
in  a much  more  perfect  manner  than  we  do,  without 
bodily  organs.  We  have  reason  to  believe  that  there 
are  other  created  beings  endowed  with  powers  of  per- 
ception more  perfect  and  more  extensive  than  ours, 
without  any  such  organs  as  we  find  necessary. 

We  ought  not,  therefore,  to  conclude,  that  such 
bodily  organs  are,  in  their  own  nature,  necessary  to 
perception  ; but  rather,  that,  by  the  will  of  God,  our 
power  of  perceiving  externM  objects  is  limited  to  and 
circumscribed  by  our  organs  of  sense ; so  that  we  per- 
ceive objects  in  a certain  manner,  and  in  certain  cir- 
cumstances, and  in  no  other.* 


* “ Among  the  well-attested  facts  of  physiology,”  says  Mailer,  perhaps 
the  highest  authority  on  the  subject,  “ there  is  not  one  to  support  the  be- 
lief that  one  nerve  of  sense  can  assume  the  functions  of  another.  The 
exaggeration  of  the  sense  of  touch  in  the  blind  will  not,  in  these  days,  be 
called  seewg  with  the  fingers ; the  accounts  of  the  power  of  vision  by  the 
fingers  and  epigastrium,  said  to  be  possessed  in  the  so-called  magnetic 
state,  appear  to  be  mere  fables,  and  the  instances  in  which  it  has  been  pre- 
tended to  practise  it,  cases  of  deception.”  And  again : — “ It  is  quite  in 
accordance  with  the  laws  of  science,  that  a person  sleeping  shall  have 
ocular  spectra,  — we  experience  them  sometimes  when  the  eyes  are  closed, 
even  before  falling  asleep,  — for  the  nerves  of  vision  may  be  excited  to 
sensation  by  internal  as  well  as  by  external  causes ; and  so  long  as  a mag- 
netic patient  manifests  merely  the  ordinary  phenomena  of  nervous  action 
that  are  seen  in  other  disorders  of  the  nervous  system,  it  is  all  creditable 
enough.  But  when  such  a person  pretends  to  see  through  a bandage 
placed  before  the  eyes,  or  by  means  of  the  fingers  or  the  epigastrium,  or 
to  see  round  a corner  and  into  a neighbouring  house,  or  to  become  pro- 


OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE. 


35 


If  a man  were  shut  up  in  a dark  room,  so  that  he 
could  see  nothing  but  through  one  small  hole  in  the 
shutter  of  a window,  would  he  conclude  that  the  hole 
was  the  cause  of  his  seeing,  and  that  it  is  impossible  to 
see  any  other  way  ? Perhaps,  if  he  had  never  in  his 
life  seen  but  in  this  way,  he  might  be  apt  to  think  so ; 
but  the  conclusion  is  rash  and  groundless.  He  sees  be- 
cause God  has  given  him  the  power  of  seeing ; and  he 
sees  only  through  this  small  hole,  because  his  power  of 
seeing  is  circumscribed  by  impediments  on  all  other 
hands. 

Another  necessary  caution  in  this  matter  is,  that  we 
ought  not  to  confound  the  organs  of  perception  with  the 
being  that  perceives.  Perception  must  be  the  act  of 
some  being  that  perceives.  The  eye  is  not  that  which 
sees ; it  is  only  the  organ  by  which  we  see.  The  ear 
is  not  that  which  hears,  but  the  organ  by  which  we 
hear.  And  so  of  the  rest.* 

A man  cannot  see  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  but  by  a 
telescope.  Does  he  conclude  from  this,  that  it  is  the 
telescope  that  sees  those  stars?  By  no  means;  such  a 
conclusion  would  be  absurd.  It  is  no  less  absurd  to 
conclude  that  it  is  the  eye  that  sees  or  the  ear  that 
hears.  The  telescope  is  an  artificial  organ  of  sight,  but 
it  sees  not.  The  eye  is  a natural  organ  of  sight,  by 
which  we  see ; but  the  natural  organ  sees  as  little  as 
the  artificial. 

The  eye  is  a machine  most  admirably  contrived  for 
refracting  the  rays  of  light,  and  forming  a distinct  pic- 
ture of  objects  upon  the  retina;  but  it  sees  neither  the 
object  nor  the  picture.  It  can  form  the  picture  after  it 


phetic,  such  arrant  imposture  no  longer  deserves  forbearance,  and  an  open 
and  sound  exposure  of  the  deception  is  called  for.”  — Elements  of  Physi- 
ology, Vol.  II.  pp.  1071,  1125.  See  also  Carpenter’s  Principles  of  Human 
Physiology,  § 311. 

^ This  doctrine  may  be  traced  back  to  Aristotle  and  his  school,  and 
even  higher.  “ There  is  extant,”  says  Plutarch,  “ a discourse  of  Strato 
Physicus,  demonstrating  that  a sensitive  apprehension  is  wholly  impossible 
without  an  act  of  wtellecV'‘  {Op.  Mor.,  p.  961.)  And  as  to  Aristotle  him- 
self:— “To  divorce,”  he  says,  “sensation  from  understanding,  is  to 
reduce  sensation  to  an  insensible  process ; wherefore  it  has  been  said,  intel- 
lect sees,  and  intellect  hears.”  {Probi,  XI.  33.)  — II. 


36 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


is  taken  out  of  the  head ; but  no  vision  ensues.  Even 
when  it  is  in  its  proper  place,  and  perfectly  sound,  it  is 
well  known  that  an  obstruction  in  the  optic  nerve  takes 
away  vision,  though  the  eye  has  performed  all  that  be- 
longs to  it. 

If  any  thing  more  were  necessary  to  be  said  on  a 
point  so  evident,  we  might  observe,  that,  if  the  faculty 
of  seeing  were  in  the  eye,  that  of  hearing  in  the  ear, 
and  so  of  the  other  senses,  the  necessary  consequence 
of  this  would  be,  that  the  thinking  principle,  which  I 
call  myself^  is  not  one,  but  many.  But  this  is  contrary 
to  the  irresistible  conviction  of  every  man.  When  I 
say,  I see,  I hear,  I feel,  I remember,  this  implies  that 
it  is  one  and  the  same  self  that  performs  all  these  op- 
erations ; and  as  it  would  be  absurd  to  say,  that  my 
memory,  another  man’s  imagination,  and  a third  man’s 
reason,  may  make  one  individual  intelligent  being,  it 
would  be  equally  absurd  to  say,  that  one  piece  of  mat- 
ter seeing,  another  hearing,  and  a third  feeling,  may 
make  one  and  the  same  percipient  being. 

2.  A second  law  of  our  nature  regarding  perception 
is,  that  we  perceive  no  object^  unless  some  impression  is 
made  upon  the  organ  of  sense^  either  by  the  immediate 
application  of  the  object^  or  by  some  medium  which 
passes  between  the  object  and  the  organ. 

In  two  of  our  senses,  to  wit,  touch  and  taste,  there 
must  be  an  immediate  application  of  the  object  to  the 
organ.  In  the  other  three,  the  object  is  perceived  at  a 
distance,  but  still  by  means  of  a medium  by  which 
some  impression  is  made  upon  the  organ.* 

The  effluvia  of  bodies  drawn  into  the  nostrils  with 


* This  distinction  of  a mediate  and  immediate  object,  or  of  an  object  and 
a medium,  in  perception,  is  inaccurate,  and  a source  of  sad  confusion.  We 
perceive,  and  can  perceive,  nothing  but  what  is  in  relation  to  the  organ, 
and  nothing  is  in  relation  to  the  organ  that  is  not  present  to  it.  All  the 
senses  are,  in  fact,  modifications  of  touch,  as  Democritus  of  old  taught. 
We  reach  the  distant  reality,  not  by  sense,  not  by  perception,  but  by  irfer- 
ence.  Thus  it  is  inaccurate  to  say,  as  Keid  does  in  the  next  sentence, 
that  “ the  effluvia  of  bodies  ” are  “ the  medium  of  smell.”  Nothing 
is  smelt  but  the  effluvia  themselves.  They  constitute  the  total  object 
of  perception  in  smell.  Reid,  however,  in  this  only  follows  his  predeces- 
sors. — H. 


OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE. 


37 


the  breath  are  the  medium  of  smell;  the  undulations 
of  the  air  are  the  medium  of  hearing ; and  the  rays  of 
light  passing  from  visible  objects  to  the  eye  are  the 
medium  of  sight.  We  see  no  object  unless  rays  of 
light  come  from  it  to  the  eye.  We  hear  not  the  sound 
of  any  body,  unless  the  vibrations  of  some  elastic  me- 
dium, occasioned  by  the  tremulous  motion  of  the 
sounding  body,  reach  our  ear.  We  perceive  no  smell, 
unless  the  effluvia  of  the  smelling  body  enter  into  the 
nostrils.  We  perceive  no  taste,  unless  the  sapid  body 
be  applied  to  the  tongue,  or  some  part  of  the  organ  of 
taste.  Nor  do  we  perceive  any  tangible  quality  of  a 
body,  unless  it  touch  the  hands,  or  some  part  of  ©ur 
body. 

These  are  facts  known  from  experience  to  hold  uni- 
versally and  invariably,  both  in  men  and  brutes.  By 
this  law  of  our  nature,  our  powers  of  perceiving  exter- 
nal objects  are  further  limited  and  circumscribed.  Nor 
can  we  give  any  other  reason  for  this,  than  that  it  is 
the  will  of  our  Maker,  who  knows  best  what  powers, 
and  what  degrees  of  them,  are  suited  to  our  state.  We 
were  once  in  a state,  (I  mean  in  the  womb,)  wherein 
our  powers  of  perception  were  more  limited  than  in  the 
present,  and  in  a future  state  they  may  be  more  en- 
larged. 

3.  It  is  likewise  a law  of  our  nature,  that,  in  order  to 
our  perceiving  objects,  the  impressions  made  upon  the 
organs  of  sense  must  be  communicated  to  the  nerves^  and 
by  them  to  the  brain.  This  is  perfectly  known  to  those 
who  know  any  thing  of  anatomy. 

The  nerves  are  fine  cords,  which  pass  from  the  brain, 
or  from  the  spinal  marrow,  which  is  a prolongation  of 
the  brain,  to  all  parts  of  the  body,  dividing  into  smaller 
branches  as  they  proceed,  until  at  last  they  escape  our 
eyesight;  and  it  is  found  by  experience,  that  all  the 
voluntary  and  involuntary  motions  of  the  body  are 
performed  by  their  means.  When  the  nerves  that  serve 
any  limb  are  cut,  or  tied  hard,  we  have  then  no  more 
power  to  move  that  limb  than  if  it  was  no  part  of  the 
body. 


4 


38 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


As  there  are  nerves  that  serve  the  muscular  motions, 
so  there  are  others  that  serve  the  several  senses ; and  as 
without  the  former  we  cannot  move  a limb,  so  without 
the  latter  we  can  have  no  perception. 

This  train  of  machinery  the  wisdom  of  God  has 
made  necessary  to  our  perceiving  objects.  Various 
parts  of  the  body  concur  to  it,  and  each  has  its  own 
function.  First  the  object,  either  immediately  or  by 
some  medium,  must  make  an  impression  on  the  organ. 
The  organ  serves  only  as  a medium,  by  which  an  im- 
pression is  made  on  the  nerve ; and  the  nerve  serves  as 
a medium  to  make  an  impression  upon  the  brain. 
Here  the  material  part  ends ; at  least,  we  can  trace  it 
no  farther ; the  rest  is  all  intellectual. 

The  proof  of  these  impressions  upon  the  nerves  and 
brain  in  perception  is  this,  — that,  from  many  observa- 
tions and  experiments,  it  is  found,  that,  when  the  organ 
of  any  sense  is  perfectly  sound,  and  has  the  impression 
made  upon  it  by  the  object  ever  so  strongly,  yet,  if  the 
nerve  which  serves  that  organ  be  cut  or  tied  hard,  there 
is  no  perception ; and  it  is  well  known,  that  disorders 
in  the  brain  deprive  us  of  the  power  of  perception, 
when  both  the  organ  and  its  nerve  are  sound. 

There  is,  therefore,  sufficient  reason  to  conclude,  that, 
in  perception,  the  object  produces  some  change  in  the 
organ ; that  the  organ  produces  some  change  upon  the 
nerve ; and  that  the  nerve  produces  some  change  in  the 
brain.  And  we  give  the  name  of  an  impression  to 
those  changes,  because  we  have  not  a name  more  prop- 
er to  express,  in  a general  manner,  any  change  pro- 
duced in  a body  by  an  external  cause,  without  specify- 
ing the  nature  of  that  change.  Whether  it  be  pressure, 
or  attraction,  or  repulsion,  or  vibration,  or  something 
unknown,  for  which  we  have  no  name,  still  it  may  be 
called  an  impression.  But  with  regard  to  the  particu- 
lar kind  of  this  change  or  impression,  philosophers  have 
never  been  able  to  discover  any  thing  at  all. 

But,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  those  impressions 
upon  the  organs,  nerves,  and  brain,  we  perceive  nothing 
without  them.  Experience  informs  us  that  it  is  so; 


OF  THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE. 


39 


but  we  cannot  give  a reason  why  it  is  so.  In  the  con- 
stitution of  man,  perception,  by  fixed  laws  of  nature, 
is  connected  with  those  impressions ; but  we  can  dis- 
cover no  necessary  connection.  The  Supreme  Being 
has  seen  fit  to  limit  our  power  of  perception,  so  that 
we  perceive  not  without  such  impressions ; and  this  is 
all  we  know  of  the  matter. 

This,  however,  we  have  reason  to  conclude  in  gen- 
eral,— that,  as  the  impressions  on  the  organs,  nerves, 
and  brain,  correspond  exactly  to  the  nature  and  con- 
ditions of  the  objects  by  which  they  are  made,  so  our 
perceptions  and  sensations  correspond  to  those  impres- 
sions, and  vary  in  kind^  and  in  degree^  as  they  vary. 
Without  this  exact  correspondence,  the  information  we 
receive  by  our  senses  would  not  only  be  imperfect,  as 
it  undoubtedly  is,  but  would  be  fallacious,  which  we 
have  no  reason  to  think  it  is.* 


* Physiologists  will  not  allow  us  to  hold  the  doctrine  taught  in  this 
chapter  in  such  a sense  as  to  exclude  what  are  called  subjective  sensations. 
“ Every  one,”  says  Muller,  “ is  aware  how  common  it  is  to  see  bright 
colors  while  the  eyes  are  closed,  particularly  in  the  morning,  when  the 
irritability  of  the  nerves  is  still  considerable.  These  phenomena  are  very 
frequent  in  children  after  waking  from  sleep.  Through  the  sense  of  vis- 
ion, we  receive  from  external  nature  no  impressions  which  we  may  not 
also  experience  from  internal  excitement  of  our  nerves  5 and  it  is  evident 
that  a'^person  blind  from  infancy,  in  consequence  of  opacity  of  the  trans- 
parent media  of  the  eye,  must  have  a perfect  internal  conception  of  light 
and  colors,  provided  the  retina  and  optic  nerve  be  free  from  lesion.  The 
prevalent  notions  with  regard  to  the  wonderful  sensations  supposed  to  be 
experienced  by  persons  blind  from  birth,  when  their  sight  is  restored  by 
operation,  are  exaggerated  and  incorrect.  The  elements  of  the  sensation 
of  vision,  namely,  the  sensations  of  light,  color,  and  darkness,  must  have 
been  previously  as  well  known  to  such  persons  as  to  those  of  whom  the 
sight  has  always  been  perfect.  The  sensations  of  hearing,  also,  are  ex- 
cited as  well  by  internal  as  by  external  causes ; for  whenever  the  auditory 
nerve  is  in  a state  of  excitement,  the  sensations  peculiar  to  it,  as  the 
sounds  of  ringing,  humming,  &c.,  are  produced.  No  further  proof  is 
wanting,  to  show  that  external  influences  give  rise  in  our  senses  to  no 
other  sensations  than  those  which  may  be  excited  in  the  corresponding 
nerves  by  internal  causes.”  — Elements^  Vol.  II.  p.  1060. 

Carpentev  explains  the  possibility  of  these  phenomena  by  observing,  — 
“ With  regard  to  all  kinds  of  sensation,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  the 
change  of  which  the  mind  is  informed  is  not  the  change  at  the  peripheral 
extremities  of  the  nerves,  but  the  change  communicated  to  the  sensorium  ; 
hence  it  results,  that  external  agencies  can  give  rise  to  no  kind  of  sensa- 
tion which  cannot  also  be  produced  by  internal  causes,  exciting  changes 
in  the  condition  of  the  nerves  in  their  course.”  — Principles^  § 310.  — Ed. 


40 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


CHAPTER  II. 

HARTLEY’S  THEORY  OE  VIBRATIONS. 

1.  Historical  Notices.]  We  are  informed  by  anato- 
mists, that  although  the  two  coats  which  inclose  a 
nerve,  and  which  it  derives  from  the  coats  of  the  brain, 
are  tough  and  elastic,  yet  the  nerve  itself  has  a very 
small  degree  of  consistence,  being  almost  like  marrow. 
It  has,  however,  a fibrous  texture^  and  may  be  divided 
and  subdivided,  till  its  fibres  escape  our  senses.  And 
as  we  know  so  very  little  about  the  texture  of  the 
nerves,  there  is  great  room  left  for  those  who  choose  to 
indulge  themselves  in  conjecture. 

The  ancients  conjectured  that  the  nervous  fibres  are 
fine  tubes,  filled  with  a very  subtile  spirit  or  vapor,  which 
they  called  animal  spirits  ; that  the  brain  is  a gland,  by 
which  the  animal  spirits  are  secreted  from  the  finer  part 
of  the  blood,  and  their  continual  waste  repaired ; and 
that  it  is  by  these  animal  spirits  that  the  nerves  per- 
form their  functions.  Descartes  has  shown  how,  by 
these  animal  spirits  going  and  returning  in  the  nerves, 
muscular  motion,  perception,  memory,  and  imagination 
are  effected.  All  this  he  has  described  as  distinctly  as 
if  he  had  been  an  eyewitness  of  all  those  operations. 
But  it  happens  that  the  tubular  structure  of  the  nerves 
was  never  perceived  by  the  human  eye,  nor  shown  by 
the  nicest  injections;  and  all  that  has  been  said  about 
animal  spirits,  through  more  than  fifteen  centuries,  is 
mere  conjecture. 

Dr.  Briggs,  who  was  Sir  Isaac  Newton’s  master  in 
anatomy,  was  the  first,  as  far  as  I know,  who  advanced 
a new  system  concerning  the  nerves.*  He  conceived 


* Briggs  was  not  the  first.  The  Jesuit,  Honoratus  Eabi-y,  had  before 
him  denied  the  old  hypothesis  of  spirits ; and  the  new  hypothesis  of  cere- 
bral fibres  or  fibrils,  by  which  he  explains  the  phenomena  of  sense,  imagi- 
nation, and  memory,  is  not  only  the  first,  but  perhaps  the  most  ingenious 
of  the  class  that  has  been  proposed.  Yet  the  very  name  of  Eabry  is 


THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS. HARTLEY.  41 

them  to  be  solid  filaments  of  prodigious  tenuity ; and 
this  opinion,  as  it  accords  better  with  observation, 
seems  to  have  been  more  generally  received  since  his 
time.  As  to  the  manner  of  performing  their  office.  Dr. 
Briggs  thought,  that,  like  musical  cords,  they  have 
vibrations  differing  according  to  their  length  and  ten- 
sion. They  seem,  however,  very  unfit  for  this  purpose, 
on  account  of  their  want  of  tenacity,  their  moisture, 
and  being  through  their  whole  length  in  contact  with 
moist  substances:  so  that,  although  Dr.  Briggs  wrote  a 
book  upon  this  system,  called  N^ova  Visionis  Theoria^ 
it  seems  not  to  have  been  much  followed. 

Sir  Isaac  Newton,  in  all  his  philosophical  writings, 
took  great  care  to  distinguish  his  doctrines,  which  he 
intended  to  prove  by  just  induction,  from  his  conjec- 
tures, which  were  to  stand  or  fall,  according  as  future 
experiments  and  observations  should  establish  or  refute 
them.  His  conjectures  he  has  put  in  the  form  of  que- 
ries, that  they  might  not  be  received  as  truths,  but  be 
inquired  into,  and  determined  according  to  the  evidence 
to  be  found  for  *or  against  them.  Those  who  mistake 
his  queries  for  a part  of  his  doctrine  do  him  great  in- 
justice, and  degrade  him  to  the  rank  of  the  common 
herd  of  philosophers,  who  have,  in  all  ages,  adulterated 
philosophy  by  mixing  conjecture  with  truth,  and  their 
own  fancies  with  the  oracles  of  nature.  Among  other 
queries,  this  truly  great  philosopher  proposed  this,  — 
Whether  there  may  not  be  an  elastic  medium,  or  ether, 
immensely  more  rare  than  air,  which  pervades  all 
bodies,  and  which  is  the  cause  of  gravitation ; of  the 
refraction  and  reflection  of  the  rays  of  light;  of  the 
transmission  of  heat,  through  spaces  void  of  air;  and 
of  many  other  phenomena?  In  the  23d  query  sub- 
joined to  his  Optics^  he  puts  this  question,  with  regard 
to  the  impressions  made  on  the  nerves  and  brain  in 
perception,  — Whether  vision  is  effected  chiefly  by  the 


wholly  unnoticed  by  those  historians  of  philosophy  who  do  not  deem  it 
superfluous  to  dwell  on  the  tiresome  reveries  of  Briggs,  Hartley,  and  Bon- 
net. — II. 


4 


42 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


vibrations  of  this  medium,  excited  in  the  bottom  of  the 
eye  by  the  rays  of  light,  and  propagated  along  the 
solid,  pellucid,  and  uniform  capillaments  of  the  optic 
nerve  ? And  whether  hearing  is  effected  by  the  vibra- 
tions of  this  or  some  other  medium,  excited  by  the 
tremor  of  the  air  in  the  auditory  nerves,  and  propagated 
along  the  solid,  pellucid,  and  uniform  capillaments  of 
those  nerves  ? And  so  with  regard  to  the  other  senses. 

What  Newton  only  proposed  as  a matter  to  be  in- 
quired into.  Dr.  Hartley  conceived  to  have  such  evi- 
dence, that,  in  his  Observations  on  Man,  he  has  deducted, 
in  a mathematical  form,  a very  ample  system  concern- 
ing the  faculties  of  the  mind,  from  the  doctrine  of 
vibrations,  joined  with  that  of  association.* 

His  notion  of  the  vibrations  excited  in  the  nerves  is 
expressed  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  Propositions  in  Part  I. 
Chap.  I.  Sect.  I.  “ Proposition  4.  External  objects  im- 
pressed on  the  senses  occasion,  first  in  the  nerves  on 
which  they  are  impressed,  and  then  in  the  brain,  vibra- 
tions of  the  small,  and,  as  one  may  say,  infinitesimal 
medullary  particles.  Proposition  5.  The  vibrations 
mentioned  in  the  last  proposition  are  excited,  propa- 
gated, and  kept  up,  partly  by  the  ether,  that  is,  by  a 
very  subtile  elastic  fluid  ; partly  by  the  uniformity,  con- 
tinuity, softness,  and  active  powers  of  the  medullary 
substance  of  the  brain,  spinal  marrow,  and  nerves.” 

The  modesty  and  diffidence  with  which  Dr.  Hartley 
offers  his  system  to  the  world,  by  desiring  his  reader 
‘‘to  expect  nothing  but  hints  and  conjectures  in  diffi- 
cult and  obscure  matters,  and  a short  detail  of  the  prin- 
cipal reasons  and  evidences  in  those  that  are  clear ; by 
acknowledging  that  he  shall  not  be  able  to  execute*, 
with  any  accuracy,  the  proper  method  of  philosophiz- 


* David  Hartley  was  born  at  Armley,  in  the  county  of  York,  Auo:iist 
30,  1705,  and  died  at  Bath,  August  28,  1757.  His  Observations  were  first 
published  in  1749.  Pistorius  translated  the  work  into  German,  v/ith  valu- 
able “ Notes  and  Additions,”  which  are  now  commonly  appended,  in  Eng- 
lish, to  the  best  editions  of  the  original.  In  the  Metaphysical  Tracts  by 
English  Philosophei's  of  the  Eighteenth  Century^  there  is  one,  Conjecturce  cpue- 
dam  de  Sensu^  Motu,  et  Idearum  Generatione^  which  is  ascribed  to  Hartley. 
— Ed. 


THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS.  — HARTLEY. 


43 


ing,  recommended  and  followed  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton ; 
and  that  he  will  attempt  a sketch  only  for  the  benefit 
of  future  inquirers,’’  — seem  to  forbid  any  criticism 
upon  it.  One  cannot,  without  reluctance,  criticize 
what  is  proposed  in  such  a manner,  and  with  so  good 
intention ; yet,  as  the  tendency  of  this  system  of  vibra- 
tions is  to  make  all  the  operations  of  the  mind  mere 
mechanism,  dependent  on  the*  laws  of  matter  and 
motion,  and  as  it  has  been  held  forth  by  its  votaries  as 
in  a manner  demon,8trated^  I shall  make  some  remarks 
on  that  part  of  the  system  which  relates  to  the  impres- 
sions made  on  the  nerves  and  brain  in  perception. 

II.  Refutation  of  the  Theory,]  It  may  be  observed, 
in  general,  that  Dr.  Hartley’s  work  consists  of  a chain 
of  propositions,  with  their  proofs  and  corollaries,  di- 
gested in  good  order,  and  in  a scientific  form.  A great 
part  of  them,  however,  are,  as  he  candidly  acknowl- 
edges, conjectures  and  hints  only;  yet  these  are  mixed 
with  the  propositions  legitimately  proved,  without  any 
distinction.  Corollaries  are  drawn  from  them,  and 
other  propositions  grounded  upon  them,  which,  all 
taken  together,  make  up  a system,  A system  of  this 
kind  resembles  a chain,  of  which  some  links  are  abun- 
dantly strong,  others  very  weak.  The  strength  of  the 
chain  is  determined  by  that  of  the  weakest  links ; for  if 
they  give  way,  the  whole  falls  to  pieces,  and  the  weight 
supported  by  it  falls  to  the  ground. 

As  to  the  vibrations  and  vibratiuncles,  whether  of  an 
elastic  ether,  or  of  the  infinitesimal  particles  of  the 
brain  and  nerves,  there  may  be  such  things  for  what 
we  know,  and  men  may  rationally  inquire  whether 
they  can  find  any  evidence  of  their  existence;  but 
while  we  have  no  proof  of  their  existence,  to  apply 
them  to  the  solution  of  phenomena,  and  to  build  a sys- 
tem upon  them,  is  what  I conceive  we  call  building  a 
castle  in  the  air. 

When  men  pretend  to  account  for  any  of  the  opera- 
tions of  nature,  the  causes  assigned  by  them  ought,  as 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  has  taught  us,  to  have  two  conditions, 


44 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


otherwise  they  are  good  for  nothing.  Firsts  They  ought 
to  be  true,  to  have  a real  existence,  and  not  to  be  barely 
conjectured  to  exist,  without  proof.  Secondly^  They 
ought  to  be  sufficient  to  produce  the  effect. 

As  to  the  existence  of  vibratory  motions  in  the  medul- 
lary substance  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  the  evidence 
produced  is  this:  — Firsts  It  is  observed,  that  the  sen- 
sations of  seeing  and*  hearing,  and  some  sensations  of 
touch,  have  some  short  duration  and  continuance. 
Secondly^  Though  there  be  no  direct  evidence  that  the 
sensations  of  taste  and  smell,  and  the  greater  part  of 
those  of  touch,  have  the  like  continuance ; yet,  says  the 
author,  analogy  would  incline  one  to  believe,  that  they 
must  resemble  the  sensations  of  sight  and  hearing  in 
this  particular.  Thirdly^  The  continuance  of  all  our 
sensations  being  thus  established,  it  follows  that  ex- 
ternal objects  impress  vibratory  motions  on  the  medul- 
lary substance  of  the  nerves  and  brain ; because  no 
motion  besides  a vibratory  one  can  reside  in  any  part 
for  a moment  of  time. 

This  is  the  chain  of  proof;  in  which  the  first  link  is 
strong,  being  confirmed  by  experience ; the  second  is 
very  weak  ; and  the  third  still  weaker.  For  other  kinds 
of  motion,  besides  that  of  vibration,  may  have  some 
continuance,  such  as  rotation,  bending  or  unbending  of 
a spring,  and  perhaps  others  which  we  are  unacquainted 
with : nor  do  we  know  whether  it  is  motion  that  is  pro- 
duced in  the  nerves ; it  may  be  pressure,  attraction, 
repulsion,  or  something  we  do  not  know.  This,  indeed, 
is  the  common  refuge  of  all  hypotheses,  that  we  know 
no  other  way  in  which  the  phenomena  may  be  pro- 
duced, and  therefore  they  must  be  produced  in  this 
way.  There  is,  therefore,  no  proof  of  vibrations  in 
the  infinitesimal  particles  of  the  brain  and  nerves. 

It  may  be  thought  that  the  existence  of  an  elastic 
vibrating  ether  stands  on  a firmer  foundation,  having 
the  authority  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton.  But  it  ought  to  be 
observed,  that  although  this  great  man  had  formed  con- 
jectures about  this  ether  near  fifty  years  before  he  died, 
and  had  it  in  his  eye  during  that  long  space  as  a sub- 


THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS. HARTLEY. 


45 


ject  of  inquiry,  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  he  ever 
found  any  convincing  proof  of  its  existence,  but  con- 
sidered it  to  the  last  as  a question  whether  there  be  such 
an  ether  or  not.  In  the  premonition  to  the  reader,  pre- 
fixed to  the  second  edition  of  his  Optics^  anno  1717,  he 
expresses  himself  thus  with  regard  to  it : — Lest  any 
one  should  think  that  I place  gravity  among  the  essen- 
tial properties  of  bodies,  I have  subjoined  one  question 
concerning  its  cause  ; a question,  I say,  for  I do  not 
hold  it  as  a thing  established.’’  If,  therefore,  we  regard 
the  authority  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton,  we  ought  to  hold 
the  existence  of  such  an  ether  as  a matter  not  estab- 
lished by  proof,  but  to  be  examined  into  by  experi- 
ments ; and  I have  never  heard  that,  since  his  time,  any 
new  evidence  has  been  found  of  its  existence. 

Vibrations  and  vibratiuncles  of  the  medullary  sub- 
stance of  the  nerves  and  brain  are  assigned  by  Dr. 
Hartley  to  account  for  all  our  sensations  and  ideas, 
and,  in  a word,  for  all  the  operations  of  our  minds. 
Let  us  consider  very  briefly  how  far  they  are  sufficient 
for  that  purpose. 

He  proposes  his  sentiments  with  great  candor,  and 
they  ought  not  to  be  carried  beyond  what  his  words 
express.  He  thinks  it  a consequence  of  his  theory,  that 
matter,  if  it  can  be  endued  with  the  most  simple  kinds 
of  sensation,  might  arrive  at  all  that  intelligence  of 
which  the  human  mind  is  possessed.  He  thinks  that 
his  theory  overturns  all  the  arguments  that  are  usually 
brought  for  the  immateriality  of  the  soul,  from  the  sub- 
tilty  of  the  internal  senses,  and  of  the  rational  faculty ; 
but  he  does  not  take  upon  him  to  determine  whether 
matter  can  be  endued  with  sensation  or  no.  He  even 
acknowledges,  that  matter  and  motibn,  however  sub- 
tilely  divided  and  reasoned  upon,  yield  nothing  more 
than  matter  and  motion  still ; and  therefore  he  would 
not  be  any  way  interpreted  so  as  to  oppose  the  imma- 
teriality of  the  soul. 

It  would,  therefore,  be  unreasonable  to  require  that 
his  theory  of  vibrations  should,  in  the  proper  sense,  ac- 
count for  our  sensations.  It*  would,  indeed,  be  ridicu- 


46 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


lous  in  any  man  to  pretend,  that  thought  of  any  kind 
must  necessarily  result  from  motion,  or  that  vibrations 
in  the  nerves  must  necessarily  produce  thought,  any 
more  than  the  vibrations  of  a pendulum.  Dr.  Hartley 
disclaims  this  way  of  thinking,  and  therefore  it  ought 
not  to  be  imputed  to  him.  All  that  he  pretends  is, 
that,  in  the  human  constitution,  there  is  a certain  con- 
nection between  vibrations  in  the  medullary  substance 
of  the  nerves  and  brain,  and  the  thoughts  of  the  mind ; 
so  that  the  last  depend  entirely  upon  the  first,  and 
every  kind  of  thought  in  the  mind  arises  in  conse- 
quence of  a corresponding  vibration,  or  vibratiuncle,  in 
the  nerves  and  brain.  Our  sensations  arise  from  vibra- 
tions^ and  our  ideas  from  vibratiuncle or  miniature 
vibrations ; and  he  comprehends,  under  these  two  words 
of  sensations  and  ideas^  all  the  operations  of  the  mind. 

But  how  can  we  expect  any  proof  of  the  connection 
between  vibrations  and  thought,  when  the  existence  of 
such  vibrations  was  never  proved.  The  proof  of  their 
connection  cannot  be  stronger  than  the  proof  of  their 
existence:  for,  as  the  author  acknowledges  that  we 
cannot  infer  the  existence  of  the  thoughts  from  the  ex- 
istence of  the  vibrations,  it  is  no  less  evident  that  we 
cannot  infer  the  existence  of  vibrations  from  the  exist- 
ence of  our  thoughts.  The  existence  of  both  must  be 
known  before  we  can  know  their  connection.  As  to 
the  existence  of  our  thoughts,  we  have  the  evidence  of 
consciousness ; a kind  of  evidence  that  never  was  called 
in  question.  But  as  to  the  existence  of  vibrations  in 
the  medullary  substance  of  the  nerves  and  brain,  no 
proof  has  yet  been  brought. 

All,  therefore,  we  have  to  expect  from  this  hypothe- 
sis is,  that,  in  vibrations  considered  abstractly,  there 
should  be  a variety  in  kind  and  degree,  which  tallies  so 
exactly  with  the  varieties  of  the  thoughts  they  are  to 
account  for,  as  may  lead  us  to  suspect  some  connec- 
tion between  the  one  and  the  other.  If  the  divisions 
and  subdivisions  of  thought  be  found  to  run  parallel 
with  the  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  vibrations,  this 
would  give  that  kind  of  plausibility  to  the  hypothesis 


THEORY  OF  VIBRATIONS. HARTLEY.  47 

of  their  connection  which  we  commonly  expect  in  a 
mere  hypothesis ; but  we  do  not  find  even  this. 

Philosophers  have  accounted  in  some  degree  for  our 
various  sensations  of  sounds  by  the  vibrations  of  elastic 
air.  But  it  is  to  be  observed,  firsts  that  we  know  that 
such  vibrations  do  really  exist ; and,  secondly.,  that  they 
tally  exactly  with  the  most  remarkable  phenomena  of 
sound.  We  cannot,  indeed,  show  how  any  vibration 
should  produce  the  sensation  of  sound.  This  must  be 
resolved  into  the  will  of  God,  or  into  some  cause  alto- 
gether unknown.  But  we  know,  that  as  the  vibration 
is  strong  or  weak,  the  sound  is  loud  or  soft.  We 
know,  that  as  the  vibration  is  quick  or  slow,  the  sound 
is  acute  or  grave.  We  can  point  out  that  relation  of 
synchronous  vibrations  which  produces  harmony  or 
discord,  and  that  relation  of  successive  vibrations  which 
produces  melody:  and  all  this  is  not  conjectured,  but 
proved  by  a sufficient  induction.  This  account  of 
sounds,  therefore,  is  philosophical ; although,  perhaps, 
there  may  be  many  things  relating  to  sound  that  we 
cannot  account  for,  and  of  which  the  causes  remain 
latent.  The  connections  described  in  this  branch  of 
philosophy  are  the  work  of  God,  and  not  the  fancy  of 
men. 

If  any  thing  similar  to  this  could  be  shown  in  ac- 
counting for  all  our  sensations  by  vibrations  in  the  me- 
dullary  substance  of  the  nerve  and  brain.,  it  would  de- 
serve a place  in  sound  philosophy.  But  when  we  are 
told  of  vibrations  in  a substance,  ivhich  no  man  could 
ever  prove  to  have  vibrations.,  or  to  be  capable  of  them; 
when  such  imaginary  vibrations  are  brought  to  account 
for  all  our  sensations,  though  we  can  perceive  no  corre- 
spondence., in  their  variety  of  kind  and  degree.,  to  the  va- 
riety of  sensations ; the  connections  described  in  such  a 
system  are  the  creatures  of  human  imagination,  not  the 
work  of  God. 

The  rays  of  light  make  an  impression  upon  the  optic 
nerves;  but  they  make  none  upon  the  auditory  or 
olfactory.  The  vibrations  of  the  air  make  an  impres- 
sion upon  the  auditory  nerves ; but  none  upon  the  op- 


48 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


tic  or  the  olfactory.  The  effluvia  of  bodies  make  an 
impression  upon  the  olfactory  nerves ; but  make  none 
upon  the  optic  or  auditory.  No  man  has  been  able  to 
give  a shadow  of  reason  for  this.  While  this  is  the 
case,  is  it  not  better  to  confess  our  ignorance  of  the 
nature  of  those  impressions  made  upon  the  nerves  and 
brain  in  perception,  than  to  flatter  our  pride  with  the 
conceit  of  knowledge  which  we  have  not,  and  to  adul- 
terate philosophy  with  the  spurious  brood  of  hypoth- 
eses ? * 


CHAPTER  III. 

FALSE  CONCLUSIONS  DKAWN  FROM  THE  CONNECTION 
BETWEEN  PERCEPTION  AND  IMPRESSIONS  MADE  ON 
THE  ORGANS  OF  SENSE. 

I.  (1.)  That  the  Mind  is  Material^  and  Perception  the 
Result  of  Mechanism.]  Some  philosophers  among  the 
ancients,  as  well  as  among  the  moderns,  imagined  that 
man  is  nothing  but  a piece  of  matter  so  curiously  or- 
ganized.)  that  the  impressions  of  external  objects  produce 
in  it  sensation.^  perception^  remembrance.^  and  all  the  other 
operations  we  are  conscious  of  This  foolish  opinion 
could  only  take  its  rise  from  observing  the  constant 
connection  which  the  Author  of  nature  has  established 
between  certain  impressions  made  upon  our  senses, 
and  our  perception  of  the  objects  by  which  the  impres- 
sion is  made ; from  which  they  weakly  inferred,  that 


* Reid  appears  to  have  been  unacquainted  with  the  works  and  theory  of 
Bonnet.  With  our  author’s  strictures  on  the  physiological  hypotheses,  the 
reader  may  compare  those  of  Tetens,  in  his  Versuche,  and  of  Stewart,  in 
his  Philosophical  Essays.  — H. 

Haller  took  pains  to  refute  the  theory  of  vibrations  in  his  Elementa  Phy- 
siologicB^  Vol.  IV.  Sect.  VIIL,  Art.  Conjecturcc.  For  some  account  of  the 
writers  who  have  advocated  it,  see  Blakey’s  History  of  the  Philosophy  of 
Mind,  Vol.  III.  Chap.  XVII.  Dr.  Priestley  published  an  octavo  volume, 
in  1775,  containing  a portion  of  Dr.  Hartley’s  great  work,  with  this  title: 
Hartleys  Theory  of  the  Human  Mind,  on  the  Principle  of  the  Association  of 
Ideas,  with  Essays  on  the  Subject  of  it.  — Ed. 


FALSE  CONCLUSIONS. 


49 


those  impressions  were  the  proper  efficient  causes  of 
the  corresponding  perception. 

But  no  reasoning  is  more  fallacious  than  this,  that, 
because  two  things  are  always  conjoined,  therefore  one 
must  be  the  cause  of  the  other.  Day  and  night  have 
been  joined  in  a constant  succession  since  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world;  but  who  is  so  foolish  as  to  conclude 
from  this  that  day  is  the  cause  of  night,  or  night  the 
cause  of  the  following  day  ? There  is  indeed  nothing 
more  ridiculous  than  to  imagine  that  any  motion  or 
modification  of  matter  should  produce  thought. 

If  one  should  tell  of  a telescope  so  exactly  made  as 
to  have  the  power  of  seeing;  of  a whispering  gallery 
that  had  the  power  of  hearing ; of  a cabinet  so  nicely 
framed  as  to  have  the  power  of  memory ; or  of  a ma- 
chine so  delicate  as  to  feel  pain  when  it  was  touched, 
— such  absurdities  are  so  shocking  to  common  sense, 
that  they  would  not  find  belief  even  among  savages: 
yet  it  is  the  same  absurdity  to  think  that  the  impres- 
sions of  external  objects  upon  the  machine  of  our  bod- 
ies can  be  the  real  efficient  cause  of  thought  and  per- 
ception. 

II.  (2.)  That  an  Impression  is  made  on  the  Mind^  as 
well  as  on  the  Organs  of  Sense,]  Another  conclusion 
sometimes  drawn  by  philosophers  is,  that  in  perception 
an  impression  is  made  upon  the  mind^  as  well  as  upon 
the  organ^  nerves,,  and  brain,  Mr.  Locke  affirms  very 
positively,  that  the  ideas  of  external  objects  are  pro- 
duced in  our  minds  by  impulse,  that  being  the  only 
way  we  can  conceive  bodies  to  operate  in.”  It.  ought, 
however,  to  be  observed,  in  justice  to  Mr.  Locke,  that 
he  retracted  this  notion  in  his  first  letter  to  the  Bishop 
of  Worcester,  and  promised  in  the  next  edition  of  his 
Essay  to  have  that  passage  rectified ; but  either  from 
forgetfulness  in  the  author,  or  negligence  in  the  printer, 
the  passage  remains  in  all  the  subsequent  editions  I 
have  seen. 

There  is  no  prejudice  more  natural  to  man,  than  to 
conceive  of  the  mind  as  having  some  similitude  to 
5 


50 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


body  in  its  operations.  Hence  men  have  been  prone 
to  imagine,  that,  as  bodies  are  put  in  motion  by  some 
impulse  or  impression  made  upon  them  by  contiguous 
bodies,  so  the  mind  is  made  to  think  and  to  perceive 
by  some  impression  made  upon  it,  or  some  impulse 
given  to  it,  by  contiguous  objects.  If  we  have  such  a 
notion  of  the  mind  as  Homer  had  of  his  gods,  who 
might  be  bruised  or  wounded  with  swords  and  spears, 
we  may  then  understand  what  is  meant  by  impressions 
made  upon  it  by  a body.  But  if  we  conceive  the  mind 
to  be  immaterial^  of  which  I think  we  have  very  strong 
proofs,  we  shall  find  it  difficult  to  affix  a meaning  to 
impressions  made  vpon  it- 

There  is  a figvrative  meaning  of  impressions  on  the 
mind  which  is  well  authorized,  but  this  meaning  ap- 
plies only  to  objects  that  are  interesting.  To  say  that 
an  object  which  I see  with  perfect  indifference  makes 
an  impression  upon  my  mind,  is  not,  as  I apprehend, 
good  English.  If  philosophers  mean  no  more  than 
that  I see  the  object,  why  should  they  invent  an  im- 
proper phrase  to  express  what  every  man  knows  how 
to  express  in  plain  English  ? 

But  it  is  evident,  from  the  manner  in  which  this 
phrase  is  used  by  modern  philosophers,  that  they  mean 
not  merely  to  express  by  it  my  perceiving  an  object, 
but  to  explain  the  manner  of  perception.  They  think 
that  the  object  perceived  acts  upon  the  mind,  in  some 
way  similar  to  that  in  which  one  body  acts  upon 
another,  by  making  an  impression  upon  it.  The  im- 
pression upon  the  mind  is  conceived  to  be  something 
wherein  the  mind  is  altogether  passive,  and  has  some 
effect  produced  on  it  by  the  object.  But  this  is  a hy- 
pothesis which  contradicts  the  common  sense  of  man- 
kind, and  which  ought  not  to  be  admitted  without 
proof.  When  I look  upon  the  wall  of  my  room,  the 
wall  does  not  act  at  all,  nor  is  it  capable  of  acting;  the 
perceiving  it  is  an  act  or  operation  in  me.  That  this 
is  the  common  apprehension  of  mankind  with  regard 
to  perception,  is  evident  from  the  manner  of  expressing 
it  in  all  languages. 


FALSE  CONCLUSIONS. 


51 


The  vulgar  give  themselves  no  trouble  how  they  per- 
ceive objects.  They  express  what  they  are  conscious 
of,  and  they  express  it  with  propriety ; but  philosophers 
have  an  avidity  to  know  hoiv  we  perceive  objects ; and, 
conceiving  some  similitude  between  a'  body  that  is  put 
in  motion  and  a mind  that  is  made  to  perceive,  they 
are  led  to  think,  that,  as  the  body  must  receive  some 
impulse  to  make  it  move,  so  the  mind  must  receive 
some  impulse  or  impression  to  make  it  perceive.  This 
analogy  seems  to  be  confirmed,  by  observing  that  we  . 
perceive  objects  only  when  they  make  some  impression 
upon  the  organs  of  sense,  and  upon  the  nerves  and 
brain;  but  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  such  is  the  na- 
ture of  hodij^  that  it  cannot  change  its  state,  but  by 
some  force  impressed  upon  it.  This  is  not  the  nature  of 
mind.  All  that  we  know  about  it  shows  it  to  be  in  its 
nature  living  and  active^  and  to  have  the  power  of  per- 
ception in  its  constitution,  but  still  within  those  limits 
to  which  it  is  confined  by  the  laws  of  nature. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  this  phrase  of  the  mind’s 
having  impressions  made  upon  it  by  corporeal  objects 
in  perception,  is  either  a phrase  without  any  distinct 
meaning,  and  contrary  to  the  propriety  of  the  English 
language,  or  it  is  grounded  upon  an  hypothesis  which  is 
destitute  of  proof.  On  that  account,  though  we  grant 
that  in  perception  there  is  an  impression  made  upon 
the  organ  of  sense,^  and  upon  the  nerves  and  brain^  we 
do  not  admit  that  the  object  makes  any  impression 
upon  the  mind, 

III.  (3.)  That  these  Impressions  leave  Images  in  the 
Brain  ivhich  are  the  only  Immediate  Objects  of  Percep- 
tion,] There  is  another  conclusion  drawn  from  the  im- 
pressions made  upon  the  brain  in  perception,  which  I 
conceive  to  have  no  solid  foundation,  though  it  has 
been  adopted  very  generally  by  philosophers.  It  is,  that 
by  the  impressions  made  on  the  brain,)  images  are  formed 
of  the  object  perceived;  and  that  the  mind,)  being  seated 
in  the  brain  as  its  chamber  of  presence,)  immediately  per- 
ceives those  images  only,)  and  has  no  perception  of  the 
external  object  but  by  them. 


52 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Now,  with  regard  to  this  hypothesis,  there  are  three 
things  that  deserve  to  be  considered,  because  the  hy- 
pothesis leans  upon  them ; and  if  any  one  of  them  fail, 
it  must  fall  to  the  ground.  The  first  is,  that  the  soul 
has  its  seat,  or,  as  Mr.  Locke  calls  it,  its  presence- 
room,”  in  the  brain.  The  second^  that  there  are  images 
formed  in  the  brain  of  all  the  objects  of  sense.  The 
thirds  that  the  mind  or  soul  perceives  these  images  in 
the  brain ; and  that  it  perceives  not  external  objects 
immediately,  but  only  by  means  of  their  images. 

As  to  the  first  point,  that  the  soul  has  its  seat  in  the 
brain,  this,  surely,  is  not  so  well  established  as  that  we 
can  safely  build  other  principles  upon  it.  There  have 
been  various  opinions  and  much  disputation  about  the 
place  of  spirits ; whether  they  have  a place,  and  if  they 
have,  how  they  occupy  that  place.  After  men  had 
fought  in  the  dark  about  these  points  for  ages,  the  wiser 
part  seem  to  have  left  off  disputing  about  them,  as 
matters  beyond  the  reach  of  the  human  faculties. 

As  to  the  second  point,  that  images  of  all  the  objects 
of  sense  are  formed  in  the  brain,  we  may  venture  to 
affirm  that  there  is  no  proof  nor  probability  of  this, 
with  regard  to  any  oi  the  objects  of  sense;  and  that 
with  regard  to  the  greater  part  of  them,  it  is  words 
without  any  meaning. 

That  external  objects  make  some  impression  on  the 
organs  of  sense,  and  by  them  on  the  nerves  and  brain, 
is  granted ; but  that  those  impressions  resemble  the  ob- 
jects they  are  made  by,  so  as  that  they  may  be  called 
images  of  the  objects^  is  most  improbable.  Every  hy- 
pothesis that  has  been  contrived  shows  that  there  can 
be  no  such  resemblance ; for  neither  the  motions  of 
animal  spirits,  nor  the  vibrations'  of  elastic  chords,  or  of 
elastic  ether,  or  of  the  infinitesimal  particles  of  the 
nerves,  can  be  supposed  to  resemble  the  objects  by 
which  they  are  excited. 

We  know  that,  in  vision,  an  image  of  the  visible 
object  is  formed  in  the  bottom  of  the  eye  by  the  rays 
of  light.  But  we  know  also,  that  this  image  cannot 
be  conveyed  to  the  brain,  because  the  optic  nerve,  and 


FALSE  CONCLUSIOxXS. 


53 


all  the  parts  that  surround  it,  are  opaque  and  imper- 
vious to  the  rays  of  light;  and  there  is  no  other  organ 
of  sense  in  which  any  image  of  the  object  is  formed. 

It  is  further  to  be  observed,  that,  with  regard  to  some 
objects  of  sense,  we  may  understand  what  is  meant  by 
an  image  of  them  imprinted  on  the  brain ; but  with 
regard  to  most  objects  of  sense,  the  phrase  is  absolutely 
unintelligible,  and  conveys  no  meaning  at  all.  As  to 
objects  of  sight,  I understand  what  is  meant  by  an 
image  of  their  figure  in  the  brain.  But  how  shall  we 
conceive  an  image  of  their  color^  where  there  is  abso- 
lute darkness  ? And  as  to  all  other  objects  of  sense, 
except  figure  and  color,  I am  unable  to  conceive  what 
is  meant  by  an  image  of  them.  Let  any  man  say 
what  he  means  by  an  image  of  heat  or  cold,  an  image 
of  hardness  or  softness,  an  image  of  sound,  of  smell,  or 
taste.  The  word  wiage^  when  applied  to  these  objects 
of  sense,  has  absolutely  no  meaning.  Upon  what  a 
weak  foundation,  then,  does  this  hypothesis  stand, 
when  it  supposes  that  images  of  all  the  objects  of  sense 
are  imprinted  on  the  brain,  being  conveyed  thither  by 
the  conduits  of  the  organs  and  nerves. 

The  third  point  in  this  hypothesis  is,  that  the  mind 
perceives  the  images  in  the  brain,  and  external  objects 
only  by  means  of  them.  This  is  as  improbable,  as  that 
there  are  such  images  to  be  perceived.  If  our  powers 
of  perception  be  not  altogether  fallacious,  the  objects 
we  perceive  are  not  in  our  brain,  but  without  us.  We 
are  so  far  from  perceiving  images  in  the  brain,  that  we 
do  not  perceive  our  brain  at  all;  nor  would  any  man 
ever  have  known  that  he  had  a brain,  if  anatomy  had 
not  discovered,  by  dissection,  that  the  brain  is  a con- 
stituent part  of  the  human  body. 

To  sum  up  what  has  been  said  with  regard  to  the 
organs  of  perception,  and  the  impressions  made  upon 
our  nerves  and  brain.  It  is  a law  of  our  nature,  estab- 
lished by  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Being,  that  we  per- 
ceive no  external  object  but  by  means  of  the  organs 
given  us  for  that  purpose.  But  these  organs  do  not 
perceive.  The  eye  is  the  organ  of  sight,  but  it  sees  not. 


54 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


A telescope  is  an  artificial  organ  of  sight.  The  eye  is 
a natural  organ  of  sight,  but  it  sees  as  little  as  the  tel- 
escope. We  know  how  the  eye  forms  a picture  of  the 
visible  object  upon  the  retina;  but  how  this  picture 
makes  us  see  the  object  we  know  not;  and  if  experi- 
ence had  not  informed  us  that  such  a picture  is  neces- 
sary to  vision,  we  should  never  have  known  it.  We 
can  give  no  reason  why  the  picture  on  the  retina  should 
be  followed  by  vision,  while  a like  picture  on  any  other 
part  of  the  body  produces  nothing  like  vision. 

It  is  likewise  a law  of  our  nature,  that  we  perceive 
not  external  objects,  unless  certain  impressions  be  made 
by  the  object  upon  the  organ,  and  by  means  of  the 
organ  upon  the  nerves  and  brain.  But  of  the  nature 
of  those  impressions  we  are  perfectly  ignorant;  and 
though  they  are  conjoined  with  perception  by  the  will 
of  our  Maker,  yet  it  does  not  appear  that  they  have 
any  necessary  connection  with  it  in  their  own  nature, 
far  less  that  they  can  be  the  proper  efficient  cause  of  it. 
We  perceive,  because  God  has  given  us  the  power  of 
perceiving,  and  not  because  we  have  impressions  from 
objects.  We  perceive  nothing  without  those  impres- 
sions, because  our  Maker  has  limited  and  circum- 
scribed our  powers  of  perception  by  such  laws  of 
nature  as  to  his  wisdom  seemed  meet,  and  such  as 
suited  our  rank  in  his  creation.* 


* In  noticing  the  benefit  accruing  to  psychology  from  recent  physiologi- 
cal investigations,  Mr.  Morell  observes : — “ The  phantasms  of  Aristotle, 
the  animal  spirits  of  Descartes,  the  vibrations  of  Hartley,  and  all  such 
speculations,  are  virtually  moved  out  of  the  road  by  a closer  examination 
of  the /acts  of  the  case,  and  thus  prevented  from  encumbering  the  move- 
ments of  scientific  research.  In  opposition  to  such  notions,  it  has  been 
discovered  that  the  different  kinds  of  nerves  have  specific  qualities  of  their 
own,  and  that,  instead  of  conveying  impressions,  they  give  rise  to  certain 
phenomena  simply  hy  the  excitement  of  their  own  properties.^"* 

He  adds ; — “ At  the  same  time,  it  is  of  great  importance  that  the  two 
sciences  should  each  hold  their  proper  limits,  and  that  the  one  should  not 
be  allowed  to  assume  the  ground  which  peculiarly  belongs  to  the  other. 
To  mark  the  boundaries  of  physiology  and  psychology  we  must  simply 
inquire,  what  are  the  phenomena  which  we  learn  by  consciousness,  and  what 
those  which  we  learn  by  outward  observation.  These  two  regions  lie  en- 
tirely without  each  other;  so  much  so,  that  there  is  not  a single  fact  known 
by  consciousness,  which  we  should  ever  have  learned  by  external  obser- 


OF  PERCEPTION  PROPER. 


55 


CHAPTER  IV. 

OF  PERCEPTION,  PROPERLY  SO  CALLED. 

L Known  by  Consciousness  and  Reflection  alone.]  In 
speaking  of  the  impressions  made  on  our  organs  in  per- 


vation,  and  not  a single  fact  known  by  external  observation  of  wliich  we 
are  ever  conscious.  A sensation,  for  example,  is  known  simply  by  con- 
sciousness; the  material  conditions  of  it,  as  seen  in  the  organ  and  the 
nervous  system,  simply  by  external  observation.  No  one  could  ever  see  a 
sensation,  or  be  conscious  of  the  organic  action  ; accordingly,  the  one  fact 
belongs  to  psychology,  the  other  to  physiology.” 

On  this  distinction  he  refers  to  a passage  in  Jouifroy,  given  by  us  in  a 
note  to  Chap.  IV.  of  the  Preliminary  Essay,  but  remarks,  that  “ Jouffroy 
carries  his  views  on  this  point  too  far  In  the  phenomena  of  muscular 
action,  we  have  the  uniting  point  of  the  two  sciences,  the  link  which  indis- 
solubly connects  the  science  of  mind  with  that  of  organic  matter.” 

In  this  connection  he  also  speaks  of  phrenology,  the  real  merit  of  which 
is,  as  he  contends,  “ that  it  has  directed  inquiry  to  the  structure  of  the 
brain  and  the  nervous  system,  and  succeeded  in  drawing  forth  many  inter- 
esting facts,  which  otherwise  would  have  been  to  this  time  enveloped  in 
darkness.  Had  it  been  content  with  taking  its  place  as  one  peculiar 
branch  of  human  physiology,  it  would  have  appeared  in  a light  perfectly 
unobjectionable  to  the  most  rigidly  philosophical  minds  ; but  its  ambition 
has,  to  a great  extent,  been  its  bane.” 

He  then  shows,  at  some  length,  that  it  can  never  serve  as  the  basis  of  a 
new  system  of  intellectual  philosophy.  A brief  extract  must  suffice  ; — 
“ I will  suppose,  for  a moment,  that  we  knew  nothing  whatever  reflectivehj 
of  our  own  mental  operations ; that  the  study  of  the  human  mind  had  not 
yet  been  commenced ; that  none  of  its  phenomena  had  been  classified ; 
and  that  we  were  to  begin  our  investigation  of  them  upon  the  phrenological 
system,  some  notion  of  which  had  been  previously  communicated  to  us: 
we  might  in  this  case  proceed  with  our  operations  with  the  greatest  ardor, 
and  examine  skull  after  skull  for  a century  ; but  this  would  not  give  us  the 
least  notion  of  any  peculiar  mental  faculty^  or  aid  us  in  the  smallest  degree  in 
classifying  mental  phenomena.  We  could  never  know  that  the  organs  of  the 
reasoning  powers  were  in  front,  and  those  of  the  moral  feelings  upon  the 
top  of  the  head,  unless  we  had  first  made  those  powers  and  feelings  inde- 
pendently the  objects  of  our  examination.  The  whole  march  of  phrenology 
goes  upon  the  supposition,  that  there  is  a system  of  intellectual  philosophy 
already  in  the  mind,  and  its  whole  aim  is  to  show  where  the  seat,  materi- 
ally speaking,  of  the  faculties  we  have  already  observed  really  is  to  be 
found  ” 

“ The  Phrenological  Journal  admits,”  he  adds  in  a note  to  his  second 
edition,  “ that  we  must  know  our  mental  phenomena  reflectively^  before  we 
can  allocate  them,  — but  still  persists  in  calling  cerebral  observation  a 
method  of  studying  psychology.  I confess  myself  unable  to  see  what 
psychological  truth  it  unfolds,  that  is  not  clear  without  it.  Does  it  reveal  a 


56 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


ception,  we  build  upon  facts  borrowed  from  anatomy 
and  physiology,  for  which  we  have  the  testimony  of 
our  senses.  But  being  now  to  speak  of  perception 
itself,  which  is  solely  an  act  of  the  mind,  we  must 
appeal  to  another  authority.  The  operations  of  our 
minds  are  known,  not  by  sense,  but  by  consciousness, 
the  authority  of  which  is  as  certain  and  as  irresistible 
as  that  of  sense.* * 


mental  fact?  Notone.  These  are  all  facts  of  cowsc/oasness.  Does  it  give 
us  a classification  ? No.  ‘We  must  know,’  (I  quote  the  critic,)  ‘from 
our  consciousness,  the  distinction  between  thoughts  and  feelings,  before  we 
can  trace  their  connection  with  particular  parts  of  the  brain.’  Does  it 
define  a single  faculty  or  feeling,  or  give  us  any  clew  to  the  class  of  phe- 
nomena to  which  it  should  belong  ? No.  The  decision  as  to  the  class  of 
phenomena  to  which  any  mental  fact  belongs  is  left  to  the  mind’s  reflective 
judgment,  which  would  be  quite  unaltered  wherever  the  organ  of  it  might 
be  found.”  — Historical  and  Critical  View  of  the  Speculative  Philosophy  of 
Europe  in  the  Nineteenth  Century^  Chap.  IV.  Sect.  I. 

For  further  information  respecting  the  physiological  conditions  of  per- 
ception and  the  other  mental  phenomena,  see  a small  tract  by  Dr.  Barlow, 
On  the  Connection  between  Physiology  and  Intellectual  Science.  Muller’s  Ele- 
ments^ already  referred  to.  The  American  edition  of  the  English  transla- 
tion omits  many  passages  interesting  to  the  psychologist.  Tissot,  Anthro- 
poloyie.  Virey,  Physiologie  dans  ses  Rapports  avec  la  Philosophie.  Pritch- 
ard’s Review  of  the  Doctrine  of  a Vital  Principle.  Green’s  Vital  Dynamics. 
Lawrence’s  Introduction  to  Comparative  Anatomy  and  Physiology.  Maine  de 
Biran,  Nouvelles  Considerations  sur  les  Rapports  da  Physique  et  du  Moral  de 
V Homme.  Jouffroy,  Nouveaux  Melanges  Philosophiques.,  Art.  De  la  L6giti- 
met6  de  la  Distinction  de  la  Psychologie  et  de  la  Physiologie.  Comte,  Phi- 
losophie Positive.^  Vol.  III.  Le^on  XLV.  — Ed. 

* It  is  more  so.  There  is  no  skepticism  possible  touching  the  facts  of 
consciousness  in  themselves.  We  cannot  doubt  that  the  phenomena  of 
consciousness  are  real,  in  so  far  as  we  are  conscious  of  them.  I cannot 
doubt,  for  example,  that  I am  actually  conscious  of  a certain  feeling  of 
fragrance,  and  of  certain  perceptions  of  color,  figure,  &c.,  when  I see  and 
smell  a rose.  Of  the  reality  of  these,  as  experienced,  I cannot  doubt,  be- 
cause they  are  facts  of  consciousness ; and  of  consciousness  I cannot 
doubt,  because  such  doubt,  being  itself  an  act  of  consciousness,  would  con- 
tradict, and  consequently  annihilate,  itself.  But  of  all  beyond  the  mere 
phenomena  of  which  we  are  conscious,  we  may  — wdthout  fear  of  self- 
contradiction  at  least  — doubt.  I may,  for  instance,  doubt  whether  the 
rose  I see  and  smell  has  any  existence,  beyond  a phenomenal  existence  in 
my  consciousness.  I cannot  doubt  that  I am  conscious  of  it  as  something 
different  from  self,  but  whether  it  have,  indeed,  any  reality  beyond  my 
mind,  — whether  the  not-self  be  not  in  truth  only  self  — that  I niay  philo- 
sophically question.  In  like  manner,  I am  conscious  of  the  memory  of  a 
certain  past  event.  Of  the  contents  of  this  memory,  as  a phenomenon 
given  by  consciousness,  skepticism  is  impossible.  But  I may  by  possi- 
bility demur  to  the  reality  of  all  beyond  these  contents,  and  the  sphere  of 
present  consciousness.  — H. 


OF  PERCEPTION  PROPER. 


57 


In  order,  however,  to  our  having  a distinct  notion  of 
any  of  the  operations  of  our  own  minds,  it  is  not  enough 
that  we  be  conscious  of  them,  for  all  men  have  this 
consciousness : it  is  further  necessary  that  we  attend  to 
them  while  they  are  exerted,  and  reflect  upon  them 
with  care,  while  they  are  recent  and  fresh  in  our  mem- 
ory. It  is  necessary  that,  by  employing  ourselves  fre- 
quently in  this  way,  we  get  the  habit  of  this  attention 
and  reflection ; and  therefore,  for  the  proof  of  facts 
which  I shall  have  occasion  to  mention  upon  this  sub- 
ject, I can  only  appeal  to  the  reader’s  own  thoughts; 
whether  such  facts  are  not  agreeable  to  what  he  is  con- 
scious of  in  his  own  mind. 

11.  Three  Things  implied  in  every  Act  of  Perception,] 
If,  therefore,  we  attend  to  that  act  of  our  mind  which 
we  call  the  perception  of  an  external  object  of  sense, 
we  shall  find  in  it  these  three  things.  Firsts  some  con- 
ception or  notion  of  the  object  perceived.  Secondly,^  a 
strong  and  irresistible  conviction  and  belief  of  its  pres- 
ent existence.  And,  thirdly^  that  this  conviction  and 
belief  are  immediate,^  and  not  the  effect  of  reasoning. 

Firsts  It  is  impossible  to  perceive  an  object  without 
having  some  notion  or  conception  of  that  which  we  per- 
ceive. We  may  indeed  conceive  an  object  which  we 
do  not  perceive  ; but  when  we  perceive  the  object,  we 
must  have  some  conception  of  it  at  the  same  time ; and 
we  have  commonly  a more  clear  and  steady  notion  of 
the  object  while  we  perceive  it,  than  we  have  from 
memory  or  imagination  when  it  is  not  perceived.  Yet, 
even  in  perception,  the  notion  which  our  senses  give  of 
the  object  may  be  more  or  less  clear,  more  or  less  dis- 
tinct, in  all  possible  degrees. 

Thus  we  see  more  distinctly  an  object  at  a small 
than  at  a great  distance.  An  object  at  a great  distance 
is  seen  more  distinctly  in  a clear  than  in  a foggy  day. 
An  object  seen  indistinctly  with  the  naked  eye,  on  ac- 
count of  its  smallness,  may  be  seen  distinctly  with  a 
microscope.  The  objects  in  this  room  will  be  seen  by 
a person  in  the  room  less  and  less  distinctly  as  the  light 


58 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


of  the  day  fails ; they  pass  through  all  the  various  de- 
grees of  distinctness  according  to  the  degrees  of  the 
light,  and  at  last,  in  total  darkness,  they  are  not  seen  at 
all.  What  has  been  said  of  the  objects  of  sight  is  so 
easily  applied  to  the  objects  of  the  other  senses,  that 
the  application  may  be  left  to  the  reader. 

In  a matter  so  obvious  to  every  person  capable  of 
reflection,  it  is  only  necessary  further  to  observe,  that 
the  notion  which  we  get  of  an  object  merely  by  our 
external  sense  ought  not  to  be  confounded  with  that 
more  scientific  notion  which  a man,  come  to  the  years 
of  understanding,  may  have  of  the, same  object,  by 
attending  to  its  various  attributes,  or  to  its  various 
parts,  and  their  relation  to  each  other  and  to  the  whole. 
Thus  the  notion  which  a child  has  of  a jack  for  roast- 
ing meat  will  be  acknowledged  to  be  very  different 
from  that  of  a man  who  understands  its  construction, 
and  perceives  the  relation  of  the  parts  to  one  another 
and  to  the  whole.  The  child  sees  the  jack,  and  every 
part  of  it,  as  well  as  the  man:  the  child,  therefore,  has 
all  the  notion  of  it  which  sight  gives;  whatever  there  is 
more  in  the  notion  which  the  man  forms  of  it  must  be 
derived  from  other  powers  of  the  mind,  which  may 
afterwards  be  explained.  This  observation  is  made 
here  only  that  we  may  not  confound  the  operations  of 
different  powers  of  the  mind,  which,  by  being  always 
conjoined  after  we  grow  up  to  understanding,  are  apt 
to  pass  for  one  and  the  same. 

Secondly^  In  perception  we  not  only  have  a notion 
more  or  less  distinct  of  the  object  perceived,  but  also  an 
irresistible  conviction  and  belief  of  its  existence.  This 
is  always  the  case  when  we  are  certain  that  we  per- 
ceive it.  There  may  be  a perception  so  faint  and  indis- 
tinct, as  to  leave  us  in  doubt  whether  we  perceive  the 
object  or  not.  Thus,  when  a star  begins  to  twinkle  as 
the  light  of  the  sun  withdraws,  one  may,  for  a short 
time,  think  he  sees  it,  without  being  certain,  until  the 
perception  acquires  some  strength  and  steadiness. 
When  a ship  just  begins  to  appear  on  the  utmost 
verge,  of  the  horizon,  we  may  at  first  be  dubious 


OF  PERCEPTION  PROPER. 


59 


whether  we  perceive  it  or  not ; but  when  the  percep- 
tion is  in  any  degree  clear  and  steady,  there  remains 
no  doubt  of  its  reality ; and  when  the  reality  of  the 
perception  is  ascertained,  the  existence  of  the  object 
perceived  can  no  longer  be  doubted. 

By  the  laws  of  all  nations,  in  the  most  solemn  ju- 
dicial trials,  wherein  men’s  fortunes  and  lives  are  at 
stake,  the  sentence  passes  according  to  the  testimony 
of  eye  or.  ear  witnesses  of  good  credit.  An  upright 
judge  will  give  a fair  hearing  to  every  objection  that 
can  be  made  to  the  integrity  of  a witness,  and  allow  it 
to  be  possible  that  he  may  be  corrupted ; but  no  judge 
will  ever  suppose  that  witnesses  may  be  imposed  upon 
by  trusting  to  their  eyes  and  ears : and  if  a skeptical 
counsel  should  plead  against  the  testimony  of  the  wit- 
nesses, that  they  had  no  other  evidence  for  what  they 
declared  than  the  testimony  of  their  eyes  and  ears,  and 
that  we  ought  not  to  put  so  much  faith  in  our  senses 
as  to  deprive  men  of  life  or  fortune  upon  their  testi- 
mony, surely  no  upright  judge  would  admit  a plea  of 
this  kind.  I believe  no  counsel,  however  skeptical,  ever 
dared  to  offer  such  an  argument ; and,  if  it  was  offered, 
it  would  be  rejected  with  disdain. 

Can  any  stronger  proof  be  given,  that  it  is  the  uni- 
versal judgment  of  mankind,  that  the^ evidence  of  sense 
is  a kind  of  evidence  w^hich  we  may  securely  rest  upon, 
in  the  most  momentous  concerns  of  mankind,  — that 
it  is  a kind  of  evidence  against  which  we  ought  not  to 
admit  any  reasoning,  and  therefore,  that  to  reason  either 
for  or  against  it  is  an  insult  to  common  sense  ? 

The  whole  conduct  of  mankind,  in  the  daily  occur- 
rences of  life,  as  well  as  the  solemn  procedure  of  judi- 
catories in  the  trial  of  causes  civil  and  criminal,  demon- 
strates this.  I know  of  only  two  exceptions  that  may 
be  offered  against  this  being  the  universal  belief  of 
mankind. 

The  first  exception  is  that  of  some  lunatics,  who 
have  been  persuaded  of  things  that  seem  to  contradict 
the  clear  testimony  of  their  senses.  It  is  said  there 
have  been  lunatics  and  hypochondriacal  persons,  who 


60 


•SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


seriously  believed  themselves  to  be  made  of  glass  ; and, 
in  consequence  of  this,  lived  in  continual  terror  of 
having  their  brittle  frame  shivered  to  pieces. 

All  I have  to  say  to  this  is,  that  our  minds,  in  our 
present  state,  are,  as  well  as  our  bodies,  liable  to 
strange  disorders ; and  as  we  do  not  judge  of  the  nat- 
ural constitution  of  the  body  from  the  disorders  or  dis- 
eases to  which  it  is  subject  from  accidents,  so  neither 
ought  we  to  judge  of  the  natural  powers  of. the  mind 
from  its  disorders,  but  from  its  sound  state.  It  is  nat- 
ural to  man,  and  common  to  the  species,  to  have  two 
hands  and  two  feet;  yet  I have  seen  a man,  and  a very 
ingenious  one,  who  was  born  without  either  hands  or 
feet.  It  is  natural  to  man  to  have  faculties  superior  to 
those  of  brutes ; yet  we  see  some  individuals,  whose 
faculties  are  not  equal  to  those  of  many  brutes ; and 
the  wisest  man  may,  by  various  accidents,  be  reduced 
to  this  state.  General  rules  that  regard  those  whose 
intellects  are  sound  are  not  overthrown  by  instances  of 
men  whose  intellects  are  hurt  by  any  constitutional  or 
accidental  disorder. 

The  other  exception  that  may  be  made  to  the  princi- 
ple we  have  laid  down  is  that  of  some  philosophers, 
who  have  maintained  that  the  testimony  of  sense  is 
fallacious,  and  therefore  ought  never  to  be  trusted. 
Perhaps  it  might  be  a sufficient  answer  to  this  to  say, 
that  there  is  no  absurdity,  however  great,  which  some 
philosophers  have  not  maintained.  It  is  one  thing  to 
profess  a doctrine  of  this  kind,  another  seriously  to  be- 
lieve it,  and  to  be  governed  by  it  in  the  conduct  of  life. 
It  is  evident,  that  a man  who  did  not  believe  his  senses 
could  not  keep  out  of  harm’s  way  an  hour  of  his  life ; 
yet,  in  all  the  history  of  philosophy,  we  never  read  of 
any  skeptic  that  ever  stepped  into  fire  or  water  because 
he  did  not  believe  his  senses,  or  that  showed,  in  the 
conduct  of  life,  less  trust  in  his  senses  than  other  men 
have.*  This  gives  us  just  ground  to  apprehend  that 

* All  this  we  read,  however,  in  Laertius,  of  Pyrrho ; and  on  the  author- 
ity of  Antigonus  Carystius,  the  great  skeptic’s  contemporary.  Whether 
we  are  to  believe  the  narrative  is  another  question.  — H. 


OF  PERCEPTION  PROPER. 


61 


philosophy  was  never  able  to  conquer  that  natural  be- 
lief which  men  have  in  their  senses ; and  that  all  their 
subtile  reasonings  against  this  belief  were  never  able  to 
persuade  themselves. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  clear  and  distinct  tes- 
timony of  our  senses  carries  irresistible  conviction  along 
with  it,  to  every  man  in  his  right  judgment. 

1 observed,  thirdly^  that  this  conviction  is  not  only 
irresistible,  but  it  is  immediate ; that  is,  it  is  not  by  a 
train  of  reasoning  and  argumentation  that  we  come  to 
be  convinced  of  the  existence  of  what  we  perceive.  We 
ask  no  argument  for  the  existence  of  the  object,  but 
that  we  perceive  it ; perception  commands  our  belief 
upon  its  own  authority,  and  disdains  to  rest  its  author- 
ity upon  any  reasoning  whatsoever. 

The  conviction  of  a truth  may  be  irresistible,  and 
yet  not  immediate.  Thus,  my  conviction  that  the 
three  angles  of  every  plane  triangle  are  equal  to  two 
right  angles,  is  irresistible,  but  it  is  not  immediate : I 
am  convinced  of  it  by  demonstrative  reasoning.  There 
are  other  truths  in  mathematics  of  which  we  have  not 
only  an  irresistible,  but  an  immediate  conviction.  Such 
are  the  axioms.  Our  belief  of  the  axioms  in  mathe- 
matics is  not  grounded  upon  argument,  — arguments 
are  grounded  upon  them ; but  their  evidence  is  dis- 
cerned immediately  by  the  human  understanding. 

It  is,  no  doubt,  one  thing  to  have  an  immediate  con- 
viction of  a self-evident  axiom ; it  is  another  thing  to 
have  an  immediate  conviction  of  the  existence  of  what 
we  see : but  the  conviction  is  equally  immediate  and 
equally  irresistible  in  both  cases.  No  man  thinks  of 
seeking  a reason  for  believing  what  he  sees ; and  before 
we  are  capable  of  reasoning,  we  put  no  less  confidence 
in  our  senses  than  after.  The  rudest  savage  is  as  fully 
convinced  of  what  he  sees,  and  hears,  and  feels,  as  the 
most  expert  logician.  The  constitution  of  our  under- 
standing determines  us  to  hold  the  truth  of  a mathe- 
matical axiom  as  a first  principle,  from  which  other 
truths  may  be  deduced,  but  it  is  deduced  from  none ; 
and  the  constitution  of  our  power  of  perception  deter- 


62 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


mines  us  to  hold  the  existence  of  what  we  distinctly 
perceive  as  a first  principle,  from  which  other  truths 
may  be  deduced,  but  it  is  deduced  from  none. 

What  has  been  said  of  the  irresistible  and  immediate 
belief  of  the  existence  of  objects  distinctly  perceived,  I 
mean  only  to  affirm  with  regard  to  persons  so  far  ad- 
vanced in  understanding  as  to  distinguish  objects  of 
mere  imagination  from  things  which  have  a real  exists 
ence.  Every  man  knows  that  he  may  have  a notion  of 
Don  Quixote  or  of  Gargantua,  without  any  belief  that 
such  persons  ever  existed ; and  that  of  Julius  Caesar 
and  of  Oliver  Cromwell  he  has  not  only  a notion, 
but  a belief  that  they  did  really  exist.  But  whether 
children,  from  the  time  that  they  begin  to  use  their 
senses,  make  a distinction  between  things  which  are 
only  conceived  or  imagined,  and  things  which  really 
exist,  may  be  doubted.  Until  we  are  able  to  make 
this  distinction,  we  cannot  properly  be  said  to  believe 
or  to  disbelieve  the  existence  of  any  thing.  The  belief 
of  the  existence  of  any  thing  seems  to  suppose  a notion 
of  existence;  a notion  too  abstract,  perhaps,  to  enter 
into  the  mind  of  an  infant.  I speak  of  the  power  of 
perception  in  those  that  are  adult,  and  of  a sound 
mind,  who  believe  that  there  are  some  things  which  do 
really  exist ; and  that  there  are  many  things  conceived 
by  themselves,  and  by  others,  which  have  no  existence. 
That  such  persons  do  invariably  ascribe  existence  to 
every  thing  which  they  distinctly  perceive,  without 
seeking  reasons  or  arguments  for  doing  so,  is  perfectly 
evident  from  the  whole  tenor  of  human  life. 

III.  How  we  are  able  to  perceive  by  Means  of  the 
Senses  is  beyond  our  Comprehension.]  The  account  I 
have  given  of  our  perception  of  extern??!  objects  is  in- 
tended as  a faithful  delineation  of  what  every  man, 
come  to  years  of  understanding,  and  capable  of  giving 
attention  to  what  passes  in  his  own  mind,  may  feel  in 
himself.  In  what  manner  the  notion  of  external  objects, 
and  the  immediate  belief  of  their  existence,  is  produced 
by  means  of  our  senses,  I am  not  able  to  show,  and  I 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. PLATO.  63 

do  not  pretend  to  show.  If  the  power  of  perceiving 
external  objects  in  certain  circumstances  be  a part  of 
the  original  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  all  at- 
tempts to  account  for  it  will  be  vain : no  other  account 
can  be  given  of  the  constitution  of  things,  but  the  will 
of  Him  that  made  them.  As  we  can  give  no  reason 
why  matter  is  extended  and  inert,  why  the  mind  thinks, 
and  is  conscious  of  its  thoughts,  but  the  will  of  Him 
who  made  both,  so,  I suspect,  we  can  give  no  other 
reason  why,  in  certain  circumstances,  we  perceive  ex- 
ternal objects,  and  in  others  do  not. 

The  Supreme  Being  intended  that  we  should  have 
such  knowledge  of  the  material  objects  that  surround 
us  as  is  necessary  in  order  to  our  supplying  the  wants 
of  nature,  and  avoiding  the  dangers  to  which  we  are 
constantly  exposed;  and  he  has  admirably  fitted  our 
powers  of  perception  to  this  purpose.  If  the  intelli- 
gence we  have  of  external  objects  were  to  be  got  by 
reasoning  only,  the  greatest  part  of  men  would  be  des- 
titute of  it ; for  the  greatest  part  of  men  hardly  ever 
learn  to  reason ; and  in  infancy  and  childhood  no  man 
can  reason:  therefore,  as  this  intelligence  of  the  objects 
that  surround  us,  and  from  which  we  may  receive  so 
much  benefit  or  harm,  is  equally  necessary  to  children 
and  to  men,  to  the  ignorant  and  to  the  learned,  God  in 
his  wisdom  conveys  it  to  us  in  a way  that  puts  all 
upon  a level.  The  information  of  the  senses  is  as  per- 
fect, and  gives  as  full  conviction,  to  the  most  ignorant 
as  to  the  most  learned. 


CHAPTER  V. 


THEOKIES  OF  PERCEPTION. 


I.  Platons  Theory,]  An  object  placed  at  a proper 
distance,  and  in  a good  light,  while  the  eyes  are  shut, 
is  not  perceived  at  all ; but  no  sooner  do  we  open  our 


64 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


eyes  upon  it,  than  we  have,  as  it  were  by  inspiration,  a 
certain  knowledge  of  its  existence,  of  its  color,  figure, 
and  distance.  This  is  a fact  which  every  one  knows. 
The  vulgar  are  satisfied  with  knowing  the  fact,  and 
give  themselves  no  trouble  about  the  cause  of  it ; but  a 
philosopher  is  impatient  to  know  how  this  event  is  pro- 
duced, to  account  for  it,  or  assign  its  cause. 

This  avidity  to  know  the  causes  of  things  is  the  par- 
ent of  all  philosophy,  true  and  false.  Men  of  specu- 
lation place  a great  part  of  their  happiness  in  such 
knowledge.  Felix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas^ 
has  always  been  a sentiment  of  human  nature. 

Many  philosophers,  ancient  and  modern,  have  em- 
ployed their  invention  to  discover  how  we  are  made  to 
perceive  external  objects  by  our  senses : and  there  ap- 
pears to  be  a very  great  uniformity  in  their  sentiments 
in  the  main,  notwithstanding  their  variations  in  partic- 
ular points.* 

Plato  illustrates  our  manner  of  perceiving  the  objects 
of  sense  in  this  manner.  He  supposes  a dark  subter- 
raneous cave,  in  which  men  lie  bound  in  such  a manner 
that  they  can  direct  their  eyes  only  to  one  part  of  the 
cave:  far  behind,  there  is  a light,  some  rays  of  which 
come  over  a wall  to  that  part  of  the  cave  which  is  be- 
fore the  eyes  of  our  prisoners.  A number  of  persons, 
variously  employed,  pass  between  them  and  the  light, 
whose  shadows  are  seen  by  the  prisoners,  but  not  the 
persons  themselves. 

In  this  manner  that  philosopher  conceived  that,  by 
our  senses,  we  perceive  the  shadows  of  things  only, 
and  not  things  themselves.  He  seems  to  have  bor- 
rowed his  notions  on  this  subject  from  the  Pythagore- 

* It  is  not  easy  to  conceive  by  what  principle  the  order  of  the  history  of 
opinions  touching  perception,  as  given  by  Reid,  is  determined.  It  is  not 
chronological,  and  it  is  not  systematic.  Of  these  theories,  there  is  a very 
able  survey,  by  M.  Royer-Collard,  among  the  fragments  of  his  lectures  in 
the  third  volume  of  Jouffroy’s  (Euvres  de  Reid.  That  distinguished  phi- 
losopher has,  however,  placed  too  great  a reliance  upon  the  accuracy  of 
Reid.  — H. 

Reid’s  historico-critical  account  of  the  theories  of  perception  is  materi- 
ally abridged  in  this  edition,  and  the  order  in  one  or  two  cases  is  changed, 
for  the  reason  intimated  above. — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. PLATO.  65 

ans,  and  they  very  probably  froms.  Pythagoras  himself. 
If  we  make  allowance  for  Plato’s  allegorical  genius,  his 
sentiments  on  this  subject  correspond  very  well  with 
those  of  his  scholar  Aristotle,  and  of  the  Peripatetics. 
The  shadows  of  Plato  may  very  well  represent  the  spe- 
cies and  phantasms  of  the  Peripatetic  school,  and  the 
ideas  and  impressions  of  modern  philosophers.* 


* This  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  Plato’s  comparison  of  the  cave 
exhibits  a curious  mistake,  in  which  Reid  is  followed  by  Mr.  Stewart  and 
many  others,  and  which,  it  is  remarkable,  has  never  yet  been  detected.  In 
the  similitude  in  question  (which  will  be  found  in  the  seventh  book  of  the 
Republic),  Plato  is  supposed  to  intend  an  illustration  of  the  mode  in  which 
the  shadows  or  vicarious  images  of  external  things  are  admitted  into  the 
mind,  — to  typify,  in  short,  an  hypothesis  of  sensitive  perception.  On  this 
supposition,  the  identity  of  the  Platonic,  Pythagorean,  and  Peripatetic  the- 
ories of  this  process  is  inferred.  Nothing  can,  however,  be  more  ground- 
less than  the  supposition  ; nothing  more  erroneous  than  the  inference.  By 
his  cave^  images^  and  shadows^  Plato  meant  simply  to  illustrate  the  grand 
principle  of  his  philosophy,  that  the  sensible  or  ectypal  world  (phenomenal, 
transitory,  yiyvopevov,  ov  Ka\  fig  ov)  stands  to  the  noetic  or  archetypal  (sub- 
stantial, permanent,  ovrws  ov)  in  the  same  relation  of  comparative  unreal- 
ity in  which  the  shadows  of  the  images  of  sensible  existences  themselves 
stand  to  the  things  of  which  they  are  the  dim  and  distinct  adumbrations. 
And  as  the  comparison  is  misunderstood,  so  nothing  can  be  conceived 
more  adverse  to  the  doctrine  of  Plato  than  the  theory  it  is  supposed  to  elu- 
cidate. It  is  here  sufficient  to  state,  that  the  ctStoXa,  the  Xdyot  yvcoo-rtKOL, 
the  forms  representative  of  external  things,  and  corresponding  to  the  spe- 
cies sensiles  expresses  of  the  schoolmen,  were  not  held  by  the  Platonists  to  be 
derived  from  without.  Prior  to  the  act  of  perception,  they  have  a latent  but 
real  existence  in  the  soul ; and,  by  the  impassive  energy  of  the  mind  itself, 
are  elicited  into  consciousness,  on  occasion  of  the  impression  (KLvgo-Ls, 
Trddos,  €p(pao-Ls)  made  on  the  external  organ,  and  of  the  vital  form  (Ccotl- 
Kov  eidos),  in  consequence  thereof,  sublimated  in  the  animal  life. 

I cannot  now  do  more  than  indicate  the  contrast  of  this  doctrine  to  the 
Peripatetic  (I  do  not  say,  Aristotelian)  theory,  and  its  approximation  to  the 
Cartesian  and  Leibnitzian  hypotheses  ; which,  however,  both  attempt  to  ex- 
plain what  the  Platonic  did  not,  — how  the  mind  {ex  hypothesis  above  all 
physical  influence)  is  detennined,  on  the  presence  of  the  unknown  reality 
within  the  sphere  of  sense^  to  call  into  consciousness  the  representation 
through  which  that  reality  is  made  known  to  us.  I may  add,  that  not 
merely  the  Platonists,  hut  some  of  the  older  Peripatetics,  held  that  the  soul 
virtually  contained  within  itself  representative  forms,  which  were  only  ex- 
cited by  the  external  reality;  as  Theophrastus  and  Themistius,  to  say 
nothing  of  the  Platonizing  Porphyry,  Simplicius,  and  Ammonius  Hermiae; 
and  the  same  opinion,  adopted  probably  from  the  latter  by  his  pupil,  the 
‘Arabian  Adelandus,  subsequently  became  even  the  common  doctrine  of 
the  Moorish  Aristotelians. 

I shall  afterwards  have  occasion  to  notice  that  Bacon  has  also  wrested 
Plato’s  similitude  of  the  cave  from  its  genuine  signification.  — H. 

On  the  subject  of  Plato’s  doctrines  generally,  and  especially  in  respect  to 


66 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Two  thousand  years  after  Plato,  Mr.  Locke,  who 
studied  the  operations  of  the  human  mind  so  much, 
and  with  so  great  success,  represents  our  manner  of 
perceiving  external  objects  by  a similitude  very  much 
resembling  that  of  the  cave.  “ Methinks,’’  says  he, 

“ the  understanding  is  not  much  unlike  a closet  wholly 
shut  from  light,  with  only  some  little  opening  left  to 
let  in  external  visible  resemblances  or  ideas  of  things 
without.  Would  the  pictures  coming  into  such  a dark 
room  but  stay  there,  and  lie  so  orderly  as  to  be  found 
upon  occasion,  it  would  very  much  resemble  the  under- 
standing of  a man,  in  reference  to  all  objects  of  sight, 
and  the  ideas  of  them.’’ 

Plato’s  subterranean  cave,  and  Mr.  Locke’s  dark 
closet,  may  be  applied  with  ease  to  all  the  systems  of 
perception  that  have  been  invented : for  they  all  sup- 
pose that  we  perceive  not  external  objects  immediately, 
and  that  the  immediate  objects  of  perception  are  only 
certain  shadows  of  the  external  objects.  Those  shad- 
ows or  images,  which  we  immediately  perceive,  were 
by  the  ancients  called  species^  forms^  phantasms.  Since 
the  time  of  Descartes,  they  have  commonly  been  called 
ideas^  and  by  Mr.  Hume  impressions.  But  all  philoso- 
phers, from  Plato  to  Mr.  Hume,  agree  in  this,  that  we 
do  not  perceive  external  objects  immediately^  and  that 
the  immediate  object  of  perception  must  be  some  image 
present  to  the  mind.  So  far,  there  appears  a unanimity 
rarely  to  be  found  among  philosophers  on  such  ab- 
struse points. 

H.  Theory  of  Aristotle  and  the  Peripatetics.]  Aris- 
totle taught,  that  all  the  objects  of  our  thought  enter  at 
first  by  the  senses ; and,  since  the  sense  cannot  receive 
external  material  objects  themselves,  it  receives  their 
species  ; that  is,  their  images  or  form,^  without  the  mat- 
ter, as  wax  receives  the  form  of  the  seal,  without  any 
of  the  matter  of  it.  These  images  or  forms,  impressed# 


sensible  perception,  and  the  similitude  of  the  cave,  compare  Van  Heusde, 
Initia  Philosophice  Platonicm.  — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. PERIPATETICS.  67 

upon  the  senses,  are  called  sensible  species^  and  are  the 
objects  only  of  the  sensitive  part  of  the  mind.  But,  by 
various  internal  powers,  they  are  retained,  refined,  and 
spiritualized,  so  as  to  become  objects  of  memory  and 
imagination^  and,  at  last,  of  pure  intellection.  When 
they  are  objects  of  memory  and  of  imagination,  they 
get  the  name  of  phantasms.  When,  by  further  refine- 
ment, and  bein^  stripped  of  their  particularities,  they 
become  objects  of  science^  they  are  called  intelligible 
species.  So  that  every  immediate  object,  whether  of 
sense,  of  memory,  of  imagination,  or  of  reasoning,  must 
be  some  phantasm  or  species  in  the  mind  itself.* 


* This  is  a tolerable  account  of  the  doctrine  vulgarly  attributed  to  Aris- 
totle. — H. 

It  is  a common  error  to  refer  to  Aristotle  himself  the  refinements  and 
subtilties  introduced  into  his  system  by  his  followers.  For  a full  and  au- 
thentic view  of  the  psychology  of  Aristotle,  see  the  French  translations  of 
De  Anima  and  of  Parva  Naturalia^  with  copious  prefaces  and  notes,  by  J. 
Barthelemy  Saint-Hilaire.  The  translator  gives  the  following  summary 
of  Aristotle’s  doctrine  respecting  sensation  and  perception : — 

“Aristotle  considers  each  of  the  senses,  in  the  following  order,  — sight, 
hearing,  smell,  taste,  and  touch.  Omitting  all  details,  we  shall  limit  our- 
selves here  to  giving  a general  idea  of  his  theory  of  sensibility. 

“ Sensibility,  according  to  Aristotle,  is  a simple  power, — a faculty  which 
can  always  act,  though  it  does  not  always  act.  Sensation  is  not,  there- 
fore, merely  an  alteration,  as  many  have  said : it  is  an  act  which  completes 
the  being  who  experiences  it  5 in  a particular  act  of  sensation,  he  develops 
a faculty  that  is  in  him,  he  realizes  what  he  can  do.  Thus,  in  sensation,  a 
being  does  not  suffer ; he  acts.  Moreover,  as  in  sensation  there  is  always 
and  necessarily  an  object  felt,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  sensible  being 
is  in  power  very  nearly  as  in  reality  the  being  felt.  Before  feeling,  it  is 
unlike  the  being  which  it  feels  ; after  having  felt,  it  is,  in  some  sense,  like 
it.  Sensibility  is,  therefore,  that  which  receives  the  form  of  sensible  objects, 
but  not  the  matter  ; like  wax  which  receives  the  impression  of  the  ring,  but 
not  the  iron  or  gold  of  which  the  ring  is  made.  The  sensibility  does  not 
become,  strictly  speaking,  each  of  the  objects  which  act  upon  it ; but  it  be- 
comes something  analogous ; and  this  something  can  be  comprehended  by 
the  reason  alone;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  not  a material  phenomenon.  The 
object  is  not  truly  sensible  as  long  as  it  is  not  felt ; sensibility,  on  its  side, 
is  a mere  power  as  long  as  it  feels  not.  The  act  of  the  object  felt  and  the 
act  of  the  sensibility  are  therefore  blended  together,  and  indissoluble. 
Hence  a certain  relation,  a kind  of  harmony,  is  necessary  between  the  sense 
and  the  object.  A sensation,  if  too  violent,  is  not  perceived.  Sensibility 
is,  to  speak  properly,  a mean ; on  this  side  or  beyond  a certain  point,  it  no 
longer  acts. 

“ But  man  has  not  only  the  faculty  of  feeling ; he  also  has  the  faculty  of 
feeling  that  he  feels.  He  feels  that  he  sees;  he  feels  that  he  hears.  Is  it 
by  the  sight  that  he  feels  that  he  sees,  or  is  it  by  some  other  sense?  It  is 
by  the  sight;  or,  to  speak  more  correctly,  the  perceptions  of  sight,  like 


68 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Aristotle  seems  to  have  thought  that  the  soul  con- 
sists of  two  parts,  or,  rather,  that  we  have  two  souls, 
the  animal  and  the  rational ; or,  as  he  calls  them,  the 
soul  and  the  intellect*  To  the  first  belong  the  senses, 


those  of  all  the  other  senses,  meet  in  a centre,  in  a single  point,  which 
serves  as  a common  limit  to  them  all,  and  which  compares  and  measures 
them  in  an  instant  indivisible  as  is  this  point  itself,  indivisible  as  is  the 
principle  which  perceives  and  feels. 

“ Such  is  Aristotle’s  theory  of  sensibility.  Not  the  least  trace  is  found 
there,  as  all  will  see,  of  those  sensible  species^  of  those  images^  of  those  repre- 
sentative images^  as  Reid  calls  them,  without  which,  it  has  often  been  re- 
peated, Aristotle  could  not  explain  perception.  I do  not  deny  that  before 
him  some  philosophers,  Democritus  and  others,  had  supposed  the  inter- 
vention of  images  proceeding  from  objects  to  the  mind,  by  means  of  which 
the  mind  is  enabled  to  comprehend  the  objects.  Neither  do  I deny  that, 
after  Aristotle,  his  commentators,  and  the  schoolmen  especially,  have  at- 
tributed to  him,  in  trying  to  comprehend  him,  the  views  which  Reid  has 
attacked  and  overthrown.  But  I think  myself  authorized  to  affirm  that 
these  views  were  never  held  by  Aristotle  himself.  He  employed  a meta- 
phor to  explain  perception,  and  the  use  of  metaphor  (which  he  had  for- 
mally proscribed  and  disowned  in  philosophy)  has  been  unlucky  in  this 
case,  as  it  has  caused  his  real  thought  to  be  misunderstood.  But  he  went 
no  farther.  As  a perfectly  faithful  observer,  he  has  stated  the  facts ; he 
has  invented  nothing.  Before  the  great  mystery  of  perception  he  paused, 
with  a prudence  not  exceeded  by  that  of  the  Scotch  school.  Reid  contents 
himself,  after  having  refuted  all  previous  theories,  with  protesting  against 
them  without  pretending  to  substitute  another  more  complete  in  their 
place,  declaring  that  perception,  with  all  its  ascertained  characteristics,  is  a 
fact  irreducible  to  any  other.  With  less  profoundness  and  delicacy  of 
analysis,  Aristotle  has  said  precisely  the  same  thing:  — ‘We  experience  in 
sensation  a modification  which  reason  alone  can  apprehend.’  Aristotle, 
it  is  true,  has  gone  farther  than  Reid,  by  adding,  that,  in  perception,  tlie 
being  which  perceives  becomes  in  some  manner  conformed  to  the  being 
perceived.  This  remark  is  perhaps  more  ingenious  than  solid ; but  it  is 
not  the  fault  of  Aristotle,  if  afterwards  consequences  were  drawn  from  his 
theories  which  he  never  attributed  to  them,  and  which  even  contradict 
them.  He  no  more  held  the  doctrine  of  idea-images,  of  representative  ideas, 
than  he  admitted  that  confusion  of  sensation  and  thought  which  has  so  often 
been  ascribed  to  him,  and  which  he  refutes  again  and  again  in  his  treatise 
On  the  Soul.  Reid  has  certainly  rendered  a real  service  to  science  by  dis- 
embarrassing it  of  an  hypothesis  the  source  of  so  many  errors,  and  enter- 
tained by  some  of  the  greatest  thinkers,  — by  Descartes  among  the  rest. 
But  this  is  an  error  into  which  Aristotle  never  fell ; his  theories  do  not 
contain  it:  error  maybe  there,  but  not  that  of  which  he  is  accused  by 
Reid.”  Traitt  de  VAme,  Preface,  p.  xxii.  The  same  topics  are  treated 
more  fully  in  the  editor’s  Plan  GOiO'ol  dii  Traite  de  VArne,  p.  3.5,  et  seq.; 
and  in  the  treatise  itself,  Liv.  II.  Chap.  V.-XII.,  and  Liv.  III.  Chap.  I., 
II.— Ed. 

* This  is  not  con'ect.  Instead  of  two,  the  animal  and  rational,  Aristotle 
gave  to  the  soul  three  generic  functions,  tlie  vegetable,  the  animal  or  sensual, 
and  the  rational;  but  whether  he  suj»poses  these  to  constitute  three  coiicen- 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. PERIPATETICS.  69 


memory,  and  imagination;  to  the  last,  judgment,  opin- 
ion, belief,  and  reasoning.  The  first  we  have  in  com- 
mon with  brute  animals ; the  last  is  peculiar  to  man. 
The  animal  soul  he  held  to  be  a certain  form  of  the 
body,  which  is  inseparable  from  it,  and  perishes  at 
death.  To  this  soul  the  senses  belong : and  he  defines 
a sense  to  be  that  which  is  capable  of  receiving  the 
sensible  forms ^ or  species  of  objects,  without  any  of  the 
matter  of  them,  as  wax  receives  the  form  of  the  seal 
without  any  of  the  matter  of  it.  The  forms  of  sound, 
of  color,  of  taste,  and  of  other  sensible  qualities,  are  in 
like  manner  received  by  the  senses. 

It  seems  to  be  a necessary  consequence  of  Aristotle’s 
doctrine,  that  bodies  are  constantly  sending  forth,  in  all 
directions,  as  many  different  kinds  of  forms  without 
matter  as  they  have  different  sensible  qualities ; for  the 
forms  of  color  must  enter  by  the  eye,  the  forms  of 
sound  by  the  ear,  and  so  of  the  other  senses.  This 
accordingly  was  maintained  by  the  followers  of  Aris- 
totle, though  not,  as  far  as  I know,  expressly  mentioned 
by  himself.  They  disputed  concerning  the  nature  of 
those  forms,  or  species,  whether  they  were  real  beings 
or  nonentities ; and  some  held  them  to  be  of  an  inter- 
mediate nature  between  the  two.* *  The  whole  doctrine 
of  the  Peripatetics  and  schoolmen  concerning  forms, 
substantial  and  accidental,  and  concerning  the  trans- 
mission of  sensible  species  from  objects  of  sense  to  the 
mind,  if  it  be  at  all  intelligible,  is  so  far  above  my  com- 


tric  potences,  three  separate  parts,  or  three  distinct  souls,  has  divided  his 
disciples.  He  also  defines  the  soul  in  general^  and  not,  as  Reid  supposes, 
the  mere  “ animal  soul,”  to  be  the  form  or  evTeXexeia  of  the  body.  (De 
Anima,  Lib.  II.  cap.  2.)  Intellect  (vovs)  he,  however,  thought  was  inor- 
ganic 5 but  there  is  some  ground  for  believing  that  he  did  not  view  this  as 
personal,  but  harboured  an  opinion  \^hich,  under  various  modifications, 
many  of  his  followers  also  held,  that  the  active  intellect  was  common  to  all 
men,  immortal  and  divine.  — H. 

* The  question  in  the  schools,  among  those  who  admitted  species,  was 
not  whether  species,  in  general^  were  real  beings  or  nonentities^  (which  would 
have  been,  did  they  exist  or  not),  but  whether  sensible  species  were  mate- 
rial^ immaterial^  or  of  a nature  between  body  and  spirit,  — a problem,  it 
must  be  allowed,  sufficiently  futile,  but  not,  like  the  other,  self-contradic- 
tory. — H. 


70 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


prehension,  that  I should  perhaps  do  it  injustice  by 
entering  into  it  more  minutely.  Malebranche,  in  his 
Recherche  de  la  VeriU^  has  employed  a chapter  to  show 
that  material  objects  do  not  send  forth  sensible  species 
of  their  several  sensible  qualities. 

III.  Descarteses  Theory,]  The  great  revolution  which 
Descartes  produced  in  philosophy  was  the  effect  of  a 
superiority  of  genius,  aided  by  the  circumstances  of 
the  times.*  Men  had,  for  more  than  a thousand  years, 
looked  up  to  Aristotle  as  an  oracle  in  philosophy.  His 
authority  was  the  test  of  truth.  The  small  remains  of 
the  Platonic  system  were  confined  to  a few  mystics, 
whose  principles  and  manner  of  life  drew  little  atten- 
tion. The  feeble  attempts  of  Ramus,  and  of  some 
others,  to  make  improvements  in  the  system,  had  little 
effect.  The  Peripatetic  doctrines  were  so  interwoven 
with  the  whole  system  of  scholastic  theology,  that  to 
dissent  from  Aristotle  was  to  alarm  the  Church.  The 
most  useful  and  intelligible  parts,  even  of  Aristotle’s 
writings,  were  neglected,  and  philosophy  was  become 
an  art  of  speaking  learnedly,  and  disputing  subtilely, 
without  producing  any  invention  of  use  in  human  life. 
It  was  fruitful  of  words,  but  barren  of  works,  and 
admirably  contrived  for  drawing  a veil  over  human 
ignorance,  and  putting  a stop  to  the  progress  of  knowl- 
edge, by  filling  men  with  a conceit  that  they  knew 
every  thing.  It  was  very  fruitful,  also,  in  controversies ; 
but  for  the  most  part  they  were  controversies  about 
words,  or  about  things  of  no  moment,  or  things  above 
the  reach  of  the  human  faculties : and  the  issue  of 
them  was  what  might  be  expected,  that  the  contend- 
ing parties  fought,  without  gaining  or  losing  an  inch 
of  ground,  till  they  were  weary  of  the  dispute,  or  their 
attention  was  called  off  to  some  other  subject.f 


* Kene  Descartes  was  born  at  La  Haye,  in  Tonraine,  March  31, 1596. 
Much  of  his  life  was  passed  in  Holland.  He  died,  February  14,  1650,  at 
Stockholm,  whither  he  had  repaired  at  the  invitation  of  Christina,  queen 
of  Sweden.  — Ed. 

t This  is  the  vulgar  opinion  in  regard  to  the  scholastic  philosophy.  The 
few  are,  however,  now  aw'are  that  the  human  mind,  though  partially,  was 
never  more  powerfully  developed  than  during  the  Middle  Ages  — PI. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. DESCARTES. 


71 


Such  was  the  philosophy  of  the  schools  of  Europe, 
during  many  ages  of  darkness  and  barbarism  that  suc- 
ceeded the  decline  of  the  Roman  empire  ; so  that  there 
was  great  need  of  a reformation  in  philosophy  as  well 
as  in  religion.  The  light  began  to  dawn  at  last;  a 
spirit  of  inquiry  sprang  up,  and  men  got  the  courage 
to  doubt  of  the  dogmas  of  Aristotle,  as  well  as  of  the 
decrees  of  popes.  The  most  important  step  in  the 
reformation  of  religion  was  to  destroy  the  claim  of  in- 
fallibility, which  hindered  men  from  using  their  judg- 
ment in  matters  of  religion  : and  the  most  important 
step  in  the  reformation  of  philosophy  was  to  destroy 
the  authority  of  which  Aristotle  had  so  long  had  peace- 
able possession.  The  last  had  been  attempted  by  Lord 
Bacon  and  others,  with  no  less  zeal  than  the  first  by 
Luther  and  Calvin. 

Descartes  knew  well  the  defects  of  the  prevailing 
system,  which  had  begun  to  lose  its  authority.  His 
genius  enabled  him,  and  his  spirit  prompted  him,  to  at- 
tempt a new  one.  He  had  applied  himself  much  to  the 
mathematical  sciences,  and  had  made  considerable  im- 
provement in  them.  He  wished  to  introduce  that  per- 
spicuity and  evidence  into  other  branches  of  philosophy 
which  he  found  in  them.  Being  sensible  how  apt  we 
are  to  be  led  astray  by  prejudices  of  education,  he 
thought  the  only  way  to  avoid  error  was,  to  resolve  to 
doubt  of  every  things  — to  hold  every  thing  to  be  uncer- 
tain, even  those  things  which  he  had  been  taught  to 
hold  as  most  certain,  until  he  had  such  clear  and  cogent 
evidence  as  compelled  his  assent. 

In  this  state  of  universal  doubt,  that  which  first  ap- 
peared to  him  to  be  clear  and  certain  was  his  own 
existence.  Of  this  he  was  certain,  because  he  was 
conscious  that  he  thought,  that  he  reasoned,  and  that 
he  doubted.  He  used  this  argument,  therefore,  to  prove 
his  own  existence,  — Cogito^  ergo  sum.  This  he  con- 
ceived to  be  the  first  of  all  truths,  the  foundation-stone 
upon  which  the  whole  fabric  of  human  knowledge  is 
built,  and  on  which  it  must  rest.  And  as  Archimedes 
thought  that,  if  he  had  one  fixed  point  to  rest  his 


72 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


engines  upon,  he  could  move  the  earth  ; so  Descartes, 
charmed  with  the  discovery  of  one  certain  principle,  by 
which  he  emerged  from  the  state  of  universal  doubt, 
believed  that  this  principle  alone  would  be  a sufficient 
foundation  on  which  he  might  build  the  whole  system 
of  science.  He  seems,  therefore,  to  have  taken  no  great 
trouble  to  examine  whether  there  might  not  be  other 
first  principles,  which,  on  account  of  their  own  light 
and  evidence,  ought  to  be  admitted  by  every  man  of 
sound  judgment.  The  love  of  simplicity,  so  natural 
to  the  mind  of  man,  led  him  to  apply  the  whole  force 
of  his  mind  to  raise  the  fabric  of  knowledge  upon 
this  one  principle,  rather  than  seek  a broader  foun- 
dation. 

Accordingly,  he  does  not  admit  the  evidence  of  sense 
to  be  a first  principle,  as  he  does  that  of  consciousness. 
The  arguments  of  the  ancient  skeptics  here  occurred 
to  him ; — that  our  senses  often  deceive  us,  and  therefore 
ought  never  to  be  trusted  on  their  own  authority;  that, 
in  sleep,  we  often  seem  to  see  and  hear  things  which 
we  are  convinced  to  have  had  no  existence.  But  that 
which  chiefly  led  Descartes  to  think  that  he  ought  not 
to  trust  to  his  senses,  without  proof  of  their  veracity, 
was,  that  he  took  it  for  granted,  as  all  philosophers  had 
done  before  him,  that  he  did  not  perceive  external  ob- 
jects themselves,  but  certain  images  of  them  in  his  own 
mind,  called  ideas.  He  was  certain,  by  consciousness, 
that  he  had  the  ideas  of  sun  and  moon,  earth  and  sea ; 
but  how  could  he  be  assured  that  there  really  existed 
external  objects  like  to  these  ideas  ? 

Hitherto  he  was  uncertain  of  every  thing  but  of  his 
own  existence,  and  the  existence  of  the  operations  and 
ideas  of  his  own  mind.  Some  of  his  disciples,  it  is 
said,  remained  at  this  stage  of  his  system,  and  got  the 
name  of  Egoists.*  They  could  not  find  evidence  in  the 
subsequent  stages  of  his  progress.  But  Descartes  re- 
solved not  to  stop  here ; he  endeavoured  to  prove,  by  a 


* Sir  W.  Hamilton  can  find  no  satisfactory  evidence  of  the  existence  of 
this  sect.  — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. DESCARTES.  73 

new  argument,  drawn  from  his  idea  of  a Deity,  the  ex- 
istence of  an  infinitely  perfect  Being,  who  made  him 
and  all  his  faculties.  From  the  perfection  of  this 
Being,  he  inferred  that  he  could  be  no  deceiver ; and 
therefore  concluded,  that  his  senses,  and  the  other  facul- 
ties he  found  in  himself,  are  not  fallacious,  but  may  be 
trusted,  when  a proper  use  is  made  of  them. 

The  merit  of  Descartes  cannot  be  easily  conceived 
by  those  who  have  not  some  notion  of  the  Peripatetic 
system  in  which  he  was  educated.  To  throw  off  the 
prejudices  of  education,  and  to  create  a system  of 
nature  totally  different  from  that  which  had  subdued 
the  understanding  of  mankind,  and  kept  it  in  subjec- 
tion for  so  many  centuries,  required  an  uncommon  force 
of  mind. 

In  the  world  of  Descartes  we  meet  with  two  kinds 
of  beings  only,  — to  wit,  body  and  mind;  the  firsts  the 
object  of  our  senses,  the  other,  of  consciousness;  both 
of  them  things  of  which  we  have  a distinct  apprehen- 
sion, if  the  human  mind  be  capable  of  distinct  appre- 
hension at  all.  To  the  first,  no  qualities  are  ascribed 
but  extension,  figure,  and  motion ; to  the  last,  nothing 
but  thought,  and  its  various  modifications,  of  which 
we  are  conscious.*  He  could  observe  no  common  attri- 
bute, no  resembling  feature,  in  the  attributes  of  body 
and  mind,  and  therefore  concluded  them  to  be  distinct 
substances,  and  totally  of  a different  nature ; and  that 
body,  from  its  very  nature,  is  inanimate  and  inert,  in- 
capable of  any  kind  of  thought  or  sensation,  or  of  pro- 
ducing any  change  or  alteration  in  itself. 

Descartes  must  be  allowed  the  honor  of  being  the 
first  ivho  drew  a distinct  line  betiveen  the  matericd.  and 
intellectual  worlds  which,  in  all  the  old  systems,  were  so 
blended  together,  that  it  was  impossible  to  say  where 
the  one  ends  and  the  other  begins.f  How  much  this 
distinction  has  contributed  to  the  improvements  of 


* In  the  Cartesian  language,  the  term  thought  included  all  of  which  we 
are  conscious.  — H. 

t This  assertion  is  true  in  general;  hut  some  individual  exceptions 
might  be  taken.  — H. 


7 


74 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


modern  times,  in  the  philosophy  both  of  body  and  of 
mind,  it  is  not  easy  to  say. 

One  obvious  consequence  of  this  distinction  was, 
that  accurate  reflection  on  the  operations  of  our  own 
mind  is  the  only  ivay  to  make  any  progress  in  the  knowl- 
edge of  it  Malebranche,  Locke,  Berkeley,  and  Hume 
were  taught  this  lesson  by  Descartes ; and  to  it  we  owe 
their  most  valuable  discoveries  in  this  branch  of  philos- 
ophy. The  analogical  way  of  reasoning  concerning 
the  powers  of  the  mind  from  the  properties  of  body, 
which  is  the  source  of  almost  all  the  errors  on  this  sub- 
ject, and  which  is  so  natural  to  the  bulk  of  mankind, 
was  as  contrary  to  the  principles  of  Descartes  as  it  was 
agi-eeable  to  the  principles  of  the  old  philosophy.  We 
may,  therefore,  truly  say,  that,  in  that  part  of  philosophy 
which  relates  to  the  mind,  Descartes  laid  the  founda- 
tion, and  put  us  into  that  track  which  all  wise  men 
now  acknowledge  to  be  the  only  one  in  which  we  can 
expect  success. 

To  return  to  Descartes’s  notions  of  the  manner  of 
our  perceiving  external  objects,  from  which  a concern 
to  do  justice  to  the  merits  of  that  great  reformer  in 
philosophy  has  led  me  to  digress,  — he  took  it  for 
granted,  as  the  old  philosophers  had  done,  that  what 
we  immediately  perceive  must  be  either  in  the  mind 
itself,  or  in  the  brain,  to  which  the  mind  is  immediately 
present.  The  impressions  made  upon  our  organs, 
nerves,  and  brain  could  be  nothing,  according  to  his 
philosophy,  but  various  modifications  of  extension, 
figure,  and  motion.  There  could  be  nothing  in  the 
brain  like  sound  or  color,  taste  or  smell,  heat  or  cold ; 
these  are  sensations  in  the  mind,  which,  by  the  laws  of 
the  union  of  soul  and  body,  are  raised  on  occasion  of 
certain  traces  in  the  brain ; and  although  he  gives  the 
name  of  ideas  to  those  traces  in  the  brain,  he  does  not 
think  it  necessary  that  they  should  be  perfectly  like  to 
the  things  which  they  represent,  any  more  than  that 
words  or  signs  should  resemble  the  things  they  signify. 
But,  says  he,  that  we  may  follow  the  received  opinion 
as  far  as  is  possible,  we  may  allow  a slight  resemblance. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. DESCARTES.  75 

Thus  we  know  that  a print  in  a book  may  represent 
houses,  temples,  and  groves ; and  so  far  is  it  from  being 
necessary  that  the  print  should  be  perfectly  like  the 
thing  it  represents,  that  its  perfection  often  requires  the 
contrary.  For  a circle  must  often  be  represented  by  an 
ellipse,  a square  by  a rhombus,  and  so  of  other  things.* 

It  is  to  be  observed,  that  Descartes  rejected  a part 
only  of  the  ancient  theory,  concerning  the  perception  of 
external  objects  by  the  senses,  and  that  he  adopted  the 
other  part.  That  theory  may  be  divided  into  two  parts  : 
the  first,  that  images,  species,  or  forms  of  external  ob- 
jects come  from  the  object,  and  enter  by  the  avenues  of 
the  senses  to  the  mind ; the  second  part  is,  that  the  ex- 
ternal object  itself  is  not  perceived,  but  only  the  species 
or  image  of  it  in  the  mind.  The  first  part  Descartes 
and  his  followers  rejected,  and  refuted  by  solid  argu- 
ments ; but  the  second  part,  neither  he  nor  his  follow- 
ers have  thought  of  calling  in  question,  being  per- 
suaded that  it  is  only  a representative  image,  in  the 
mind,  of  the  external  object  that  we  perceive,  and  not 
the  object  itself.  And  this  image,  which  the  Peripa- 
tetics called  a species^  he  calls  an  idea^  changing  the 
name  only,  while  he  admits  the  thing. 

It  seems  strange,  that  the  great  pains  which  the  phi- 
losopher took  to  throw  off  the  prejudices  of  education. 


* But  be  it  observed  that  Descartes  did  not  allow,  far  less  hold,  that  the 
mind  had  any  cognizance  of  these  organic  motions,  — of  these  material 
ideas.  They  were  merely  the  antecedents,  established  by  the  law  of  union 
of  soul  and  body,  of  the  mental  idea;  which  mental  idea  was  nothing 
more  than  a modification  of  the  mind  itself  Reid,  I may  observe  in  gen- 
eral, does  not  distinguish,  as  it  especially  behooved  him  to  do,  between  what 
were  held  by  philosophers  to  be  the  proximate  causes  of  our  mental  repre- 
sentations, and  these  representations  themselves  as  the  objects  of  cognition ; 
i.  e.  between  what  are  known  in  the  schools  as  the  species  impressoi^  and 
the  species  expressce.  The  former,  to  which  the  name  of  species^  image^ 
idea^  was  often  given,  in  common  with  the  latter,  w^as  held  on  all  hands  to 
be  unknown  to  consciousness,  and  generally  supposed  to  be  merely  certain 
occult  motions  in  the  organism.  The  latter,  the  result  determined  by  the 
former,  is  the  mental  representation,  and  the  immediate  or  proper  object  in 
perception.  Great  confusion,  to  those  who  do  not  bear  this  distinction  in 
mind,  is,  however,  the  consequence  of  the  verbal  ambiguity ; and  Reid’s 
misrepresentations  of  tbe  doctrine  of  the  philosophers  is,  in  a great  meas- 
ure, to  be  traced  to  this  source.  — H. 


76 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


to  dismiss  all  his  former  opinions,  and  to  assent  to 
nothing  till  he  found  evidence  that  compelled  his  as- 
sent, should  not  have  led  him  to  doubt  this  opinion 
of  the  ancient  philosophy.  It  is  evidently  a philosoph- 
ical opinion ; for  the  vulgar  undoubtedly  believe  that  it 
is  the  external  object  which  we  immediately  perceive, 
and  not  a representative  image  of  it  only.  It  is  for 
this  reason  that  they  look  upon  it  as  a perfect  lunacy 
to  call  in  question  the  existence  of  external  objects. 

It  seems  to  be  admitted  as  a first  principle  by  the 
learned  and  the  unlearned,  that  what  is  really  perceived 
must  exist,  and  that  to  perceive  what  does  not  exist  is 
impossible.  So  far  the  unlearned  man  and  the  philos- 
opher agree.  The  unlearned  -man  says,  I perceive  the 
external  object,  and  I perceive  it  to  exist.  Nothing 
can  be  more  absurd  than  to  doubt  it.  The  Peripatetic 
says,  What  I perceive  is  the  very  identical  form  of  the 
object,  which  came  immediately  from  the  object,  and 
makes  an  impression  upon  my  mind,  as  a seal  does 
upon  wax ; and  therefore  I can  have  no  doubt  of  the 
existence  of  an  object  whose  form  I perceive.  But 
what  says  the  Cartesian  ? I perceive  not,  says  he,  the 
external  object  itself.  So  far  he  agrees  with  the  Peri- 
patetic, and  differs  from  the  unlearned  man.  But  I 
perceive  an  image,  or  form,  or  idea,  in  my  own  mind, 
or  in  my  brain.  I am  certain  of  the  existence  of  the 
idea,  because  I immediately  perceive  it.  But  how  this 
idea  is  formed,  or  what  it  represents,  is  not  self-evident; 
and  therefore  I must  find  arguments  by  which,  from 
the  existence  of  the  idea  which  I perceive,  I can  infer 
the  existence  of  an  external  object  which  it  represents. 

As  I take  this  to  be  a just  view  of  the  principles 
of  the  unlearned  man,  of  the  Peripatetic,  and  of  the 
Cartesian,  so  I think  they  all  reason  consequentially 
from  their  several  principles.  The  Cartesian  has  strong 
grounds  to  doubt  of  the  existence  of  external  objects, 
the  Peripatetic  very  little  ground  of  doubt,  and  the 
unlearned  man  none  at  all ; and  the  difference  of  their 
situation  arises  from  this,  — that  the  unlearned  man 
has  no  hypothesis,  the  Peripatetic  leans  upon  an  hy- 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. MALEBRANCHE.  77 


pothesis,  and  the  Cartesian  upon  one  half  of  that 
hypothesis.* 

IV.  Malebranche^ s Theory,]  Malebranche,  with  a 
very  penetrating  genius,  entered  into  a more  minute 
examination  of  the  powers  of  the  human  mind  than 
any  one  before  him.f  He  had  the  advantage  of  the 
discoveries  made  by  Descartes,  whom  he  followed 
without  slavish  attachment. 

He  lays  it  down  as  a principle  admitted  by  all  phi- 
losophers, and  which  could  not  be  called  in  question, 
that  we  do  not  perceive  external  objects  immediately, 
but  by  means  of  images  or  ideas  of  them  present  to  the 
mind.  I suppose,*’  says  he,  “ that  every  one  will 
grant  that  we  perceive  not  the  objects  that  are  without 
us  immediately,  and  of  themselves.:j:  We  see  the  sun, 
the  stars,  and  an  infinity  of  objects  without  us;  and  it 
is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  soul  sallies  out  of  the  body, 
and,  as  it  were,  takes  a walk  through  the  heavens  to 
contemplate  all  those  objects.  She  sees  them  not, 
therefore,  by  themselves ; and  the  immediate  object  of 
the  mind,  when  it  sees  the  sun,  for  example,  is  not  the 
sun,  but  something  which  is  intimately  united  to  the 
soul;  and  it  is  that  which  I call  an  idea:  so  that  by 
the  word  idea  I understand  nothing  else  here  but  that 
which  is  the  immediate  object,  or  nearest  to  the  mind, 
when  we  perceive  any  object.  It  ought  to  be  carefully 
observed,  that,  in  order  to  the  mind’s  perceiving  any 


* M.  Gamier  has  published  the  best  edition  of  Descartes’s  metaphysical 
writings,  Oeuvres  Philosophiques  de  Descartes  (4  vols.,  8vo,  Paris,  1835)* 
For  the  best  account  of  Cartesianism,  and  its  influence  on  modern  thought, 
see  Histoire  et  Critique  de  la  Revolution  Cartesienne,  par  M.  Francisque 
Bouillier.  See,  also,  Stewart’s  Dissertation^  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  Sect.  II. ; 
Hallam’s  Literature  of  Europe^  from  1600  to  1650,  Chap.  III.  Sect.  III.; 
Darniron,  Essai  sur  V Histoire  de  la  Philosophie  en  France^  au  XVIE  Siecle^ 
Liv.  II. 

We  have  met  with  but  two  English  translations  from  Descartes;  his 
Discourse  of  Method  London,  1649),  published  anonymously,  and 

his  Six  Metaphysical  Meditations^  by  William  Molyneux  (16mo,  London, 
1680).— Ed. 

t Nicholas  Malebranche,  a priest  of  the  Oratory,  was  born  at  Paris,  Au- 
gust 6,  1638,  and  died  in  the  same  city,  October  13,  1715. — Ed. 

i Rather  in  or  by  themselves  (par  eux-memes).  — H. 

rji  * 


78 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


object,  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  idea  of  that 
object  be  actually  present  to  it.  Of  this  it  is  not  pos- 
sible to  doubt.  The  things  which  the  soul  perceives 
are  of  two  kinds.  They  are  either  in  the  soul,  or  they 
are  without  the  soul : those  that  are  in  the  soul  are  its 
own  thoughts,  that  is  to  say,  all  its  different  modifica- 
tions. The  soul  has  no  need  of  ideas  for  perceiving 
these  things.  But  with  regard  to  things  without  the 
soul,  we  cannot  perceive  them  but  by  means  of  ideas.”  * 

Having  laid  this  foundation,  as  a principle  which 
was  common  to  all  philosophers,  and  which  admitted 
of  no  doubt,  he  proceeds  to  enumerate  all  the  possible 
ways  by  which  the  ideas  of  sensible  objects  may  be 
presented  to  the  mind : — Either,  firsts  they  come  from 
the  bodies  which  we  perceive  ; or,  secondly^  the  soul 
has  the  power  of  producing  them  in  itself ; or,  thirdly^ 
they  are  produced  by  the  Deity,  either  in  our  creation, 
or  joccasionally,  as  there  is  use  for  them ; or,  fourthly^ 
the  soul  has  in  itself  virtually  and  eminently,  as  the 
schools  speak,  all  the  perfections  which  it  perceives  in 
bodies;  or,  fifthly^  the  soul  is  united  with  a being  pos- 
sessed of  all  perfection,  who  has  in  himself  the  ideas  of 
all  created  things. 

This  he  takes  to  be  a complete  enumeration  of  all 
the  possible  ways  in  which  the  ideas  of  external  objects 
may  be  presented  to  our  minds.  He  employs  a whole 
chapter  upon  each ; refuting  the  first  four,  and  confirm- 
ing the  last  by  various  arguments.  The  Deity,  being 
always  present  to  our  minds  in  a more  intimate  man- 
ner than  any  other  being,  may,  upon  occasion  of  the 
impressions  made  on  our  bodies,  discover  to  us,  as  far 
as  he  thinks  proper,  and  according  to  fixed  laws,  his 
own  ideas  of  the  object;  and  thus  “we  see  all  things 
in  God,”  or  in  the  Divine  ideas.f 


* De  la  Recherche  de  la  Liv.  III.  Partie  II.  Chap.  I. 

t It  should  have  been  noticed  that  the  Malebranchian  philosophy  is  fun- 
damentally Cartesian,  and  that,  after  De  la  Forge  and  Geulinx,  the  doc- 
trine of  Divine  Assistance^  implicitly  maintained  by  Descartes,  was  most 
ably  developed  by  Malebranche,  to  whom  it  owes,  indeed,  a principal  share 
of  its  celebrity.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. MALEBRANCHE.  79 

However  visionary  this  system  may  appear  on  a su- 
perficial view,  yet  when  we  consider  that  he  agreed 
with  the  whole  tribe  of  philosophers  in  conceiving  ideas 
to  be  the  immediate  objects  of  perception,  and  that  he 
found  insuperable  difficulties,  and  even  absurdities,  in 
every  other  hypothesis  concerning  them,  it  will  not  ap- 
pear so  wonderful  that  a man  of  very  great  genius 
should  fall  into  this ; and  probably  it  pleased  so  devout 
a man  the  more,  that  it  sets  in  the  most  striking  light 
our  dependence  upon  God,  and  his  continual  presence 
with  us. 

He  distinguished,  more  accurately  than  any  philoso- 
pher had  done  before,  the  objects  which  we  perceive 
from  the  sensations  in  our  own  minds,  which,  by  the 
laws  of  nature,  always  accompany  the  perception  of 
the  object.  As  in  many  things,  so  particularly  in  this, 
he  has  great  merit : for  this,  I apprehend,  is  a key  that 
opens  the  way  to  a right  understanding  both  of  our 
external  senses  and  of  other  powers  of  the  mind.  The 
vulgar  confound  sensation  with  other  powers  of  the 
mind,  and  with  their  objects,  because  the  purposes  of 
life  do  not  make  a distinction  necessary.  The  con- 
founding of  these  in  common  language  has  led  philoso- 
phers, in  one  period,  to  make  those  things  external 
which  really  are  sensations  in  our  own  minds ; and,  in 
another  period,  running,  as  is  usual,  into  the  contrary 
extreme,  to  make  almost  every  thing  to  be  a sensation 
or  feeling  in  our  minds. 

It  is  obvious,  that  the  system  of  Malebranche  leaves 
no  evidence  of  the  existence  of  a material  world  from 
what  we  perceive  by  our  senses ; for  the  Divine  ideas, 
which  are  the  objects  immediately  perceived,  were  the 
same  before  the  world  was  created.  Malebranche  was 
too  acute  not  to  discern  this  consequence  of  his  system, 
and  too  candid  not  to  acknowledge  it : he  fairly  owns 
it,  and  endeavours  to  make  advantage  of  it,  resting  the 
complete  evidence  we  have  of  the  existence  of  matter 
upon  the  authority  of  revelation.  He  shows,  that  the 
arguments  brought  by  Descartes  to  prove  the  existence 
of  a material  world,  though  as  good  as  any  that  reason 


80 


SENSATION  AND  PEKCEPTION. 


could  furnish,  are  not  perfectly  conclusive ; and  though 
he  acknowledges,  with  Descartes,  that  we  feel  a strong 
propensity  to  believe  the  existence  of  a material  world, 
yet  he  thinks  this  is  not  sufficient,  and  that  to  yield  to 
such  propensities  without  evidence  is  to  expose  our- 
selves to  perpetuahdelusion.  He  thinks,  therefore,  that 
the  only  convincing  evidence  we  have  of  the  existence 
of  the  material  world  is,  that  we  are  assured  by  revela- 
tion that  “ God  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth,” 
and  that  “the  Word  was  made  flesh.”  He  is  sensible 
of  the  ridicule  to  which  so  strange  an  opinion  may  ex- 
pose him  among  those  who  are  guided  by  prejudice ; 
but,  for  the  sake  of  truth,  he  is  willing  to  bear  it.  But 
no  author,  not  even  Bishop  Berkeley,  has  shown  more 
clearly,  that,  either  upon  his  own  system,  or  upon  the 
common  principles  of  philosophers  with  regard  to  ideas, 
we  have  no  evidence  left,  either  from  reason  or  from 
our  senses,  of  the  existence  of  a material  world.  It  is 
no  more  than  justice  to  Father  Malebranche  to  ac- 
knowledge, that  Bishop  Berkeley’s  arguments  are  to 
be  found  in  him  in  their  whole  force.* 

Malebranche’s  system  was  adopted  by  many  devout 
people  in  France,  of  both  sexes;  but  it  seems  to  have 
had  no  great  currency  in  other  countries.  Mr.  Locke 
wrote  a small  tract  against  it,  which  is  found  among 
his  posthumous  works ; but  whether  it  was  written  in 
haste,  or  after  the  vigor  of  his  understanding  was  im- 
paired by  age,  there  is  less  of  strength  and  solidity  in 
it  than  in  most  of  his  writings.f  The  most  formidable 
antagonist  Malebranche  met  with  was  in  his  own 
country, — Antony  Arnauld,  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne, 


* Once,  and  only  once,  these  eminent  philosophers  had  the  pleasure  of 
an  interview.  “ The  conversation,”  we  are  told,  “ turned  on  the  non-exist- 
ence of  matter.  Malebranche,  who  had  an  inflammation  in  his  lungs,  and 
whom  Berkeley 'found  preparing  a medicine  in  his  cell,  and  cooking  it  in  a 
small  pipkin,  exerted  his  voice  so  violently  in  the  heat  of  their  dispute, 
that  he  increased  his  disorder,  which  carried  him  off  in  a few  days  after.” 
Biog.  Art.  Berkeley.  — Ed. 

t In  answer  to  Locke’s  Examination  of  P.  Malebranche' s Opinions^  Leib- 
nitz wrote  Reniarques.,  making  No.  LXVI.  of  Erdmann’s  edition  of  his 
Opera  Philosophica.  ^ Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. ARNAULD. 


81 


and  one  of  the  acutest  writers  the  Jansenists  have  to 
boast  of,  though  that  sect  has  produced  many.  Those 
who  choose  to  see  this  system  attacked  on  the  one 
hand,  and  defended  on  the  other,  with  subtilty  of  argu- 
ment and  elegance  of  expression,  and  on  the  part  of 
Arnauld  with  much  wit  and  humor,  may  find  satisfac- 
tion by  reading  Malebranche’s  Inquiry  after  Truths 
Arnauld’s  book  of  True  and  False  Ideas^  Malebranche’s 
Defence^  and  some  subsequent  replies  and  defences. 
In  controversies  of  this  kind,  the  assailant  commonly 
has  the  advantage,  if  the  parties  are  not  unequally 
matched ; for  it  is  easier  to  overturn  all  the  theories  of 
philosophers  upon  this  subject,  than  to  defend  any  one 
of  them.  Mr.  Bayle  makes  a very  just  remark  upon 
this  controversy,  that  the  arguments  of  Mr.  Arnauld 
against  the  system  of  Malebranche  were  often  unan- 
swerable, but  they  were  capable  of  being  retorted 
against  his  own  system ; and  his  ingenious  antagonist 
knew  well  how  to  use  this  defence.* 

V.  ArnauWs  Theory.]  The  controversy  between 
Malebranche  and  Arnauld  f necessarily  led  them  to 
consider  what  kind  of  things  ideas  are,  a point  upon 


* Independently  of  his  principal  hypothesis  altogether,  the  works  of 
Malebranche  deserve  the  most  attentive  study,  both  on  account  of  the 
many  admirable  thoughts  and  observations  with  which  they  abound,  and 
because  they  are  among  the  few  consummate  models  of  philosophical  elo- 
quence. — H. 

Charpentier  has  published  in  his  Bibliothhque  Phihsophique  a good  edi- 
tion of  Malebranche’s  metaphysical  writings,  — (Euvres,  edition  collationee 
sur  les  meilleurs  textes,  comprenant;  les  Entretiens  Metaphysiques ^ les  Me- 
ditations^ le  Traite  de  V Amour  de  Dieu,  VEntretien  d'un  Philosophe  Chretien  et 
d\m  Philosophe  Chinois,  la  Recherche  de  la  V6riti^  avec  notes  et  introduction 
par  J.  Simon  (2  vols.,  12mo).  For  further  information  respecting  Male- 
branche and  his  philosophy,  see  Le  Cartesianisme^  ou  la  Veritable  Renova- 
tion des  Sciences^  par  M.  Bordas  Demoulin ; Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Philo- 
sophiques^  Art.  Malebranche  ; Damiron,  De  la  Philosophie  en  France^  au  XVIIe 
Siecle,  Liv.  VI. ; Stewart’s  Dissertation,  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  Sect.  II. 

Malebranche’s  Search  after  Truth  was  translated  into  English  by  Eichard 
Sault  (2  vols.,  12mo,  London,  1694);  and  his  Treatise  of  Morality,  by 
James  Shipton  (12mo,  London,  1699)'.  Sault  translated  also  his  Treatise 
of  Nature  and  Grace.  — Ed. 

t Antoine  Arnauld,  doctor  of  the  Sorbonne,  whom  the  Port-Eoyalists 
call  “le  grand,”  was  born  at  Paris,  February  8,  1612,  and  died  at  Brussels, 
August  8,  1694.  — Ed. 


82 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


which  other  philosophers  had  very  generally  been  silent. 
Both  of  them  professed  the  doctrine  universally  re- 
ceived, that  we  perceive  not  material  things  immedi- 
ately, that  it  is  their  ideas  that  are  the  immediate  ob- 
jects of  our  thought,  and  that  it  is  in  the  idea  of  every 
thing  that  we  perceive  its  properties. 

It  is  necessary  to  premise,  that  both  these  authors 
use  the  word  perception^  as  Descartes  had  done  before 
them,  to  signify  every  operation  of  the  understanding.* 
‘‘  To  think,  to  know,  to  perceive,  are  the  same  thing,’’ 
says  Mr.  Arnauld,  Chap.  V.  Def.  2.  It  is  likewise  to 
be  observed,  that  the  various  operations  of  the  mind 
are  by  both  called  modifications  of  the  mind.  Perhaps 
they  were  led  into  this  phrase  by  the  Cartesian  doc- 
trine, that  the  essence  of  the  mind  consists  in  thinking, 
as  that  of  body  consists  in  extension.  I apprehend, 
therefore,  that  when  they  make  sensation,  perception, 
memory,  and  imagination  to  be  various  modifications 
of  the  mind,  they  mean  no  more  than  that  these  are 
things  which  can  only  exist  in  the  mind  as  their  sub- 
ject. We  express  the  same  thing  by  calling  them 
various  modes  of  thinking,  or  various  operations  of  the 
mind.f 

The  things  which  the  mind  perceives,  says  Male- 
branche,  are  of  two  kinds.  They  are  either  in  the 
mind  itself,  or  they  are  external  to  it.  The  things  in 
the  mind  are  all  its  different  modifications,  its  sensa- 
tions, its  imaginations,  its  pure  intellections,  its  pas- 
sions and  affections.  These  are  immediately  perceived; 
we  are  conscious  of  them,  and  have  no  need  of  ideas  to 
represent  them  to  us. 

Things  external  to  the  mind  are  either  corporeal  or 
spiritual.  With  regard  to  the  last,  he  thinks  it  possi- 
ble, that,  in  another  state,  spirits  may  be  an  immediate 


* Every  apprehensive^  or  strictly  cognitive^  operation  of  the  understand- 
ing.—H. 

t Modes  or  modifications  of  mind^  in  the  Cartesian  school,  mean  merely 
what  some  recent  philosophers  express  by  states  of  rnind,  and  include  both 
the  active  and  passive  phenomena  of  the  conscious  subject.  The  terms 
were  used  by  Descartes  as  well  as  by  his  disciples.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. ARNAULD.  83 

object  of  our  understandings,  and  so  be  perceived  with- 
out ideas ; that  there  may  be  such  a union  of  spirits  as 
that  they  may  immediately  perceive  each  other,  and 
communicate  their  thoughts  mutually,  without  signs 
and  without  ideas.  But  leaving  this  as  a problemati- 
cal point,  he  holds  it  to  be  undeniable,  that  material 
things  cannot  be  perceived  immediately,  but  only  by 
the  mediation  of  ideas.  He  thought  it  likewise  undeni- 
able, that  the  idea  must  be  immediately  present  to  the 
mind,  that  it  must  touch  the  soul,  as  it  were,  and  mod- 
ify its  perception  of  the  object. 

From  these  principles  we  must  necessarily  conclude, 
either  that  the  idea  is  some  modification  of  the  human 
mind,  or  that  it  must  be  an  idea  in  the  Divine  mind, 
which  is  always  intimately  present  with  our  minds. 
The  matter  being  brought  to  this  alternative,  Male- 
branche  considers,  first,  all  the  possible  ways  such  a 
modification  may  be  produced  in  our  mind  as  that  we 
call  an  idea  of  a material  object,  taking  it  for  granted 
always  that  it  must  be  an  object  perceived,  and  some- 
thing different  from  the  act  of  the  mind  in  perceiving 
it.  He  finds  insuperable  objections  against  every  hy- 
pothesis of  such  ideas  being  produced  in  our  minds, 
and  therefore  concludes,  that  the  immediate  objects  of 
perception  are  the  ideas  of  the  Divine  mind. 

Against  this  system  Arnauld  wrote  his  book  of  True 
and  False  Ideas,  He  does  not  object  to  the  alterna- 
tive mentioned  by  Malebranche ; but  he  maintains, 
that  ideas  are  modifications  of  our  minds.  And  finding 
no  other  modification  of  the  human  mind  which  can 
be  called  the  idea  of  an  external  object,  he  says  it  is 
only  another  word  for  perception,  (Chap.  V.  Def.  3.) 
“ I take  the  idea  of  an  object,  and  the  perception  of  an 
object,  to  be  the  same  thing.  I do  not  say  wheiher 
there  may  be  other  things  to  which  the  name  of  idea 
may  be  given.  But  it  is  certain  that  there  are  ideas 
taken  in  this  sense,  and  that  these  ideas  are  either 
attributes  or  modifications  of  our  minds.”* 


Arnauld  did  not  allow  that  perceptions  and  ideas  are  really  or  numeri- 


84 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


This,  I think,  indeed,  was  to  attack  the  system  of 
Malebranche  upon  its  weak  side,  and  where,  at  the 
same  time,  an  attack  was  least  expected.  Philosophers 
had  been  so  unanimous  in  maintaining  that  we  do  not 
perceive  external  objects  immediately,  but  by  certain 
representative  images  of  them  called  ideas ^ that  Male- 
branche might  well  think  his  system  secure  upon  that 
quarter,  and  that  the  only  question  to  be  determined 
was,  in  what  subject  those  ideas  are  placed,  whether  in 
the  human  or  in  the  Divine  mind. 

But,  says  Arnauld,  these  ideas  are  mere  chimeras, 
fictions  of  philosophers ; there  are  no  such  beings  in 
nature ; and  therefore  it  is  to  no  purpose  to  inquire 
whether  they  are  in  the  Divine  or  in  the  human  mind. 
The  only  true  and  real  ideas  are  our  perceptions,  which 
are  acknowledged  by  all  philosophers,  and  Malebranche 
himself,  to  be  acts  or  modifications  of  our  own  minds. 
He  does  not  say  that  the  fictitious  ideas  were  a fiction 
of  Malebranche.  He  acknowledges  that  they  had  been 
very  generally  maintained  by  the  scholastic  philoso- 
phers, and  points  out,  very  judiciously,  the  prejudices 
that  had  led  them  into  the  belief  of  such  ideas. 

Of  all  the  powers  of  our  mind,  the  external  senses 
are  thought  to  be  the  best  understood,  and  their  objects 
are  the  most  familiar.  Hence  we  measure  other  pow- 
ers by  them,  and  transfer  to  other  powers  the  language 
which  properly  belongs  to  them.  The  objects  of  sense 
must  be  present  to  the  sense,  or  within  its  sphere,  in 
order  to  their  being  perceived.  Hence,  by  analogy,  we 
are  led  to  say  of  every  thing  when  we  think  of  it,  that 
it  is  present  to  the  mind,  or  in  the  mind.  But  this 
presence  is  metaphorical  or  analogical  only ; and  Ar- 
nauld calls  it  objective  presence,  to  distinguish  it  from 


colly  distinguished,  — i.  e.  as  one  thing  from  another  thing;  not  even  that 
they  are  modally  distinguished,  — i.  e.  as  a thing  from  its  mode.  He  main- 
tained that  they  are  really  identical,  and  only  rationally  discriminated  as 
viewed  in  different  relations ; the  indivisible  mental  modification  being 
called  a perception^  by  reference  to  the  mind  or  thinking  subject,  — an  idea^ 
by  reference  to  the  mediate  object  or  thing  thought.  Arnauld  everyw^here 
avows  that  he  denies  ideas,  only  as  existences  distinct  from  the  act  itself  of 
perception.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. ARNAULD. 


85 


that  local  presence  which  is  required  in  objects  that  are 
perceived  by  sense.  But  both  being  called  by  the  same 
name,  they  are  confounded  together,  and  those  things 
that  belong  only  to  real  or  local  presence  are  attributed 
to  the  metaphorical.  We  are  likewise  accustomed  to 
see  objects  by  their  images  in  a mirror,  or  in  water; 
and  hence  are  led,  by  analogy,  to  think  that  objects 
may  be  presented  to  the  memory  or  imagination,  in 
some  similar  manner,  by  images^  which  philosophers 
have  called  ideas. 

By  such  prejudices  and  analogies,  Arnauld  conceives, 
men  have  been  led  to  believe  that  the  objects  of  mem- 
ory and  imagination  must  be  presented  to  the  mind  by 
images  or  ideas ; and  the  philosophers  have  been  more 
carried  away  by  these  prejudices  than  even  the  vulgar, 
because  the  use  made  of  this  theory  was  to  explain 
and  account  for  the  various  operations  of  the  mind,  a 
matter  in  which  the  vulgar  take  no  concern.  He  thinks, 
however,  that  Descartes  had  got  the  better  of  these 
prejudices,  and  that  he  uses  the  word  idea  as  signifying 
the  same  thing  with  perception.,  and  is  therefore  sur- 
prised that  a disciple  of  Descartes,  and  one  who  was 
so  great  an  admirer  of  him  as  Malebranche,  should 
be  carried  away  by  them.  It  is  strange,  indeed,  that 
the  two  most  eminent  disciples  of  Descartes,  and  his 
contemporaries,  should  differ  so  essentially  with  regard 
to  his  doctrine  concerning  ideas. 

I shall  not  attempt  to  give  the  reader  an  account 
of  the  continuation  of  this  controversy  between  those 
two  acute  philosophers,  in  the  subsequent  defences 
and  replies,  because  I have  not  access  to  them.  After 
much  reasoning,  and  some  animosity,  each  continued 
in  his  own  opinion,  and  left  his  antagonist  where  he 
found  him.  Malebranche’s  opinion  of  our  seeing  all 
things  in  God  soon  died  away  of  itself,  and  Arnauld’s 
notion  of  ideas  seems  to  have  been  less  regarded  than  it 
deserved  by  the  philosophers  that  came  after  him ; per- 
haps for  this  reason,  among  others,  that  it  seemed  to 
be  in  some  sort  given  up  by  himself,  in  his  attempting 


86 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


to  reconcile  it  to  the  common  doctrine  concerning 
ideas.* 

Arnauld  has  employed  the  whole  of  his  sixth  chapter 
to  show  that  these  ways  of  speaking,  common  among 
philosophers,  — to  wit,  that  we  perceive  not  things  im- 
mediately ; that  it  is  their  ideas  that  are  the  immediate 
objects  of  our  thoughts ; that  it  is  in  the  idea  of  every 
thing  that  we  perceive  its  properties^  — are  not  to  be  re- 
jected, but  are  true  when  rightly  understood.  He  labors 
to  reconcile  these  expressions  to  his  own  definition  of 
ideas,  by  observing,  that  every  perception  and  every 
thought  is  necessarily  conscious  of  itself,  and  reflects 
upon  itself;  and  that,  by  this  consciousness  and  reflec- 
tion, it  is  its  own  immediate  object.  Whence  he  in- 


* The  opinion  of  Arnauld  in  regard  to  the  nature  of  ideas  was  by  no 
means  overlooked  by  subsequent  philosophers.  It  is  found  fully  detailed 
in  almost  every  systematic  course  or  compend  of  philosophy  which  ap- 
peared for  a long  time  after  its  first  promulgation,  and  in  many  of  these  it 
is  the  doctrine  recommended  as  the  true.  Arnauld’s  was  indeed  the  opin- 
ion which  latterly  prevailed  in  the  Cartesian  school.  From  this  it  passed 
into  other  schools.  Leibnitz,  like  Arnauld,  regarded  ideas,  notions^  repre- 
sentations^ as  mere  modifications  of  the  mind,  (what  by  his  disciples  were 
called  material  ideas,  like  the  cerebral  ideas  of  Descartes,  are  out  of  the 
question,)  and  no  cruder  opinion  than  this  has  ever  subsequently  found  a 
footing  in  any  of  the  German  systems. 

“ I don’t  know,”  says  Mr.  Stewart,  “ of  any  author  who,  prior  to  Dr. 
Reid,  has  expressed  himself  on  this  subject  with  so  much  justness  and  pre- 
cision as  Father  Buffier,  in  the  following  passage  of  his  Treatise  on  First 
Truths  (p.  311):  — ‘If  we  confine  ourselves  to  what  is  intelligible  in  our 
observations  on  ideas^  we  will  say,  they  are  nothing  but  mere  modifications 
of  the  mind  as  a thinking  being.  They  are  called  ideas  with  regard  to  the 
object  represented,  and  perceptions  with  regard  to  the  faculty  representing. 
It  is  manifest  that  our  ideas,  considered  in  this  sense,  are  not  more  distin- 
guished than  motion  is  from  the  body  moved.’  ” — Elements^  Add.  to  note 
to  Fart  1.  Chap.  IV.  Sect.  II. 

In  this  passage,  Buffier  only  repeats  the  doctrine  of  Arnauld,  in  Ar- 
nauld’s own  words. 

Dr.  Thomas  Brown,  on  the  other  hand,  has  endeavoured  to  show  that 
this  doctrine  (which  he  identifies  with  Reid’s)  had  been  long  the  catholic 
opinion,  and  that  Reid,  in  his  attack  on  the  ideal  system,  only  refuted  what 
had  been  already  almost  universally  exploded.  In  this  attempt  he  is,  how- 
ever, singularly  unfortunate ; for,  with  the  exception  of  Crousaz,  all  the 
examples  he  adduces  to  evince  the  prevalence  of  Arnauld’s  doctrine  are 
only  so  many  mistakes,  so  many  instances,  in  fact,  which  might  be  alleged 
in  confirmation  of  the  very  opposite  conclusion.  See  Edinburgh  Review^ 
Vol.  LIT  pp.  181-196.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LEIBNITZ. 


87 


fers,  that  the  idea  — that  is,  the  perception  — is  the 
immediate  object  of  perception.* 

VI.  Leibnitz^s  Theory,]  The  next  system  concern- 
ing perception,  of  which  I shall  give  some  account,  is 
the  invention  of  the  famous  German  philosopher,  Leib- 
nitz,! who,  while  he  lived,  held  the  first  rank  among 
the  Germans  in  all  parts  of  philosophy,  as  well  as  in 
mathematics,  in  jurisprudence,  in  the  knowledge  of 
antiquities,  and  in  every  branch  both  of  science  and  of 
literature.  He  was  highly  respected  by  emperors,  and 
by  many  kings  and  princes,  ^^{ho  bestowed  upon  him 
singular  marks  of  their  esteem.  He  was  a particular 
favorite  of  our  Queen  Caroline,  consort  of  George  IL, 
with  whom  he  continued  his  correspondence  by  letters 
after  she  came  to  the  crown  of  Britain,  till  his  death. 

The  famous  controversy  between  him  and  the  British 
mathematicians,  whether  he  or  Sir  Isaac  Newton  was 
the  inventor  of  that  noble  improvement  in  mathemat- 


* Reid’s  discontent  with  Arnauld’s  opinion  — an  opinion  which  is  stated 
with  great  perspicuity  by  its  author  — maybe  used  as  an  argument  to 
show  that  his  own  doctrine  is,  however  ambiguous,  that  of  intuitive  or  im- 
mediate perception.  (See  Note  C.)  Arnauld’s  theory  is  identical  with 
the  finer  form  of  representative  or  mediate  perception,  and  the  difficul- 
ties of  that  doctrine  were  not  overlooked  by  his  great  antagonist.  Arnauld 
well  objected,  that,  when  we  see  a horse,  according  to  Malebranche,  what 
we  see  is  in  reality  God  himself;  but  Malebranche  well  rejoined,  that, 
when  we  see  a horse,  according  to  Arnauld,  what  we  see  is  in  reality  only 
a modification  of  ourselves.  — H. 

Charpentier  has  published  in  his  Bihliothtque  PhilosopMque  the  meta- 
physical writings  of  Arnauld,  Oeuvres  Pltilosopliiques,  collationn6es  siir  les 
meilleurs  Textes^  avec  une  Introduction  par  J.  Simon  (12mo).  Arnauld, 
with  the  assistance  of  Nicole,  was  the  author  of  La  Logique^  ou  VArt  de 
Penser^  of  which,  under  the  name  of  the  Port-Bogal  Logic,,  there  have  been 
several  editions  in  English.  Arnauld  assisted  Pascal  in  the  composition 
of  several  of  the  Lettres  Provinciales.  His  entire  works  fill  forty-five  close- 
ly printed  quarto  volumes.  His  whole  life  was  consumed  in  controver- 
sies, and  distracted  by  the  persecutions  to  which  these  controversies  led. 
“Nicole,  who  bore  a share  in  most  of  his  literary  labors,  but  was  of  a mild- 
er character  than  Arnauld,  told  him  one  day,  that  he  was  weary  of  this 
incessant  warfare,  and  wished  to  rest.  ‘ Rest ! ’ said  Arnauld  ; ‘ will  you 
not  have  the  whole  of  eternity  to  rest  in?  ’ ” See  Baylc,  Diet.,,  Art.  Ar- 
nauld,, Ant. ; and  The  Biographical  Dictionary  of  the  Society  for  the  Diffu- 
sion of  Useful  Knowledge,  under  his  name.  — Ed. 

t Gottfried  Wilhelm  Leibnitz  was  born  at  Leipzig,  July  3,  1646,  and 
died  at  Hanover,  November  14,  1714.  — Ed. 


88 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


ics,  called  by  Newton  the  Method  of  Fluxions^  and  by 
Leibnitz  the  Differential  Method^  engaged  the  attention 
of  the  mathematicians  in  Europe  for  several  years.  He 
had  likewise  a controversy  with  the  learned  and  ju- 
dicious Dr.  Samuel  Clarke,  about  several  points  of  the 
Newtonian  philosophy  which  he  disapproved.  The 
papers  which  gave  occasion  to  this  controversy,  with 
all  the  replies  and  rejoinders,  had  the  honor  to  be  trans- 
mitted from  the  one  party  to  the  other  through  the 
hands  of  Queen  Caroline,  and  were  afterwards  pub- 
lished. 

His  authority,  in  all  matters  of  philosophy,  is  still  so 
great  in  most  parts  of  Germany,  that  they  are  consid- 
ered as  bold  spirits,  and  a kind  of  heretics,  who  dissent 
from  him  in  any  thing.  Christian  Wolf,  the  most 
voluminous  writer  in  philosophy  of  this  age,  is  con- 
sidered as  the  great  interpreter  and  advocate  of  the 
Leibnitzian  system,  and  reveres  as  an  oracle  whatever 
has  dropped  from  the  pen  of  Leibnitz.  This  author 
proposed  two  great  works  upon  the  mind.  The  first, 
which  I have  seen,  he  published  with  the  title  of  Psy- 
chologia  Empirica,  The  other  was  to  have  the  title  of 
Psychologia  Rationalis ; and  to  it  he  refers  for  his  ex- 
plication of  the  theory  of  Leibnitz  with  regard  to  the 
mind.  But  whether  it  was  published  I have  not 
learned.* 

I must,  therefore,  take  the  short  account  I am  to  give 
of  this  system  from  the  writings  of  Leibnitz  himself, 
without  the  light  which  his  interpreter,  Wolff,  may 
have  thrown  upon  it. 

Leibnitz  conceived  the  whole  universe,  bodies  as 
well  as  minds,  to  be  made  up  of  monads^  that  is,  simple 
substances,  each  of  which  is  by  the  Creator,  in  the  be- 


* It  was  published  in  1734.  Such  careless  ignorance  of  the  most  dis- 
tinguished works  on  the  subject  of  an  author’s  speculations  is  peculiarly 
British.  — H. 

Wolf,  who  died  in  1754,  was  succeeded  by  Kant,  whose  Kritik  der  reinen 
Vernunft  appeared  in  1781,  and  commenced  a new  philosophical  era  in 
Germany,  corresponding  to  that  which  the  writings  of  Reid  commenced 
in  Great  Britain.  The  Trench  eclectics  of  the  present  day  claim  to  be 
heirs  of  what  is  good  and  enduring  in  both  of  these  movements.  — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTIOxN. LEIBNITZ. 


89 


ginning  of  its  existence,  endowed  with  certain  active 
and  perceptive  powers.  A monads  therefore,  is  an 
active  substance,  simple,  without  parts  or  figure,  ivhich 
has  within  itself  the  power  to  produce  all  the  changes  it 
undergoes  from  the  beginning  of  its  existence  to  eternity. 
The  changes  which  the  monad  undergoes,  of  what 
kind  soever,  though  they  may  seem  to  us  the  effect  of 
causes  operating  from  without,  yet  they  are  only  the 
gradual  and  successive  evolutions  of  its  own  internal 
poivers^  which  would  have  produced  all  the  same 
changes  and  motions,  although  there  had  been  no  other 
being  in  the  universe. 

Every  human  soul  is  a monad  joined  to  an  organ- 
ized body,  which  organized  body  consists  of  an  infinite 
number  of  monads,  each  having  some  degree  of  active 
and  of  perceptive  power  in  itself.  But  the  whole  ma- 
chine of  the  body  has  a relation  to  that  monad  which 
we  call  the  soul^  which  is,  as  it  were,  the  centre  of  the 
whole. 

As  the  universe  is  completely  filled  with  monads 
without  any  chasm  or  void,  and  thereby  every  body 
acts  upon  every  other  body,  according  to  its  vicinity  or 
distance,  and  is  mutually  reacted  upon  by  every  other 
body,  it  follows,  says  Leibnitz,  that  every  monad  is  a 
kind  of  living  mirror,  which  reflects  the  whole  universe, 
according  to  its  point  of  view,  and  represents  the  whole 
more  or  less  distinctly. 

I cannot  undertake  to  reconcile  this  part  of  the  sys- 
tem with  what  was  before  mentioned,  — to  wit,  that 
every  change  in  a monad  is  the  evolution  of  its  own 
original  powers,  and  would  have  happened  though  no 
other  substance  had  been  created.  But  to  proceed. 

There  are  different  orders  of  monads,  some  higher, 
and  others  lower.  The  higher  orders  he  calls  domi- 
nant; such  is  the  human  soul.  The  monads  that  com- 
pose the  organized  bodies  of  men,  animals,  and  plants, 
are  of  a lower  order,  and  subservient  to  the  dominant 
monads.  But  every  monad,  of  whatever  order,  is  a 
complete  substance  in  itself,  — indivisible,  having  no 
parts ; indestructible,  because,  having  no  parts,  it  can- 
8 * 


90 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


not  perish  by  any  kind  of  decomposition.  It  can  only 
perish  by  annihilation,  and  we  have  no  reason  to  be- 
lieve that  God  will  ever  annihilate  any  of  the  beings 
which  he  has  made. 

The  monads  of  a lower  order  may,  by  a regular  evo- 
lution of  their  powers,  rise  to  a higher  order.  They 
may  successively  be  joined  to  organized  bodies,  of 
various  forms  and  different  degrees  of  perception ; but 
they  never  die,  nor  cease  to  be  in  some  degree  active 
and  percipient. 

This  philosopher  makes  a distinction  between  per- 
ception and  what  he  calls  apperception.  The  first  is 
common  to  all  monads,  the  last  proper  to  the  higher 
orders,  among  which  are  human  souls.^ 

By  apperception  he  understands  that  degree  of  per- 
ception which  reflects,  as  it  were,  upon  itself ; by  which 
we  are  conscious  of  our  own  existence,  and  conscious 
of  our  perceptions ; by  which  we  can  reflect  upon  the 
operations  of  our  own  minds,  and  can  comprehend  ab- 
stract truths.  The  mind,  in  many  operations,  he  thinks, 
particularly  in  sleep,  and  in  many  actions  common  to 
us  with  the  brutes,  has  not  this  apperception,  although 
it  is  still  filled  with  a multitude  of  obscure  and  indis- 
tinct perceptions,  of  which  we  are  not  conscious. 

He  conceives  that  our  bodies  and  minds  are  united 
in  such  a manner,  that  neither  has  any  physical  influ- 
ence upon  the  other.  Each  performs  all  its  operations 
by  its  own  internal  springs  and  powers ; yet  the  opera- 
tions of  one  correspond  exactly  with  those  of  the  other, 
by  a preestablished  harmony^  just  as  one  clock  may  be 
so  adjusted  as  to  keep  time  with  another,  although 
each  has  its  own  moving  power,  and  neither  receives 
any  part  of  its  motion  from  the  other.  So  that  accord- 
ing to  this  system  all  our  perceptions  of  external  ob- 
jects would  be  the  same,  though  external  things  had 
never  existed ; our  perception  of  them  would  continue, 
although,  by  the  power  of  God,  they  should  this  mo- 
ment be  annihilated.  We  do  not  perceive  external 
things  because  they  exist,  but  because  the  soul  was 
originally  so  constituted  as  to  produce  in  itself  all  its 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LEIBNITZ. 


91 


successive  changes,  and  all  its  successive  perceptions, 
independently  of  the  external  objects. 

Every  perception  or  apperception,  every  operation,  in 
a word,  of  the  soul,  is  a necessary  consequence  of  the 
state  of  it  immediately  preceding  that  operation ; and 
this  state  is  the  necessary  consequence  of  the  state  pre- 
ceding it;  and  so  backwards,  until  you  come  to  its 
first  formation  and  constitution,  which  produces  suc- 
cessively, and  by  necessary  consequence,  all  its  succes- 
sive states  to  the  end  of  its  existence : so  that  in  this 
respect  the  soul,  and  every  monad,  may  be  compared  to 
a watch  wound  up,  which,  having  the  spring  of  its  mo- 
tion in  itself,  by  the  gradual  evolution  of  its  own  spring 
produces  all  the  successive  motions  we  observe  in  it. 

In  this  account  of  Leibnitz’s  system  concerning  mo- 
nads, and  the  preestablished  harmony,  I have  kept  as 
nearly  as  I could  to  his  own  expressions,  in  his  New 
System  of  the  Nature  and  Communication  of  Substances^ 
and  of  the  Union  of  Soul  and  Body^  and  in  the  several 
illustrations  of  that  new  system  which  he  afterwards 
published,  and  in  his  Principles  of  Nature  and  Grace 
founded  in  Reason,  I shall  now  make  a few  remarks 
upon  this  system. 

1.  To  pass  over  the  irresistible  necessity  of  all  hu- 
man actions,  which  makes  a part  of  this  system,  and 
which  will  be  considered  in  another  place,  I observe 
first,  that  the  distinction  made  between  perception  and 
apperception  is  obscure  and  unphilosophical.  As  far 
as  we  can  discover,  every  operation  of  our  mind  is  at- 
tended with  consciousness,  and  particularly  that  which 
we  call  the  perception  of  external  objects ; and  to  speak 
of  a perception  of  which  we  are  not  conscious,  is  to 
speak  without  any  meaning. 

As  consciousness  is  the  only  power  by  which  we  dis- 
cern the  operations  of  our  own  minds,  or  can  form  any 
notion  of  them,  an  operation  of  mind  of  which  we  are 
not  conscious  is  we  know  not  what;  and  to  call  such 
an  operation  by  the  name  of  perception  is  an  abuse  of 
language.  No  man  can  perceive  an  object,  without 
being  conscious  that  he  perceives  it.  No  man  can 


92 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


think,  without  being  conscious  that  he  thinks.  What 
men  are  not  conscious  of  cannot,  therefore,  without  im- 
propriety, be  called  either  perception  or  thought  of  any 
kind.  And  if  we  will  suppose  operations  of  mind  of 
which  we  are  not  conscious,  and  give  a name  to  such 
creatures  of  our  imagination,  that  name  must  signify 
what  we  know  nothing  about.* 

2.  To  suppose  bodies  organized  or  unorganized  to  be 
made  up  of  indivisible  monads  which  have  no  parts,  is 
contrary  to  all  that  ive  knoiv  of  body.  It  is  essential  to 
a body  to  have  parts ; and  every  part  of  a body  is  a 
body,  and  has  parts  also.  No  number  of  parts,  without 
extension  or  figure^  not  even  an  infinite  number,  if  we 
may  use  that  expression,  can,  by  being  put  together, 
make  a whole  that  has  extension  and  figure,  which  all 
bodies  have. 

3.  It  is  contrary  to  all  that  we  know  of  bodies  to 
ascribe  to  the  monads,  of  which  they  are  supposed  to 
be  compounded,  perception  and  active  force.  If  a phi- 
losopher thinks  proper  to  say,  that  a clod  of  earth  both 
perceives  and  has  active  force,  let  him  bring  his  proofs. 
But  he  ought  not  to  expect  that  men  who  have  under- 
standing will  so  far  give  it  up  as  to  receive  without 
proof  whatever  his  imagination  may  suggest. 

4.  This  system  overturns  all  authority  of  our  senses^ 
and  leaves  not  the  least  ground  to  believe  the  existence 
of  the  objects  of  sense^  or  the  existence  of  any  thing 
which  depends  upon  the  authority  of  our  senses ; for  our 
perception  of  objects,  according  to  this  system,  has  no 
dependence  upon  any  thing  external,  and  would  be  the 
same  as  it  is  supposing  external  objects  had  never 
existed,  or  that  they  were  from  this  moment  annihilated. 
It  is  remarkable  that  Leibnitz’s  system,  that  of  Male- 
branche,  and  the  common  system  of  ideas,  or  images 


^ The  language  in  which  Leibnitz  expresses  his  doctrine  of  latent  modi- 
fications of  mind,  which,  though  out  of  consciousness,  manifest  their  ex- 
istence in  their  effects,  is  objectionable;  the  doctrine  itself  is  not  only  true, 
but  of  the  very  highest  importance  in  psychology,  although  it  has  never 
yet  been  appreciated,  or  even  understood,  by  any  writer  on  philosophy  in 
this  island.  — II. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LEIBNITZ. 


93 


of  external  objects  in  the  mind,  do  all  agree  in  over- 
turning all  the  authority  of  our  senses ; and  this  one 
thing,  as  long  as  men  retain  their  senses,  will  always 
make  all  these  systems  truly  ridiculous. 

5.  The  last  observation  I shall  make  upon  this  sys- 
tem, which  indeed  is  equally  applicable  to  all  the  sys- 
tems of  perception  I have  mentioned,  is,  that  it  is  all 
hypothesis^  made  up  of  conjectures  and  suppositions^  with- 
out proof  The  Peripatetics  supposed  sensible  species 
to  be  sent  forth  by  the  objects  of  sense.  The  moderns 
suppose  ideas  in  the  brain,  or  in  the  mind.  Male- 
bran  che  supposed,  that  we  perceive  the  ideas  of  the 
Divine  mind,  Leibnitz  supposed  monads  and  a pre- 
established  harmony ; and  these  monads  being  creatures 
of  his  own  making,  he  is  at  liberty  to  give  them  what 
properties  and  powers  his  fancy  may  suggest.*  Such 
suppositions,  while  there  is  no  proof  of  them  offered, 
are  nothing  but  the  fictions  of  human  fancy ; and  if 
they  were  true,  would  solve  no  difficulty,  but  raise 
many  new  ones.  It  is  therefore  more  agreeable  to  good 
sense,  and  to  sound  philosophy,  to  rest  satisfied  with 
what  our  consciousness  and  attentive  reflection  discover 
to  us  of  the  nature  of  perception,  than,  by  inventing 
hypotheses,  to  attempt  to  explain  things  which  are 
above  the  reach  of  human  understanding.! 


* It  is  a disputed  point  whether  Leibnitz  was  serious  in  his  monadology 
and  preestablished  harmony.  — H. 

t God.  Gull.  Leibnitii  Opera  Philosophica  qum  extant  Latina  Gallica  Ger- 
manica  omnia^  edited  by  Erdmann  (royal  8vo,  Berlin,  1840),  is  the  best 
edition  of  Leibnitz’s  metaphysical  writings.  Most  of  them  are  also  in- 
cluded in  CEuvres  de  Leibnitz.,  published,  with  an  introduction,  by  M. 
Jacques  (2  vols.,  12mo,  Paris,  1842).  The  best  life  of  this  philosopher  is 
in  German,  — Gottfried  Wilhelm  Freiherr  von  Leibnitz,  Eine  Biographie,  von 
Dr.  G.E.  Guhrauer  (2  vols.,  12mo,  Breslau,  1842).  A life  in  English  on 
the  basis  of  this  work,  but  much  abridged,  has  been  published  by  John  M. 
Mackie  (12mo,  Boston,  1845).  For  an  exposition  of  his  system,  see 
Eeuerbach,  Darstellung  und  Kritik  der  Leibnitzichen  Philosophie ; Buble,  His- 
toire  de  la  Philosophie  Moderne,  Tome  IV.  Chap.  III. ; Biographie  Uni- 
verselle,  Art.  Leibnitz  ; Stewart’s  Dissertation,  Part  II.  Sect.  II. 

The  ashes  of  Leibnitz  repose  under  the  court  church  of  Hanover,  with 
no  other  inscription  to  mark  the  spot  than  these  two  words  : — Ossa 
Leibnitii.  But,  as  Mr.  Stewart  observes,  “ the  best  doge  of  Leibnitz  is 
furnished  by  the  literary  history  of  the  eighteenth  century.  Whoever 
takes  the  pains  to  compare  it  with  his  works,  and  with  his  epistolary  cor- 


94 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


VIL  Lockers  Theory.]  The  reputation  which  Locke’s 
Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding  had  at  home 
from  the  beginning,  and  which  it  has  gradually  acquired 
abroad,  is  a sufficient  testimony  of  its  merit.* *  There  is 
perhaps  no  book  of  the  metaphysical  kind  that  has 
been  so  generally  read  by  those  who  understand  the 
language,  or  that  is  more  adapted  to  teach  men  to 
think  with  precision,!  and  to  inspire  them  with  that 
candor  and  love  of  truth  which  is  the  genuine  spirit  of 
philosophy.  He  gave,  I believe,  the  first  example  in 
the  English  language  of  writing  on  such  abstract  sub- 
jects with  a remarkable  degree  of  simplicity  and  per- 
spicuity ; and  in  this  he  has  been  happily  imitated  by 
others  that  came  after  him.  No  author  has  more  suc- 
cessfully pointed  out  the  danger  of  ambiguous  words, 
and  the  importance  of  having  distinct  and  determinate 
notions  in  judging  and  reasoning.  His  observations 
on  the  various  powers  of  the  human  understanding,  on 
the  use  and  abuse  of  words,  and  on  the  extent  and 
limits  of  human  knowledge,  are  drawn  from  attentive 
reflection  on  the  operations  of  his  own  mind,  the  true 
source  of  all  real  knowledge  on  these  subjects,  and 
show  an  uncommon  degree  of  penetration  and  judg- 
ment. But  he  needs  no  panegyric  of  mine ; and  I 
mention  these  things  only  that,  when  I have  occasion 
to  differ  from  him,  I may  not  be  thought  insensible  of 
the  merit  of  an  author  whom  I highly  respect,  and  to 
whom  I owe  my  first  lights  in  those  studies,  as  well  as 
my  attachment  to  them.J 


respondence,  will  find  reason  to  doubt,  whether,  at  the  singular  era  when 
he  appeared,  he  could  have  more  accelerated  the  advancement  of  knowl- 
edge by  the  concentration  of  his  studies,  than  he  has  actually  done  by  the 
universality  of  his  aims ; and  whether  he  does  not  afford  one  of  the  few 
instances  to  which  the  words  of  the  poet  may  literally  be  applied : — 

‘ Si  non  errasset,  fecerat  ille  minus.’  ” 

— Ed. 

* John  Locke  was  born  at  Wrington,  near  Bristol,  August  29,  1632,  and 
died  at  the  house  of  his  friend.  Sir  Erancis  Masham,  at  Oates,  in  Essex, 
October  28,  1704,  where  he  had  passed  the  last  twelve  years  of  his  life. 
— Ed. 

t To  praise  Locke  for  precision  is  rather  too  much.  — H. 

I Sir  James  Mackintosh  has  said  : — “ The  Treatise  on  the  Law  of  War 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION.  — LOCKE. 


95 


He  sets  out  in  his  essay  with  a full  conviction,  com- 
mon to  him  with  other  philosophers,  that  ideas  in  the 
mind  are  the  objects  of  all  our  thoughts  in  every  oper- 
ation of  the  understanding.  This  leads  him  to  use 
the  word  idea *  * so  very  frequently,  beyond  what  was 
usual  in  the  English  language,  that  he  thought  it  neces- 
sary in  his  introduction  to  make  this  apology : — “It 
being  that  term,”  says  he,  “ which,  I think,  serves  best 
to  stand  for  whatsoever  is  the  object  of  the  understand- 
ing, when  a man  thinks,  I have  used  it  to  express  what- 
ever is  meant  by  phantasm^  notion^  species^  or  whatever 
it  is  which  the  mind  can  be  employed  about  in  think- 
ing ; and  I could  not  avoid  frequently  using  it.  I pre- 
sume it  will  be  granted  me,  that  there  are  such  ideas 
in  men’s  minds;  every  man  is  conscious  of  them  in 
himself,  and  men’s  words  and  actions  will  satisfy  him 
that  they  are  in  others.” 

Speaking  of  the  reality  of  our  knowledge,  he  says, — 
“ It  is  evident  the  mind  knovjs  not  things  immediately^ 
but  only  by  the  intervention  of  the  ideas  it  has  of  them. 
Our  knowledge,  therefore,  is  real,  only  so  far  as  there 
is  a conformity  between  our  ideas  and  the  reality  of 
things.  But  what  shall  be  here  the  criterion  ? How 
shall  the  mind,  when  it  perceives  nothing  but  its  own 
ideas,  know  that  they  agree  with  things  themselves  ? 
This,  though  it  seems  not  to  want  difficulty,  yet  I think 
there  be  two  sorts  of  ideas  that  we  may  be  assured 
agree  with  things.” 

We  see  that  Mr.  Locke  was  aware,  no  less  than  Des- 
cartes, that  the  doctrine  of  ideas  made  it  necessary,  and 
at  the  same  time  difficult,  to  prove  the  existence  of  a 
material  world  without  us ; because  the  mind,  accord- 
ing to  that  doctrine,  perceives  nothing  but  a world  of 


and  Peace^  the  Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding^  the  Spirit  of  Laws^ 
and  the  Inquiry  into  the  Causes  of  the  Wealth  of  Nations^  are  the  works 
which  have  most  directly  influenced  the  general  opinion  of  Europe  during 
the  last  two  centuries.”  — Edinburgh  Review,  Vol.  XXXVI.  p.  240.  The 
Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding  was  first  printed  in  1690.  — Ed. 

* Locke  may  be  said  to  have  first  naturalized  the  word  in  English  philo- 
sophical language,  in  its  Cartesian  extension.  — II. 


96 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


ideas  in  itself.  Not  only  Descartes,  but  Malebranche 
and  Arnauld,  had  perceived  this  difficulty,  and  attempt- 
ed to  remove  it  with  little  success.  Mr.  Locke  attempts 
the  same  thing;  but  his  arguments  are  feeble.  He 
even  seems  to  be  conscious  of  this ; for  he  concludes 
his  reasoning  with  this  observation,  — “ That  we  have 
evidence  sufficient  to  direct  us  in  attaining  the  good 
and  avoiding  the  evil  caused  by  external  objects,  and 
that  this  is  the  important  concern  we  have  in  being 
made  acquainted  with  them.”  This,  indeed,  is  saying 
no  more  than  will  be  granted  by  those  who  deny  the 
existence  of  a material  world. 

As  there  is  no  material  difference  between  Locke  and 
Descartes  with  regard  to  the  perception  of  objects  by 
the  senses,  there  is  the  less  occasion,  in  this  place, 
to  take  notice  of  all  their  differences  in  other  points. 
They  differed  about  the  origin  of  our  ideas.  Descartes 
thought  some  of  them  were  innate ; * the  other  main- 
tained, that  there  are  no  innate  ideas,  and  that  they  are 
all  derived  from  two  sources,  — to  wit,  sensation  and 
reflection;  meaning  by  sensation  the  operations  of  our 
external  senses,  and  by  reflection  that  attention  which 
we  are  capable  of  giving  to  the  operations  of  our  own 
minds.f 

They  differed  with  regard  to  the  essence  both  of  mat- 
ter and  of  mind : the  British  philosopher  holding,  that 
the  real  essence  of  both  is  beyond  the  reach  of  human 
knowledge;  the  other  conceiving,  that  the  very  essence 


* The  doctrine  of  Descartes,  in  relation  to  innate  ideas,  has  been  very 
generally  misunderstood  ; and  by  no  one  more  than  by  Locke.  What  it 
really  amounted  to  is  clearly  stated  in  his  strictures  on  the  Program  of 
Regius.  Justice  has  latterly  been  done  him,  among  others,  by  Mr.  Stew- 
art, in  his  Dissertation,  and  by  M.  Laromiguiere,  in  his  Cours.  See  also  the 
old  controversy  of  De  Vries  with  Roell  on  this  point.  — H. 

t That  Locke  did  not  (as  even  Mr.  Stewart  supposes)  introduce  reflec- 
tion, either  name  or  thing,  into  the  philosophy  of  mind,  see  Note  I.  Nor 
was  he  even  the  first  explicitly  to  enunciate  sense  and  reflection  as  the  two 
sources  of  our  knowledge  ; for  I can  show  that  this  had  been  done  in  a 
far  more  philosophical  manner  by  some  of  the  schoolmen  ; reflection  with 
them  not  being  merely,  as  with  Locke,  a source  of  adventitious,  empirical, 
or  a posteriori  knowledge,  but  the  mean  by  which  we  disclose  also  the 
native  or  a priori  cognitions  which  the  intellect  itself  contains.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LOCKE. 


97 


of  mind  consists  in  thought,  and  that  of  matter  in  ex- 
tension, by  which  he  made  matter  and  space  not  to 
diflfer  in  reality,  and  no  part  of  space  to  be  void  of 
matter. 

Mr.  Locke  explained,  more  distinctly  than  had  been 
done  before,  the  operations  of  the  mind  in  classing  the 
various  objects  of  thought,  and  reducing  them  to  genera 
and  species.  He  was  the  first,  I think,  who  distin- 
guished in  substances  what  he  calls  the  nominal  essence, 
which  is  only  the  notion  we  form  of  a genus  or  species, 
and  which  we  express  by  a definition,  from  the  real 
essence  or  internal  constitution  of  the  thing,  which 
makes  it  to  be  what  it  is.*  Without  this  distinction, 
the  subtile  disputes  which  tortured  the  schoolmen  for 
so  many  ages,  in  the  controversy  between  the  nominal- 
ists and  realists,  could  never  be  brought  to  an  issue. 
He  shows  distinctly  how  we  form  abstract  and  general 
notions,  and  the  use  and  necessity  of  them  in  reason- 
ing. And  as  (according  to  the  received  principles  of 
philosophers)  every  notion  of  our  mind  must  have  for 
its  object  an  idea  in  the  mind  itself,  he  thinks  that  we 
form  abstract  ideas  by  leaving  out  of  the  idea  of  an 
individual  every  thing  wherein  it  differs  from  other  in- 
dividuals of  the  same  species  or  genus ; and  that  this 
power  of  forming  abstract  ideas  is  that  which  chiefly 
distinguishes  us  from  brute  animals,  in  whom  he  could 
see  no  evidence  of  any  abstract  ideas. 

Since  the  time  of  Descartes,  philosophers  have  dif- 
fered much  with  regard  to  the  share  they  ascribe  to  the 
mind  itself  in  the  fabrication  of  those  representative 
beings  called  ideas^  and  the  manner  in  which  this  work 
is  carried  on. 

Of  the  authors  I have  met  with.  Dr.  Robert  Hook  is 
the  most  explicit.  He  was  one  of  the  most  ingenious 
and  active  members  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London 
at  its  first  institution,  and  frequently  read  lectures  to 
the  Society,  which  were  published  among  his  posthu- 
mous works.  In  his  Lectures  upon  Lights  § 7,  he  makes 


Locke  has  no  originality  in  this  respect.  — H. 


98 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


ideas  to  be  material  substances ; and  thinks  that  the 
brain  is  furnished  with  a proper  kind  of  matter  for  fab- 
ricating the  ideas  of  each  sense.  The  ideas  of  sight, 
he  thinks,  are  formed  of  a kind  of  matter  resembling 
the  Bononian  stone,  or  some  kind  of  phosphorus ; that 
the  ideas  of  sound  are  formed  of  some  matter  resem- 
bling the  chords  or  glasses  which  take  a sound  from  the 
vibrations  of  the  air ; and  so  of  the  rest. 

The  soul,  he  thinks,  may  fabricate  some  hundreds  of 
those  ideas  in  a day ; and  that,  as  they  are  formed, 
they  are  pushed  farther  off  from  the  centre  of  the  brain, 
where  the  soul  resides.  By  this  means,  they  make  a 
continued  chain  of  ideas,  coiled  up  in  the  brain,  the 
first  end  of  which  is  farthest  removed  from  the  centre 
or  seat  of  the  soul,  and  the  other  end  is  always  at  the 
centre,  being  the  last  idea  formed,  which  is  always  pres- 
ent the  moment  when  considered;  and  therefore,  ac- 
cording as  there  is  a greater  number  of  ideas  between 
the  present  sensation  or  thought  in  the  centre  and  any 
other,  the  soul  is  apprehensive  of  a larger  portion  of 
time  interposed. 

Mr.  Locke  has  not  entered  into  so  minute  a detail  of 
this  manufacture  of  ideas;  but  he  ascribes  to  the  mind 
a very  considerable  hand  in  forming  its  own  ideas. 
With  regard  to  our  sensations,  the  mind  is  passive, 
“ they  being  produced  in  us  only  by  different  degrees 
and  modes  of  motion  in  our  animal  spirits,  variously 
agitated  by  external  objects.”  These,  however,  cease 
to  be,  as  soon  as  they  cease  to  be  perceived ; but,  by 
the  faculties  of  memory  and  imagination,  ^‘the  mind 
has  an  ability,  when  it  wills,  to  revive  them  again,  and, 
as  it  were,  to  paint  them  anew  upon  itself,  though  some 
with  more,  some  with  less  difficulty.” 

As  to  the  ideas  of  reflection,  he  ascribes  them  to  no 
other  cause  but  to  that  attention  which  the  mind  is 
capable  of  giving  to  its  own  operations  : these,  there- 
fore, are  formed  by  the  mind  itself.  He  ascribes  like- 
wise to  the  mind  the  power  of  compounding  its  simple 
ideas  into  complex  ones  of  various  forms ; of  repeating 
them,  and  adding  the  repetitions  together ; of  dividing 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LOCKE. 


99 


and  classing  them ; of  comparing  them,  and,  from  that 
comparison,  of  forming  the  ideas  of  their  relation; 
nay,  of  forming  a general  idea  of  a species  or  genus, 
by  taking  from  the  idea  of  an  individual  every  thing 
by  which  it  is  distinguished  from  other  individuals  of 
the  kind,  till  at  last  it  becomes  an  abstract  general  idea, 
common  to  all  the  individuals  of  the  kind. 

The  ideas  we  have  of  the  various  qualities  of  bodies 
are  not  all,  as  Mr.  Locke  thinks,  of  the  same  kind. 
Some  of  them  are  images  or  resemblances  of  what  is 
really  in  the  body ; others  are  not.  There  are  certain 
qualities  inseparable  from  matter;  such  as  extension, 
solidity,  figure,  mobility.  Our  ideas  of  these  are  real 
resemblances  of  the  qualities  in  the  body ; and  these  he 
calls  primary  qualities : but  color,  sound,  taste,  smell, 
heat,  and  cold  he  calls  secondary  qualities^  and  thinks 
that  they  are  only  powers  in  bodies  of  producing  cer- 
tain sensations  in  us ; which  sensations  have  nothing 
resembling  them^  though  they  are  commonly  thought  to 
be  exact  resemblances  of  something  in  the  body.* 
Thus,”  says  he,  “ the  ideas  of  heat  or  light,  which  we 
receive,  by  our  eye  or  touch,  from  the  sun,  are  com- 
monly thought  real  qualities  existing  in  the  sun,  and 
something  more  than  mere  powers  in  it.” 

Perhaps  it  was  unfortunate  for  Mr.  Locke  that  he 
used  the  word  idea  so  very  frequently  as  to  make  it 
very  difficult  to  give  the  attention  necessary  to  put  it 
always  to  the  same  meaning.  And  it  appears  evident, 
that,  in  many  places,  he  means  nothing  more  by  it  than 
the  notion  or  conception  we  have  of  any  object  of 
thought ; that  is,  the  act  of  the  mind  in  conceiving  it, 
and  not  the  object  conceived.f 


Locke  only  gave  a new  meaning  to  old  terms.  The  first  and  second^ 
or  the  primary  and  secondary  qualities  of  Aristotle,  denoted  a distinction 
similar  to,  hut  not  identical  with,  that  in  question.  Locke  distinguished 
nothing  which  had  not  been  more  precisely  discriminated  hy  Aristotle  and 
the  Cartesians.  — H. 

t When  we  contemplate  a triangle,  we  may  consider  it  either  as  a com- 
plement of  three  sides  or  of  three  angles ; not  that  the  three  sides  and  the 
three  angles  are  possible  except  through  each  other,  but  because  we  may 
in  thought  view  the  figure  — qua  triangle,  in  reality  one  and  indivisible  — 


I 


100  SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 

In  explaining  this  word,  he  says  that  he  uses  it  for 
whatever  is  meant  by  phantasm^  notion^  species.  Here 
are  three  synonymes  to  the  word  idea.  The  first  and 
last  are  very  proper  to  express  the  philosophical  mean- 
ing of  the  word,  being  terms  of  art  in  the  Peripatetic 
philosophy,  and  signifying  images  of  external  things  in 
the  mind,  which,  according  to  that  philosophy,  are  ob- 
jects of  thought.  But  the  word  notion  is  a word  in 
common  language,  whose  meaning  agrees  exactly  with 
the  popular  meaning  of  the  word  idea^  but  not  with  the 
philosophical. 

When  these  two  different  meanings  of  the  word  idea 
are  confounded  in  a studied  explication  of  it,  there  is 
little  reason  to  expect  that  they  should  be  carefully  dis- 
tinguished in  the  frequent  use  of  it.  There  are  many 
passages  in  the  essay,  in  which,  to  make  them  intelli- 
gible, the  word  idea  must  be  taken  in  one  of  those 
senses,  and  many  others,  in  which  it  must  be  taken  in 
the  other.  It  seems  probable  that  the  author,  not  at- 
tending to  this  ambiguity  of  the  word,  used  it  in  the  one 
sense  or  the  other,  as  the  subject-matter  required ; and 
the  far  greater  part  of  his  readers  have  done  the  same. 

There  is  a third  sense  in  which  he  uses  the  word  not 
unfrequently,  — to  signify  objects  of  thought  that  are  not 


in  different  relations.  In  like  manner,  we  may  consider  a representative 
act  of  knowledge  in  two  relations, — 1st,  as  an  act  representative  of  some- 
thing, and,  2d,  as  an  act  cognitive  of  that  representation,  although,  in 
truth,  these  are  both  only  one  indivisible  energy,  — the  representation  only 
existing  as  known,  the  cognition  being  only  possible  in  a representation. 
Thus,  e.  g.,  in  the  imagination  of  a Centaur,  the  Centaur  represented  is  the 
Centaur  known,  the  Centaur  known  is  the  Centaur  represented.  It  is  one  act 
under  two  relations,  — a relation  to  the  subject  knowing,  a relation  to  the  ob- 
ject represented.  But  to  a cognitive  act  considered  in  these  several  relations 
we  may  give  either  different  names,  or  we  may  confound  them  under  one, 
or  we  may  do  both : and  this  is  actually  done ; some  words  expressing  only 
one  relation,  others  both  or  either,  and  others  properly  one,  but  abusively 
also  the  other.  Thus  idea  properly  denotes  an  act  of  thought  considered 
in  relation  to  an  external  something  beyond  the  sphere  of  consciousness, 
— a representation;  but  some  philosophers,  as  Locke,  abuse  it  to  compre- 
hend the  thought  also,  viewed  as  cognitive  of  this  representation.  Again, 
perception,  notion^  conception^  ^c.,  (concept  is,  unfortunately,  obsolete,)  com- 
prehend both,  or  may  be  used  to  denote  either  of  the  relations ; and  it 
is  only  by  the  context  that  we  can  ever  vaguely  discover  in  which  applica- 
tion they  are  intended.  This  is  unfortunate  5 but  so  it  is.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LOCKE. 


101 


in  the  mind,  but  external.  Of  this  he  seems  to  be  sen- 
sible, and  somewhere  makes  an  apology  for  it.  When 
he  affirms,  as  he  does  in  innumerable  places,  that  all 
human  knowledge  consists  in  the  perception  of  the 
agreement  or  disagreement  of  our  ideas,  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  put  a meaning  upon  this,  consistent  with  his 
principles,  unless  he  means  by  ideas  every  object  of 
human  thought,  whether  mediate  or  immediate ; every 
thing,  in  a word,  that  can  be  signified  by  the  subject  or 
by  the  predicate  of  a proposition. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  word  idea  has  three  different 
meanings  in  the  essay ; and  the  author  seems  to  have 
used  it  sometimes  in  one,  sometimes  in  another,  with- 
out being  aware  of  any  change  in  the  meaning.  The 
reader  slides  easily  into  the  same  fallacy,  that  meaning 
occurring  most  readily  to  his  mind  which  gives  the  best 
sense  to  what  he  reads.  I have  met  with  persons  pro- 
fessing no  slight  acquaintance  with  the  Essay  concerning 
Human  Understandings  who  maintained  that  the  word 
ideas  wherever  it  occurs,  means  nothing  more  than 
thought;  and  that  where  the  author  speaks  of  ideas 
as  images  in  the  mind,  and  as  objects  of  thought,  he  is 
not  to  be  understood  as  speaking  properly,  but  figura- 
tively or  analogically : and,  indeed,  I apprehend  that  it 
would  be  no  small  advantage  to  many  passages  in  the 
book,  if  they  could  admit  of  this  interpretation. 

It  is  not  the  fault  of  this  philosopher  alone  to  have 
given  too  little  attention  to  the  distinction  between  the 
operations  of  the  mind,  and  the  objects  of  those  opera- 
tions. Although  this  distinction  be  familiar  to  the  vul- 
gar, and  found  in  the  structure  of  all  languages,  philos- 
ophers, when  they  speak  of  ideas,  often  confound  the 
two  together;  and  their  theory  concerning  ideas  has 
led  them  to  do  so ; for  ideas,  being  supposed  to  be  a 
shadowy  kind  of  beings,  intermediate  between  the 
thought  and  the  object  of  thought,  sometimes  seem  to 
coalesce  with  the  thought,  sometimes  with  the  object 
of  thought,  and  sometimes  to  have  a distinct  existence 
of  their  own. 

The  same  philosophical  theory  of  ideas  has  led  phi- 
9* 


102 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


losophers  to  confound  the  different  operations  of  the 
understanding,  and  to  call  them  all  by  the  name  of 
perception.'^  Mr.  Locke,  though  not  free  from  this 
fault,  is  not  so  often  chargeable  with  it  as  some  who 
came  after  him.  The  vulgar  give  the  name  of  percep- 
tion to  that  immediate  knowledge  of  external  objects 
which  we  have  by  our  external  senses.  This  is  its 
proper  meaning  in  our  language,  though  sometimes  it 
may  be  applied  to  other  things  metaphorically  or  ana- 
logically. When  I think  of  any  thing  that  does  not 
exist,  as  of  the  republic  of  Oceana,  I do  not  perceive 
it ; I only  conceive  or  imagine  it.f  When  I think  of 
what  happened  to  me  yesterday,  I do  not  perceive.^  but 
remember  it.  When  I am  pained  with  the  gout,  it  is 
not  proper  to  say  I perceive  the  pain  ; I feel  it,  or  am 
conscious  of  it.J  It  is  not  an  object  of  perception,  but 
of  sensation  and  of  consciousness.  So  far,  the  vulgar 
distinguish  very  properly  the  different  operations  of  the 
mind,  and  never  confound  the  names  of  things  so  dif- 
ferent in  their  nature.  But  the  theory  of  ideas  leads 
philosophers  to  conceive  all  those  operations  to  be  of 
one  nature,  and  to  give  them,  one  name.  They  are  all, 
according  to  that  theory,  the  perception  of  ideas  in  the 
mind.  Perceiving,  remembering,  imagining,  being  con- 
scious, are  all  perceiving  ideas  in  the  mind,  and  are 


* No  more  than  by  calling  them  all  by  the  name  of  cognitions^  or  acts  of 
consciousness.  There  was  no  reason,  either  from  etymology  or  usage,  why 
perceptio?i  should  not  signify  the  energy  of  immediately  apprehending,  in 
general;  and  until  Reid  limited  the  word  to  our  apprehension  of  an  external 
worlds  it  was,  in  fact,  employed  by  philosophers  as  tantamount  to  an  act  of 
consciousness.  We  were  in  need  of  a word  to  express  our  sensitive  cog- 
nitions as  distinct  from  our  sensitive  feelings.^  (for  the  term  sensation  involved 
both.)  and  therefore  Reid’s  restriction  should  be  adopted ; but  his  criti- 
cism of  other  philosophers  for  their  employment  of  the  term  in  a wider 
meaning  is  wholly  groundless.  — H. 

t And  why  ? Simply  because  we  do  not,  by  such  an  act,  know  or  appre- 
hend such  an  object  to  exist,  which  is  what  perception^  in  its  wider  accepta- 
tion, was  used  to  denote ; we  merely  represent  the  object.  We  could  say, 
however,  that  we  perceived  (as  we  could  say  that  we  were  conscious  of)  the 
republic  of  Oceana,  as  imagined  by  us,  after  Harrington.  — H. 

f Because  the  feeling  of  pain,  though  only  possible  through  conscious- 
ness, is  not  an  act  of  knowledge.  But  it  could  have  been  properly  said, 
J perceive  a feeling  of  pain.  At  any  rate,  the  expression  I perceive  a pain 
is  as  correct  as  I am  conscious  of  a pain.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. LOCKE. 


103 


called  perceptions.  Hence  it  is  that  philosophers  speak 
of  the  perceptions  of  memory  and  the  perceptions  of 
imagination.  They  make  sensation  to  be  a perception, 
and  every  thing  we  perceive  by  our  senses  to  be  an 
idea  of  sensation.  Sometimes  they  say,  that  they  are 
conscious  of  the  ideas  in  their  own  minds  ; sometimes, 
that  they  perceive  them. 

However  improbable  it  may  appear  that  philoso- 
phers, who  have  taken  pains  to  study  the  operations 
of  their  own  minds,  should  express  them  less  properly 
and  less  distinctly  than  the  vulgar,  it  seems  really  to  be 
the  case ; and  the  only  account  that  can  be  given  of 
this  strange  phenomenon  I take  to  be  this : that  the 
vulgar  seek  no  theory  to  account  for  the  operations  of 
their  minds ; they  know  that  they  see,  and  hear,  and 
remember,  and  imagine  ; and  those  who  think  distinct- 
ly will  express  these  operations  distinctly,  as  their  con- 
sciousness represents  them  to  the  mind.  But  philoso- 
phers think  they  ought  to  know,  not  only  that  there  are 
such  operations,  but  how  they  are  performed  ; how  they 
see,  and  hear,  and  remember,  and  imagine ; and,  hav- 
ing invented  a theory  to  explain  these  operations  by 
ideas  or  images  in  the  mind,  they  suit  their  expressions 
to  their  theory ; and,  as  a false  comment  throws  a cloud 
upon  the  text,  so  a false  theory  darkens  the  phenomena 
which  it  attempts  to  explain.* 

* An  authentic  and  ample,  but  ill-digested  and  unsatisfactory  Life  of 
John  Loc.he^  with  Extracts  from,  his  Correspondence^  Journals^  and  Common- 
place Books,  was  published  by  Lord  King  (2d  ed.,  2 vols..  8vo,  London, 
1830).  The  best  and  most  complete  edition  of  his  works  is  that  in  10 
vols.,  8vo,  London,  1801,  and  again  in  1810.  The  criticisms  and  polemics 
to  winch  his  writings  have  given  rise  are  innumerable,  of  which  the  fol- 
lowing may  be  referred  to  as  being  among  the  most  recent  and  remark- 
able : — De  Maistre,  Lcs  Soirees  de  Saint- Peter sbouj'ge,  Sixieme  Entretien. 
Cousin,  Flistoire  de  la  Philosophie  du  XVIIP  xSiCc/e,  Tome  II. ; of  this  we 
have  an  English  translation  by  Professor  Henry,  Elements  of  Psychology : 
included  in  a Critical  Examination  of  Locke's  Essay  on  the  Human  Under- 
standing (3d  ed.,  12mo,  New  York,  1842).  Tennemann’s  Abh.  iiber  den 
Empirismus  in  der  Philosophie,^  vorzUglich  den  Lockischen,,  inserted  in  the 
third  volume  of  his  German  translation  of  Locke’s  Essay.  Hallam’s  Lit- 
erature of  Europe,,  from  1650'to  1700,  Chap.  III.  Morell’s  Hist,  and  Crit. 
View  of  Speculative  Philosophy^  Part  I.  Chap.  I.  Sect.  II,  Compare  what 
Stewart  says  of  Locke,  in  the  first  of  his  Philosophical  Essays,  with  what 
he  says  of  him  in  his  Dissertation,  Part  II.  Sect.  I.  and  II.  — Ed. 


104 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


VIIL  Berkelej/s  Theory,]  George  Berkeley,*  after- 
wards Bishop  of  Cloyne,  published  his  Neio  Theory  of 
Vision  in  1709;  his  Treatise  concerning^  the  Principles 
of  Human  Knowledge,,  in  1710 ; and  his  Dialogues  be- 
tween Hylas  and  Philonous^  in  1713  ; being  then  a Fel- 
low of  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  He  is  acknowledged 
universally  to  have  great  merit,  as  an  excellent  writer, 
and  a very  acute  and  clear  reasoner  on  the  most  ab- 
stract subjects,  not  to  speak  of  his  virtues  as  a man, 
which  were  very  conspicuous ; yet  the  doctrine  chiefly 
held  forth  in  the  treatises  above  mentioned,  especially 
in  the  last  two,  has  generally  been  thought  so  very  ab- 
surd, that  few  can  be  brought  to  think,  either  that  he 
believed  it  himself,  or  that  he  seriously  meant  to  per- 
suade others  of  its  truth. 

He  maintains,  and  thinks  he  has  demonstrated,  by  a 
variety  of  arguments,  grounded  on  principles  of  phi- 
losophy universally  received,  that  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  matter  in  the  universe ; that  sun  and  moon,  earth 
and  sea,  our  own  bodies,  and  those  of  our  friends,  are 
nothing  but  ideas  in  the  minds  of  those  who  think  of 
them,  and  that  they  have  no  existence  when  they  are 
not  the  objects  of  thought;  that  all  that  is  in  the  uni- 
verse may  be  reduced  to  two  categories,  — to  wit,  minds,, 
and  ideas  in  the  mind. 

But  however  absurd  this  doctrine  might  appear  to 
the  unlearned,  who  consider  the  existence  of  the  objects 
of  sense  as  the  most  evident  of  all  truths,  and  what  no 
man  in  his  senses  can  doubt,  the  philosophers,  who  had 
been  accustomed  to  consider  ideas  as  the  immediate 
objects  of  all  thought,  had  no  title  to  view  this  doctrine 
of  Berkeley  in  so  unfavorable  a light. 

They  were  taught  by  Descartes,  and  by  all  that  came 
after  him,  that  the  existence  of  the  objects  of  sense  is 
not  self-evident,  but  requires  to  be  proved  by  argu- 
ments; and  although  Descartes,  and  many  others,  had 


^ Born  at  Kilerin,  in  the  county  of  Kilkenny,  March  12,  1684,  and  died 
at  Oxford,  January  14,  1753,  whither  he  had  repaired  a few  months  before 
to  superintend  the  education  of  one  of  his  sons.  — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION.  BERKELEY.  105 

labored  to  find  arguments  for  this  purpose,  there  4id 
not  appear  to  be  that  force  and  clearness  in  them  which 
might  have  been  expected  in  a matter  of  such  impor- 
tance. Mr.  Norris  had  declared,  that,  after  all  the  argu- 
ments that  had  been  offered,  the  existence  of  an  exter- 
nal world  is  only  probable,  but  by  no  means  certain. 
Malebranche  thought  it  rested  upon  the  authority  of 
revelation,  and  that  the  arguments  drawn  from  reason 
were  not  perfectly  conclusive.  Others  thought,  that 
the  argument  from  revelation  was  a mere  sophism,  be- 
cause revelation  comes  to  us  by  our  senses,  and  must 
rest  upon  their  authority. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  new  philosophy  had  been  mak- 
ing gradual  approaches  towards  Berkeley’s  opinion ; 
and,  whatever  others  might  do,  the  philosophers  had  no 
title  to  look  upon  it  as  absurd,  or  unworthy  of  a fair 
examination.  Several  authors  attempted  to  answer 
his  arguments,  but  with  little  success,  and  others  ac- 
knowledged that  they  could  neither  answer  them  nor 
assent  to  them.  It  is  probable  the  Bishop  made  but 
few  converts  to  his  doctrine ; but  it  is  certain  he  made 
some ; and  that  he  himself  continued,  to  the  end  of  his 
life,  firmly  persuaded,  not  only  of  its  truth,  but  of  its 
great  importance  for  the  improvement  of  human  knowl- 
edge, and  especially  for  the  defence  of  religion.  Dial, 
Pref.  “ If  the  principles  which  I here  endeavour  to 
propagate  are  admitted  for  true,  the  consequences 
which  I think  evidently  flow  from  thence  are,  that 
atheism  and  skepticism  will  be  utterly  destroyed,  many 
intricate  points  made  plain,  great  difficulties  solved, 
several  useless  parts  of  science  retrenched,  speculation 
referred  to  practice,  and  men  reduced  from  paradoxes 
to  common  sense.” 

In  the  Theory  of  Vision  he  goes  no  farther  than  to 
assert,  that  the  objects  of  sight  are  nothing  but  ideas 
in  the  mind,  granting,  or  at  least  not  denying,  that  there 
is  a tangible  world,  wMch  is  really  external,  and  which 
exists  whether  we  perceive  it  or  not.  Whether  the 
reason  of  this  was,  that  his  system  had  not,  at  that 
time,  wholly  opened  to  his  own  mind,  or  whether  he 


106 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


thought  it  prudent  to  let  it  into  the  minds  of  his  read- 
ers by  degrees,  I cannot  say.  I think  he  insinuates  the 
last  as  the  reason  in  the  Principles  of  Human  Knowl- 
edge. 

The  Theory  of  Vision^  however,  taken  by  itself,  and 
without  relation  to  the  main  branch  of  his  system, 
contains  very  important  discoveries,  and  marks  of  great 
genius.  He  distinguishes,  more  accurately  than  any 
that  went  before  him,  between  the  immediate  objects 
of  sight,  and  those  of  the  other  senses  which  are  early 
associated  with  them:  he  shows,  that  distance,  of  it- 
self, and  immediately,  is  not  seen  ; but  that  we  learn  to 
judge  of  it  by  certain  sensations  and  perceptions  which 
are  connected  with  it.  This  is  a very  important  obser- 
vation, and  I believe  was  first  made  by  this  author.* 
It  gives  much  new  light  to  the  operations  of  our  senses, 
and  serves  to  account  for  many  phenomena  in  optics, 
of  which  the  greatest  adepts  in  that  science  had  always 
either  given  a false  account,  or  acknowledged  that  they 
could  give  none  at  all. 

We  may  observe  by  the  way,  that  the  ingenious 
author  seems  not  to  have  attended  to  a distinction  by 
which  his  general  assertion  ought  to  have  been  limited. 
It  is  true  that  the  distance  of  an  object  from  the  eye  is 
not  immediately  seen  ; but  there  is  a certain  kind  of 
distance  of  one  object  from  another  which  we  see  im- 
mediately. The  author  acknowledges  that  there  are 
a visible  extension  and  visible  figures,  which  are  proper 
objects  of  sight;  there  must  therefore  be  a visible  dis- 
tance. Astronomers  call  it  angular  distance ; and 
although  they  measure  it  by  the  angle  which  is  made 
by  two  lines  drawn  from  the  eye  to  the  two  distinct 
objects,  yet  it  is  immediately  perceived  by  sight,  even 
by  those  who  never  thought  of  that  angle. 

He  led  the  way  in  showing  how  we  learn  to  perceive 
the  distance  of  an  object  from  the  eye,  though  this 
speculation  was  carried  farther  by  others  who  came 
after  him.  He  made  the  distinction  between  that  ex- 


This  last  statement  is  inaccurate.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. BERKELEY.  107 

tension  and  figure  which  we  perceive  by  sight  only, 
and  that  which  we  perceive  by  touch  ; calling  the  first 
visible^  the  last,  tangible  extension  and  figure.  He 
showed,  likewise,  that  tangible  extension,  and  not  visi- 
ble, is  the  object  of  geometry,  although  mathematicians 
commonly  use  visible  diagrams  in  their  demonstra- 
tions.* 

The  notion  of  extension  and  figure  which  we  get 
from  sight  only,  and  that  which  we  get  from  touchy 
have  been  so  constantly  conjoined  from  our  infancy  in 
all  the  judgments  we  form  of  the  objects  of  sense,  that 
it  required  great  abilities  to  distinguish  them  accu- 
rately, and  to  assign  to  each  sense  what  truly  belongs 
to  it ; ‘‘  so  difficult  a thing  it  is,”  as  Berkeley  justly 
observes,  to  dissolve  a union  so  early  begun,  and  con- 
firmed by  so  long  a habit.”  This  point  he  has  labored, 
through  the  whole  of  the  essay  on  vision,  with  that  un- 
common penetration  and  judgment  which  he  possessed, 
and  with  as  great  success  as  could  be  expected  in  a 
first  attempt  upon  so  abstruse  a subject. 

In  the  new  philosophy,  the  pillars  by  which  the  ex- 
istence of  a material  world  was  supported  were  so 
feeble,  that  it  did  not  require  the  force  of  a Samson  to 
bring  them  down ; and  in  this  we  have  not  so  much 
reason  to  admire  the  strength  of  Berkeley’s  genius,  as 
his  boldness  in  publishing  to  the  world  an  opinion, 
which  the  unlearned  would  be  apt  to  interpret  as  the 
sign  of  a crazy  intellect.  A man  who  was  firmly  per- 
suaded of  the  doctrine  universally  received  by  philos- 
ophers concerning  ideas,  if  he  could  but  take  courage 
to  call  in  question  the  existence  of  a material  world, 
would  easily  find  unanswerable  arguments  in  that  doc- 
trine. “ Some  truths  there  are,”  says  Berkeley,  “ so 
near  and  obvious  to  the  mind,  that  a man  need  only 
open  his  eyes  to  see  them.  Such,”  he  adds,  I take 
this  important  one  to  be,  that  all  the  choir  of  heaven, 


* Properly  speaking,  it  is  neither  tangible  nor  visible  extension  which  is 
the  object  of  geometry,  but  intelligible,  purc^  or  a priori  extension.  But  of 
this  distinction  more  hereafter.  — H. 


108 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


and  furniture  of  the  earth ; in  a word,  all  those  bodies 
which  compose  the  mighty  frame  of  the  world;  have 
not  any  subsistence  without  a mind.”  — Princ.^  Sect.  VI. 

The  principle  from  which  this  important  conclusion 
is  obviously  deduced,  is  laid  down  in  the  first  sentence 
of  his  Principles  of  Knowledge  as  evident : and,  indeed, 
it  had  always  been  acknowledged  by  philosophers. 
“ It  is  evident,”  says  he,  “ to  any  one  who  takes  a sur- 
vey of  the  objects  of  human  knowledge,  that  they  are 
either  ideas  actually  imprinted  on  the  senses,  or  else 
such  as  are  perceived  by  attending  to  the  passions  and 
operations  of  the  mind ; or,  lastly,  ideas  formed  by  help 
of  memory  and  imagination,  either  compounding,  di- 
viding, or  barely  representing  those  originally  perceived 
in  the  foresaid  ways.” 

This  is  the  foundation  on  which  the  whole  system 
rests.  If  this  be  true,  then,  indeed,  the  existence  of  a 
material  world  must  be  a dream  that  has  imposed  upon 
all  mankind  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 

The  foundation  on  which  such  a fabric  rests  ought 
to  be  very  solid,  and  well  established ; yet  Berkeley 
says  nothing  more  for  it  than  that  “ it  is  evident.”  If 
he  means  that  it  is  self-evident^  this,  indeed,  might  be  a 
good  reason  for  not  offering  any  direct  argument  in 
proof  of  it.  But  I apprehend  this  cannot  justly  be 
said.  Self-evident  propositions  are  those  which  appear 
evident  to  every  man  of  sound  understanding,  who 
apprehends  the  meaning  of  them  distinctly,  and  attends 
to  them  without  prejudice.  Can  this  be  said  of  this 
proposition,  that  all  the  objects  of  our  knowledge  are 
ideas  in  our  own  minds  ?*  I believe,  that,  to  any  man 


* To  the  idealist,  it  is  of  perfect  indifference  whether  this  proposition, 
in  Keid’s  sense  of  the  expression  ideas,  be  admitted,  or  whether  it  be  held 
that  we  are  conscious  of  nothing  but  of  the  modifications  of  our  own  minds. 
Tor  on  the  supposition  that  we  can  know  the  non-ego  only  in  and  through 
the  ego,  it  follows,  (since  we  can  know  nothing  immediately  of  which  we 
are  not  conscious,  and  it  being  allowed  that  we  are  conscious  only  of 
mind,)  that  it  is  contradictory  to  suppose  aught,  as  known,  (i.  e.  any  object 
of  knowledge.)  to  be  known  otherwise  than  as  a phenomenon  of  mind. 
— H.  ' 

In  another  connection,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  had  said,  that  we  might  give 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. BERKELEY.  109 

uninstmcted  in  philosophy,  this  proposition  will  appear 
very  improbable,  if  not  absurd.  However  scanty  his 
knowledge  may  be,  he  considers  the  sun  and  moon,  the 
earth  and  sea,  as  objects  of  it:  and  it  will  be  difficult 
to  persuade  him,  that  those  objects  of  his  knowledge 
are  ideas  in  his  own  mind,  and  have  no  existence  when 
he  does  not  think  of  them.  If  I may  presume  to  speak 
my  own  sentiments,  I once  believed  this  doctrine  of 
ideas  so  firmly,  as  to  embrace  the  whole  of  Berkeley’s 
system  in  consequence  of  it ; till,  finding  other  conse- 
quences to  follow  from  it  which  gave  me  more  uneasi- 
ness than  the  want  of  a material  world,  it  came  into 
my  mind,  more  than  forty  years  ago,  to  put  the  ques- 
tion, What  evidence  have  I for  this  doctrine,  that  all 
the  objects  of  my  knowledge  are  ideas  in  my  own 
mind?  From  that  time  to  the  present,  I have  been 


up  the  supposition  of  the  existence  of  ideas  as  tertia  qucedam,  distinct  at 
once  from  the  material  object  and  the  immaterial  subject,  and  yet  be  un- 
able to  confute  the  modern  doctrine  of  egoistical  idealism,  which  is  founded 
on  the  doctrine,  “ that  all  our  knowledge  is  merely  subjective^  or  of  the 
mind  itself ; that  the  ego  has  no  immediate  cognizance  of  a non-ego  as  ex- 
isting, but  that  the  non-ego  is  only  represented  to  us  in  a modification  of  the 
self-conscious  ego.  This  doctrine  being  admitted,  the  idealist  has  only  to 
show  that  the  supposition  of  a non-ego,  or  external  world  really  existent,  is 
a groundless  and  unnecessary  assumption ; for,  while  the  law  of  parcimony 
prohibits  the  multiplication  of  substances  or  causes  beyond  what  the  phe- 
nomena require,  we  have  manifestly  no  right  to  postulate  for  the  non-ego 
the  dignity  of  an  independent  substance  beyond  the  ego,  seeing  that  this 
non-ego  is,  ex  hypotliesi.,  known  to  us,  consequently  exists  for  us,  only  as  a 
phenomenon  of  the  ego.^^  Hence  he  argues  that  the  Scotch  philosophers, 
including  Reid,  did  not  go  far  enough  ; for  their  doctrine  respecting  the 
mere  suggestion  of  extension,  on  occasion  of  certain  sensations,  involves 
the  very  groundwork  on  which  modern  idealism  reposes.  “ All  our  knowl- 
edge of  the  non-ego  is  thus  rendered  merely  ideal  and  mediate ; we  have 
no  knowledge  of  any  really  objective  reality,  except  through  a subjective 
representation  or  notion ; in  other  words,  we  are  only  immediately  cog- 
nizant of  certain  modes  of  our  own  minds,  and,  in  and  through  them, 
mediately  warned  of  the  phenomena  of  the  material  universe.”  Taking 
this  position,  even  the  argument  from  common  sense  against  idealism  be- 
comes unavailing;  “for  the  common  sense  of  mankind  only  assures  us  of 
the  existence  of  an  external  and  extended  world,  in  assuring  us  that  we 
are  conscious,  not  merely  of  the  phenomena  of  mind  in  relation  to  matter, 
but  of  the  phenomena  of  matter  in  relation  to  mind,  — in  other  words, 
that  we  are  immediately  percipient  of  extended  things.”  Reid  himself,  he 
says,  seems  to  have  become  obscurely  aware  of  this  condition,  and  to  have 
accommodated  his  later  views  to  it.  — Ed. 

10 


110 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


candidly  and  impartially,  as  I think,  seeking  for  the 
evidence  of  this  principle,  but  can  find  none,  except- 
ing the  authority  of  philosophers. 

Berkeley  foresaw  the  opposition  that  would  be  made 
to  his  system,  from  two  different  quarters : firsts  from 
the  philosophers ; and,  secondly^  from  the  vulgar,  who 
are  led  by  the  plain  dictates  of  nature.  The  first  he 
had  the  courage  to  oppose  openly  and  avowedly;  the 
second  he  dreaded  much  more,  and  therefore  takes  a 
great  deal  of  pains,  and,  I think,  uses  some  art,  to  court 
into  his  party.  This  is  particularly  observable  in  his 
Dialogues,  He  sets  out  with  a declaration.  Dial,  1, 
‘‘  That,  of  late,  he  had  quitted  several  of  the  sublime 
notions  he  had  got  in  the  schools  of  the  philosophers 
for  vulgar  opinions,”  and  assures  Hylas,  his  fellow- 
dialogist,  “ That,  since  this  revolt  from  metaphysical 
notions  to  the  plain  dictates  of  nature  and  common 
sense,  he  found  his  understanding  strangely  enlight- 
ened ; so  that  he  could  now  easily  comprehend  a great 
many  things,  which  before  were  all  mystery  and  rid- 
dle.” Pref.  to  Dial,  If  his  principles  are  admitted  for 
true,  men  will  be  reduced  from  paradoxes  to  common 
sense.”  At  the  same  time,  he  acknowledges,  “ That 
they  carry  with  them  a great  opposition  to  the  preju- 
dices of  philosophers,  which  have  so  far  prevailed 
against  the  common  sense  and  natural  notions  of  man- 
kind.” 

When  Hylas  objects  to  him.  Dial,  3,  “ You  can 
never  persuade  me,  Philonous,  that  the  denying  of  mat- 
ter or  corporeal  substance  is  not  repugnant  to  the  uni- 
versal sense  of  mankind”;  he  answers,  “I  wish  both 
our  opinions  were  fairly  stated,  and  submitted  to  the 
judgment  of  men  who  had  plain  common  sense,  with- 
out the  prejudices  of  a learned  education.  Let  me  be 
represented  as  one  who  trusts  his  senses,  who  thinks 
he  knows  the  things  he  sees  and  feels,  and  entertains 
no  doubt  of  their  existence.  If  by  material  substance 
is  meant  only  sensible  body,,  that  ivhicli  is  seen  and  felt,, 
(and  the  unphilosophical  part  of  the  world,  I dare  say, 
mean  no  more,)  then  I am  more  certain  of  matter’s  ex^ 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. BERKELEY.  Ill 

istence  than  you  or  any  other  philosopher  pretend  to 
be.  If  there  be  any  thing  which  makes  the  generality 
of  mankind  averse  from  the  notions  I espouse,  it  is  a 
misapprehension  that  I deny  the  reality  of  sensible 
things  : but  as  it  is  you  who  are  guilty  of  that,  and  not 
T,  it  follows,  that,  in  truth,  their  aversion  is  against 
your  notions,  and  not  mine.  I am  content  to  appeal 
to  the  common  sense  of  the  world  for  the  truth  of  my 
notion.  I am  of  a vulgar  cast,  simple  enough  to  be- 
lieve my  senses,  and  to  leave  things  as  I find  them.  I 
cannot,  for  my  life,  help  thinking  that  snow  is  white, 
and  fire  hot.’’ 

When  Hylas  is  at  last  entirely  converted,  he  observes 
to  Philonous,  “ After  all,  the  controversy  about  matter, 
in  the  strict  acceptation  of  it,  lies  altogether  between 
you  and  the  philosophers,  whose  principles,  I acknowl- 
edge, are  not  near  so  natural,  or  so  agreeable  to  the 
common  sense  of  mankind,  and  Holy  Scripture,  as 
yours.”  Philonous  observes  in  the  end,  That  he  does 
not  pretend  to  be  a setter  up  of  new  notions  ; his  en- 
deavours tend  only  to  unite,  and  to  place  in  a clearer 
light,  that  truth  which  was  before  shared  between  the 
vulgar  and  the  philosophers ; the  former  being  of  opin- 
ion, that  those  things  they  immediately  perceive  are  the 
real  things^  and  the  latter,  that  the  things  immediately 
perceived  are  ideas  which  exist  only  in  the  mind;  which 
two  things  put  together  do,  in  effect,  constitute  the 
substance  of  what  he  advances.”  And  he  concludes 
by  observing,  “ That  those  principles  which  at  first 
view  lead  to  skepticism,  pursued  to  a certain  point, 
bring  men  back  to  common  sense.” 

These  passages  show  sufficiently  the  author’s  concern 
to  reconcile  his  system  to  the  plain  dictates  of  nature 
and  common  sense,  while  he  expresses  no  concern  to 
reconcile  it  to  the  received  doctrines  of  philosophers. 
He  is  fond  of  taking  part  with  the  vulgar  against  the 
philosophers,  and  of  vindicating  common  sense  against 
their  innovations.  What  pity  is  it  that  he  did  not 
carry  this  suspicion  of  the  doctrine  of  philosophers  so 
far  as  to  doubt  of  that  philosophical  tenet  on  which 


112 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


his  whole  system  is  built,  — to  wit,  that  the  things  im- 
mediately perceived  by  the  senses  are  ideas  which  exist 
only  in  the  mind ! 

After  all,  it  seems  no  easy  matter  to  make  the  vul- 
gar opinion  and  that  of  Berkeley  to  meet.  And  to 
accomplish  this,  he  seems  to  me  to  draw  each  out  of 
its  line  towards  the  other,  not  without  some  straining. 
The  vulgar  opinion  he  reduces  to  this,  that  the  very 
things  which  we  pei'ceive  by  our  senses  do  really  exist. 
This  he  grants.  For  these  things,  says  he,  are  ideas  in 
our  minds^  or  complexions  of  ideas^  to  which  we  give 
one  name^  and  consider  as  one  thing ; these  are  the  im- 
mediate objects  of  sense,  and  these  do  really  exist 
As  to  the  notion,  that  those  things  have  an  absolute 
external  existence^  independent  of  being  perceived  by 
any  mind,  he  thinks  that  this  is  no  notion  of  the  vul- 
gar, but  a refinement  of  philosophers;  and  that  the 
notion  of  material  substance,  as  a substratum  or  sup- 
port of  that  collection  of  sensible  qualities  to  which 
we  give  the  name  of  an  apple  or  a melon,  is  likewise 
an  invention  of  philosophers,  and  is  not  found  with  the 
vulgar  till  they  are  instructed  by  philosophers.  The 
substance  not  being  an  object  of  sense^  the  vulgar  never 
think  of  it ; or,  if  they  are  taught  the  use  of  the  word, 
they  mean  no  more  by  it  but  that  collection  of  sensible 
qualities  which  they,  from  finding  them  conjoined  in 
nature^  have  been  accustomed  to  call  by  one  name^  and 
to  consider  as  one  thing. 

Thus  he  draws  the  vulgar  opinion  near  to  his  own ; 
and,  that  he  may  meet  it  half  way,  he  acknowledges 
that  material  things  have  a real  existence  out  of  the 
mind  of  this  or  that  person;  but  the  question,  says  he, 
between  the  materialist  and  me  is.  Whether  they  have 
an  absolute  existence  distinct  from  their  being  perceived 
by  God^  and  exterior  to  all  minds  ? This,  indeed,  he 
says,  some  heathens  and  philosophers  have  affirmed ; 
but  whoever  entertains  notions  of  the  Deity  suitable  to 
the  Holy  Scripture  will  be  of  another  opinion. 

But  here  an  objection  occurs,  which  it  required  all 
his  ingenuity  to  answer.  It  is  this.  The  ideas  in  my 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. BERKELEY.  113 

mind  cannot  be  the  same  with  the  ideas  of  any  other 
mind;  therefore,  if  the  objects  I perceive  be  only  ideas^ 
it  is  impossible  that  the  objects  I perceive  can  exist 
anywhere  when  I do  not  perceive  them ; and  it  is  im- 
possible that  two  or  more  minds  can  perceive  the  same 
object 

To  this  Berkeley  answers,  that  this  objection  presses 
no  less  the  opinion  of  the  materialist  philosopher  than 
his.  But  the  difficulty  is,  to  make  his  opinion  coincide 
with  the  notions  of  the  vulgar^  who  are  firmly  per- 
suaded that  the  very  identical  objects  which  they  per- 
ceive continue  to  exist  when  they  do  not  perceive  them  ; 
and  who  are  no  less  firmly  persuaded,  that,  when  ten 
men  look  at  the  sun  or  the  moon,  they  all  see  the  same 
individual  object. 

To  reconcile  this  repugnancy,  he  observes,  DiaL  3, 
“ That  if  the  term  sajne  be  taken  in  the  vulgar  accepta- 
tion, it  is  certain,  (and  not  at  all  repugnant  to  the  prin- 
ciples he  maintains,)  that  different  persons  may  perceive 
the  same  thing;  or  the  same  thing  or  idea  exist  in  dif- 
ferent minds.  Words  are  of  arbitrary  imposition  ; and 
since  men  are  used  to  apply  the  word  same  where  no 
distinction  or  variety  is  perceived^  and  he  does  not  pre- 
tend to  alter  their  perceptions^  it  follows,  that,  as  men 
have  said  before.  Several  saw  the  same  things  so  they 
may,  upon  like  occasions,  still  continue  to  use  the  same 
phrase,  without  any  deviation  either  from  propriety  of 
language  or  the  truth  of  things.  But  if  the  term  same 
be  used  in  the  acceptation  of  philosophers,  who  pre- 
tend to  an  abstract  notion  of  identity,  then,  accord- 
ing to  their  sundry  definitions  of  this  term,  (for  it  is 
not  yet  agreed  wherein  that  philosophic  identity  con- 
sists,) it  may  or  may  not  be  possible  for  divers  persons 
to  perceive  the  same  thing ; but  whether  philosophers 
shall  think  fit  to  call  a thing  the  same  or  no,  is,  I con- 
ceive, of  small  importance.  Men  may  dispute  about 
identity  and  diversity,  without  any  real  difference  in 
their  thoughts  and  opinions,  abstracted  from  names.” 

Upon  the  whole,  I apprehend  that  Berkeley  has  car- 
ried this  attempt  to  reconcile  his  system  to  the  vulgar 
10^ 


114 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


opinion  farther  than  reason  supports  him : and  he  was 
no  doubt  tempted  to  do  so  from  a just  apprehension 
that,  in  a controversy  of  this  kind,  the  common  sense 
of  mankind  is  the  most  formidable  antagonist. 

Berkeley  has  employed  much  pains  and  ingenuity  to 
show  that  his  system,  if  received  and  believed,  would 
not  be  attended  with  those  bad  consequences  in  the 
conduct  of  life  which  superficial  thinkers  may  be  apt 
to  impute  to  it.  His  system  does  not  take  away,  or 
make  any  alteration  in,  our  pleasures  or  our  pains : our 
sensations,  whether  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  are  the 
same  upon  his  system  as  upon  any  other.  These  are 
real  things,  and  the  only  things  that  interest  us.  They 
are  produced  in  us  according  to  certain  laws  of  nature, 
by  which  our  conduct  will  be  directed  in  attaining  the 
one,  and  avoiding  the  other : and  it  is  of  no  moment 
to  us  whether  they  are  produced  immediately  by  the 
operation  of  some  powerful  intelligent  being  upon  our 
minds,  or  by  the  mediation  of  some  inanimate  being 
which  we  call  matter. 

The  evidence  of  an  All-governing  Mind,  so  far  from 
being  weakened,  seems  to  appear  even  in  a more  strik- 
ing light  upon  his  hypothesis  than  upon  the  common 
one.  The  powers  which  inanimate  matter  is  supposed 
to  possess  have  always  been  the  stronghold  of  atheists, 
to  which  they  had  recourse  in  defence  of  their  system. 
This  fortress  of  atheism  must  be  most  effectually  over- 
turned, if  there  is  no  such  thing  as  matter  in  the  universe. 
In  all  this  the  Bishop  reasons  justly  and  acutely.  But 
there  is  one  uncomfortable  consequence  of  his  system 
which  he  seems  not  to  have  attended  to,  and  from 
which  it  will  be  found  difficult,  if  at  all  possible,  to 
guard  it. 

The  consequence  I mean  is  this,  — that,  although  it 
leaves  us  sufficient  evidence  of  a supreme  intelligent 
Mind^  it  seems  to  take  away  all  the  evidence  we  have 
of  other  intelligent  beings  like  ourselves.  What  I call 
a father^  a brotliery  or  a friend^  is  only  a parcel  of  ideas 
in  my  own  mind;  and  being  fdeas  in  my  mind,  they 
cannot  possibly  have  that  relation  to  another  mind 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. BERKELEY.  115 

which  they  have  to  Tnine,  any  more  than  the  pain  felt 
by  me  can  be  the  individual  pain  felt  by  another.  I 
can  find  no  principle  in  Berkeley’s  system  which  affords 
me  even  probable  ground  to  conclude  that  there  are 
other  intelligent  beings,  like  myself,  in  the  relations  of 
father,  brother,  friend,  or  fellow-citizen.  I am  left  alone, 
as  the  only  creature  of  God  in  the  universe,  in  that  for- 
lorn state  of  egoism  into  which  it  is  said  some  of  the 
disciples  of  Descartes  were  brought  by  his  philosophy. 

But  I must  take  notice  of  another  part  of  Berkeley’s 
system,  wherein  he  seems  to  have  deviated  from  the 
common  opinion  about  ideas,  as  regards  our  evidence 
of  the  existence  of  other  minds. 

Though  he  sets  out  in  his  Principles  of  Knowledge 
by  telling  us  that  it  is  evident  the  objects  of  human 
knowledge  are  ideas,  and  builds  his  whole  system  upon 
this  principle ; yet,  in  the  progress  of  it,  he  finds  that 
there  are  certain  objects  of  human  knowledge  that  are 
not  ideas^  but  things  which  have  a permanent  existence. 
The  objects  of  knowledge,  of  which  we  have  no  ideas, 
are  our  own  minds,  and  their  various  operations,  other 
finite  minds,  and  the  Supreme  Mind.  The  reason  why 
there  can  be  no  ideas  of  spirits  and  their  operations, 
the  author  informs  us,  is  this,  — that  ideas  are  passive, 
inert,  unthinking  beings ; they  cannot,  therefore,  be  the 
image  or  likeness  of  things  that  have  thought,  and  will, 
and  active  power ; we  have  notions  of  minds,  and  of 
their  operations,  but  not  ideas.  We  know  what  we 
mean  by  thinking,  willing,  and  perceiving;  we  can 
reason  about  beings  endowed  with  those  powers,  but 
we  have  no  ideas  of  them.  A spirit  or  mind  is  the 
only  substance  or  support  wherein  the  unthinking  be- 
ings or  ideas  can  exist ; but  that  this  substance  which 
supports  or  perceives  ideas  should  itself  be  an  idea,  or 
like  an  idea,  is  evidently  absurd. 

Berkeley  foresaw  that  this  might  give  rise  to  an  ob- 
jection to  his  system,  and  puts  it  in  the  mouth  of 
Hylas,  in  the  following  words  {Dial.  3) : — “ If  you  can 
conceive  the  mind  of  God,  without  having  an  idea  of 
it,  why  may  not  I be  allowed  to  conceive  the  existence 


116 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


of  matter,  notwithstanding  that  I have  no  idea  of  it?” 
The  answer  of  Philonous  is,  — “ You  neither  perceive 
matter  objectively^  as  you  do  an  inactive  being  or  idea, 
nor  know  it,  as  you  do  yourself,  by  a reflex  act^  neither 
do  you  immediately  apprehend  it  by  similitude  of  the 
one  or  the  other,  nor  yet  collect  it  by  reasoning  from  that 
which  you  know  immediately.  All  which  makes  the 
case  of  matter  widely  different  from  that  of  the  Deity.” 

Though  Hylas  declares  himself  satisfied  with  this 
answer,  I confess  I am  not ; because,  if  I may  trust  the 
faculties  that  God  has  given  me,  I do  perceive  matter 
objectively;  that  is,  something  which  is  extended  and 
solid,  which  may  be  measured  and  weighed,  is  the  im- 
mediate object  of  my  touch  and  sight.  And  this  object 
I take  to  be  matter,  and  not  an  idea.  And  though  I 
have  been  taught  by  philosophers  that  what  I immedi- 
ately touch  is  an  idea,  and  not  matter,  yet  I have  never 
been  able  to  discover  this  by  the  most  accurate  atten- 
tion to  my  own  perceptions. 

Of  all  the  opinions  that  have  ever  been  advanced  by 
philosophers,  this  of  Bishop  Berkeley,  that  there  is  no 
material  world,  seems  the  strangest  and  the  most  apt 
to  bring  philosophy  into  ridicule  with  plain  men,  who 
are  guided  by  the  dictates  of  nature  and  common 
sense.  And  it  will  not,  I apprehend,  be  deemed  im- 
proper to  have  traced  this  progeny  of  the  doctrine  of 
ideas  from  its  origin,  and  to  have  observed  its  gradual 
progress,  till  it  acquired  such  strength,  that  a pious  and 
learned  bishop  had  the  boldness  to  usher  it  into  the 
world,  as  demonstrable  from  the  principles  of  philos- 
ophy universally  received,  and  as  an  admirable  expe- 
dient for  the  advancement  of  knowledge,  and  for  the 
defence  of  religion.* 


* The  Works  of  George  Berkeley^  D.  Z).,  late  Bishop  of  Cloyne^  in  Ireland. 
To  which  is  added.^  An  Account  of  his  Life ; and  several  of  his  Letters  to 
Thomas  Prior,  Esq.,  Dean  Gervais,  Mr.  Pope,  ^c.  (3  vols.,  8vo,  London, 
1820).  Some  additional  particulars  respecting  him  are  given  under  his 
name  in  Kippis’s  edition  of  the  Biographia  Dritannica.  Eschenbach  pub- 
lished (in  8vo,  Rostock,  1756)  a German  translation  of  the  principal  works 
written  to  disprove  the  existence  of  the  material  world  (including  Bcrke- 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. COLLIER. 


117 


We  ought  not,  in  this  historical  sketch,  to  omit  an 
author  of  far  inferior  name,  Arthur  Collier,  rector  of 
Langford  Magna,  near  Sarum.  He  published  a book 
in  1713,  which  he  calls  Clavis  Universalis ; or^  a New 
Inquiry  after  Truth  ; being  a Demonstration  of  the  Non- 
existence or  Impossibility  of  an  External  World,  His 
arguments  are  the  same  in  substance  with  Berkeley’s; 
and  he  appears  to  understand  the  whole  strength  of  his 
cause.  Though  he  is  not  deficient  in  metaphysical 
acuteness,  his  style  is  disagreeable,  being  full  of  con- 
ceits, of  new-coined  words,  scholastic  terms,  and  per- 
plexed sentences.  He  appears  to  be  well  acquainted 
with  Descartes,  Malebranche,  and  Norris,  as  well  as  with 
Aristotle  and  the  schoolmen ; but,  what  is  very  strange, 
it  does  not  appear  that  he  had  ever  heard  of  Locke’s 
Essay^  which  had  been  published  twenty-four  years,  or 
of  Berkeley’s  Principles  of  Knowledge^  which  had  been 
published  three  years. 

He  says,  he  had  been  ten  years  firmly  convinced  of 
the  non-existence  of  an  external  world,  before  he  ven- 
tured to  publish  his  book.  He  is  far  from  thinking,  as 
Berkeley  does,  that  the  vulgar  are  of  his  opinion.  If 
his  book  should  make  any  converts  to  his  system,  (of 
which  he  expresses  little  hope,  though  he  has  supported 
it  by  “ nine  demonstrations  f)  he  takes  pains  to  show 
that  his  disciples,  notwithstanding  their  opinion,  may, 
with  the  unenlightened,  speak  of  material  things  in  the 
common  style.  He  himself  had  scruples  of  conscience 
about  this  for  some  time ; and  if  he  had  not  got  over 
them,  he  must  have  shut  his  lips  for  ever : but  he  con- 
sidered, that  God  himself  has  used  this  style  in  speak- 
ing to  men  in  the  Holy  Scripture,  and  has  thereby 


ley’s  Dialogues  and  Collier’s  Clavis  Universalis)^  with  notes  and  a supple- 
ment in  refutation  of  the  same.  See,  also,  A Review  of  Berkeley's  Theory 
of  Vision^  designed  to  show  the  Unsoundness  of  that  celebrated  Speculation.  By 
Samuel  Bailey.  (Syo,  London,  1842.)  The  Westminster  Review.^  for  Oc- 
tober, 1842,  contains  an  earnest  vindication  of  Berkeley.  Two  very 
ingenious  articles  on  the  same  subject,  and  the  philosophy  of  sensation 
generally,  may  be  found  in  Blackwood's  Magazine.^  in  the  numbers  for  June, 
1842,  and  June,  1843.  There  is  also  a valuable  paper  On  the  Idealism  of 
Berkeley.,  in  Stewart’s  Philosophical  Essays.  — Ed. 


118 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


sanctified  it  to  all  the  faithful ; and  that  to  the  pure  all 
things  are  pure.  He  thinks  his  opinion  may  be  of 
great  use,  especially  in  religion ; and  applies  it,  in  par- 
ticular, to  put  an  end  to  the  controversy  about  Christ’s 
presence  in  the  sacrament. 

I have  taken  the  liberty  to  give  this  short  account  of 
Collier’s  book,  because  I believe  it  is  rare,  and  little 
known.  I have  only  seen  one  copy  of  it,  which  is  in 
the  University  library  of  Glasgow.* 

IX.  Humeh  Theory,]  Two  volumes  of  the  Treatise 
of  Human  Nature  f were  published  in  1739,  and  the 
third  in  1740.  The  doctrine  contained  in  this  treatise 
was  published  anew,  in  a more  popular  form,  in  Mr. 
Hume’s  Philosophical  Essays,,  of  which  there  have  been 
various  editions.  What  other  authors,  from  the  time 
of  Descartes,  had  called  ideas,,  this  author  distinguished 
into  two  kinds,  — to  impressions  and  ideas;  com- 
prehending under  the  first  all  our  sensations,  passions, 
and  emotions ; and  under  the  last,  the  faint  images  of 
these,  when  we  remember  or  imagine  them. 

He  sets  out  with  this  as  a principle  that  needs  no 
proof,  and  of  which,  therefore,  he  offers  none,  — that 


* This  work,  though  of  extreme  rarity,  and  long  absolutely  unknown 
to  the  philosophers  of  this  country,  had  excited,  from  the  first,  the  atten- 
tion of  the  German  metaphysicians.  A long  analysis  of  it  was  given  in 
the  Acta  Eruditorum ; it  is  found  quoted  by  Bilfinger,  and  other  Leibnitz- 
ians,  and  was  subsequently  translated  into  German,  with  controversial 
notes,  by  Professor  Eschenbach,  of  Rostock,  in  his  Collection  of  the  Princi- 
pal Writers  who  deny  the  Reality  of  their  own  Body  and  of  the  whole  Corporeal 
World  [mentioned  in  the  last  note].  — H. 

A small  edition  of  the  Claris  was  published  in  Edinburgh  in  1836,  and 
another  in  a collection  of  Metaphysical  Tracts^  hy  English  Philosophers  of  the 
Eighteenth  Century:  prepared  for  the  Press  by  the  late  Rev.  Samuel  Parr, 
D.  D.  f8vo,  London,  1837).  The  work  is  now,  therefore,  easily  accessible 
to  English  readers.  We  also  have  Memoirs  of  the  Life  and  Writings  of  the 
Rev.  Arthur  Collier.  By  Robert  Benson.  (8vo,  London,  1837  ) Collier 
was  born  at  Langford  Magna,  in  the  county  of  Wilts,  October  12,  1680, 
and  died,  as  he  had  been  born,  in  the  rectory  of  that  place,  which  had  been 
nearly  a century  and  a quarter  in  the  family.  The  precise  day  of  his 
death  is  not  known ; but  he  was  buried  in  Langford  church,  September  9, 
1732  —Ed 

t The  author,  David  Hume,  was  born  at  Edinburgh,  April  26,  1711,  and 
died  in  the  same  city,  August  25,  1776.  — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION.  — HUME.  119 

all  the  perceptions  of  the  human  mind  resolve  them- 
selves into  these  two  kinds,  impressions  and  ideas.  As 
this  proposition  is  the  foundation  upon  which  the  whole 
of  Mr.  Hume’s  system  rests,  and  from  which  it  is  raised 
with  great  acuteness  indeed,  and  ingenuity,  it  were  to 
be  wished  that  he  had  told  us  upon  what  authority 
this  fundamental  proposition  rests.  But  we  are  left  to 
guess  whether  it  is  held  forth  as  a first  principle,  which 
has  its  evidence  in  itself,  or  whether  it  is  to  be  re- 
ceived upon  the  authority  of  philosophers. 

Mr.  Locke  had  taught  us,  that  all  the  immediate 
objects  of  human  knowledge  are  ideas  in  the  mind. 
Bishop  Berkeley,  proceeding  upon  this  foundation, 
demonstrated  very  easily,  that  there  is  no  material 
world.  And  he  thought,  that,  for  the  purposes  both 
of  philosophy  and  religion,  we  should  find  no  loss,  but 
great  benefit,  in  the  want  of  it.  But  the  Bishop,  as 
became  his  order,  was  unwilling  to  give  up  the  world 
of  spirits.  He  saw  very  well,  that  ideas  are  as  unfit 
to  represent  spirits  as  they  are  to  represent  bodies. 
Perhaps  he  saw,  that,  if  we  perceive  only  the  ideas  of 
spirits,  we  shall  find  the  same  difficulty  in  inferring 
their  real  existence  from  the  existence  of  their  ideas,  as 
we  find  in  inferring  the  existence  of  matter  from  the 
idea  of  it ; and  therefore,  while  he  gives  up  the  material 
world  in  favor  of  the  system  of  ideas,  he  gives  up  one 
half  of  that  system  in  favor  of  the  world  of  spirits; 
and  maintains  that  we  can,  without  ideas,  think,  and 
speak,  and  reason  intelligibly  about  spirits,  and  what 
belongs  to  them. 

Mr.  Hume  shows  no  such  partiality  in  favor  of  the 
world  of  spirits.  He  adopts  the  theory  of  ideas  in  its 
full  extent;  and,  in  consequence,  shows  that  there  is 
neither  matter  nor  mind  in  the  universe ; nothing  but 
impressions  and  ideas.  What  we  call  a body  is  only 
a bundle  of  sensations ; and  what  we  call  the  mind  is 
only  a bundle  of  thoughts,  passions,  and  emotions, 
without  any  subject* 


Dr.  Reid  had  said,  in  another  connection,  — “ The  author  of  the  Trea~ 


120 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Some  ages  hence,  it  will  perhaps  be  looked  upon  as 
a curious  anecdote,  that  two  philosophers  of  the  eigh- 


tise  of  Human  Nature  appears  to  me  to  be  but  a half-skeptic.  He  has  not 
followed  his  principles  so  far  as  they  lead  him ; but,  after  having,  with 
unparalleled  intrepidity  and  success  combated  vulgar  prejudices,  when  he 
has  but  one  blow  to  strike,  his  courage  fails  him  5 he  fairly  lays  down  his 
arms,  and  yields  himself  a captive  to  the  most  common  of  all  vulgar 
prejudices,  — I mean,  the  belief  of  the  existence  of  his  own  impressions 
and  ideas.  I beg,  therefore,  to  have  the  honor  of  making  an  addition  to 
the  skeptical  system,  without  which  I conceive  it  cannot  hang  together. 
I affirm,  that  the  belief  of  the  existence  of  impressions  and  ideas  is  as 
little  supported  by  reason,  as  that  of  the  existence  of  minds  and  bodies.” 
— Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind^  Chap.  V.  Sect.  VII. 

But  to  this  Sir  W.  Hamilton  replies : — “In  Reid’s  strictures  upon 
Hume,  he  confounds  two  opposite  things.  He  reproaches  that  philosopher 
with  inconsequence,  in  holding  to  ‘ the  belief  of  the  existence  of  his  own 
impressions  and  ideas.’  Now,  if,  by  the  existence  of  impressions  and  ideas^ 
Reid  meant  their  existence  as  mere  phenomena  of  consciousness,  his  criti- 
cism is  inept ; for  a disbelief  of  their  existence,  as  such  phenomena,  would 
have  been  a suicidal  act  in  the  skeptic.  Of  consciousness  the  skeptic  can- 
not doubt,  because  such  doubt,  being  itself  an  act  of  consciousness,  would 
contradict,  and  consequently  annihilate,  itself.  If,  again,  he  meant  by 
impressions  and  ideas  the  hypothesis  of  representative  entities  different  from 
the  mind  and  its  modifications,  in  that  case,  the  objection  is  equally  in- 
valid. Hume  was  a skeptic ; that  is,  he  accepted  the  premises  afforded 
him  by  the  dogmatist,  and  carried  these  premises  to  their  legitimate  conse- 
quences. To  blame  Hume,  therefore,  for  not  having  doubted  of  his  bor- 
rowed principles,  is  to  blame  the  skeptic  for  not  performing  a part  alto- 
gether inconsistent  with  his  vocation.  But,  in  point  of  fact,  the  hypothesis 
of  such  entities  is  of  no  value  to  the  idealist  or  the  skeptic.  Impressions 
and  ideas^  viewed  as  mental  modes,  would  have  answered  Hume’s  purpose 
not  a whit  worse  than  impressions  and  ideas,  viewed  as  objects,  but  not  as 
affections  of  mind.  The  most  consistent  scheme  of  idealism  known  in  the 
history  of  philosophy  is  that  of  Eichte  ; and  Fichte’s  idealism  is  founded 
on  a basis  which  excludes  that  crude  hypothesis  of  ideas  on  which  alone 
Reid  imagined  any  doctrine  of  idealism  could  possibly  be  established. 
And  is  the  acknowledged  result  of  the  Fichtean  dogmatism  less  a nihilism 
than  the  skepticism  of  Hume  ? ‘ The  sum  total,’  says  Fichte,  ‘ is  this  : — 

There  is  absolutely  nothing  permanent,  either  without  me  or  within  me, 
but  only  an  unceasing  change.  I know  absolutely  nothing  of  any  exist 
ence,  not  even  of  my  own.  I myself  know  nothing,  and  am  nothing. 
Images  {Bilder)  there  are  : they  constitute  all  that  apparently  exists,  and 
what  they  know  of  themselves  is  after  the  manner  of  images  ; images  that 
pass  and  vanish  without  there  being  aught  to  witness  their  transition, — 
that  consist,  in  fact,  of  the  images  of  images,  without  significance  and  with- 
out an  aim.  I myself  am  one  of  these  images ; nay,  I am  not  even  thus 
much,  but  only  a confused  image  of  images.  All  reality  is  converted  into 
a marvellous  dream,  without  a life  to  dream  of,  and  without  a mind  to 
dream,  — into  a dream  made  up  only  of  a dream  of  itself.  Perception  is 
a dream;  thought  — the  source  of  all  the  existence  and  all  the  reality 
which  I imagine  to  myself  of  my  existence,  of  my  power,  of  my  destina- 
tion— is  the  dream  of  that  dream.’  ” — Ed. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. HUME. 


121 


teenth  century,  of  very  distinguished  rank,  were  led  by  a 
philosophical  hypothesis,  the  one  to  disbelieve  the  exist- 
ence of  matter,  and  the  other  to  disbelieve  the  existence 
both  of  matter  and  of  mind.  Such  an  anecdote  may 
not  be  uninstructive,  if  it  prove  a warning  to  philoso- 
phers to  beware  of  hypotheses,  especially  when  they 
lead  to  conclusions  which  contradict  the  principles  upon 
which  all  men  of  common  sense  must  act  in  common 
life. 

The  Egoists^  whom  we  mentioned  before,  were  left 
far  behind  by  Mr.  Hume ; for  they  believed  their  own 
existence,  and  perhaps  also  the  existence  of  a Deity. 
But  Mr.  Hume’s  system  does  not  even  leave  him  a self 
to  claim  the  property  of  his  impressions  and  ideas. 

A system  of  consequences,  however  absurd,  acutely 
and  justly  drawn  from  a few  principles,  in  very  abstract 
matters,  is  of  real  utility  in  science,  and  may  be  made 
subservient  to  real  knowledge.  This  merit  Mr.  Hume’s 
metaphysical  writings  have  in  a great  degree. 

We  had  occasion  before  to  observe,  that,  since  the 
time  of  Descartes,  philosophers,  in  treating  of  the  pow- 
ers of  the  mind,  have  in  many  instances  confounded 
things  which  the  common  sense  of  mankind  has  always 
led  them  to  distinguish,  and  which  have  different  names 
in  all  languages.  Thus,  in  the  perception  of  an  exter- 
nal object,  all  languages  distinguish  three  things,  the 
mind  that  perceives,  the  operation  of  that  mind,  which 
is  cdiWed  perception^  and  the  object  perceived.  Nothing 
appears  more  evident  to  a mind  untutored  by  philoso- 
phy, than  that  these  three  are  distinct  things,  which, 
though  related,  ought  never  to  be  confounded.  The 
structure  of  all  languages  supposes  this  distinction,  and 
is  built  upon  it.  Philosophers  have  introduced  a fourth 
thing  in  this  process,  which  they  call  the  idea  of  the  ob- 
ject, and  which  is  supposed  to  be  an  image  or  representa- 
tive of  the  object,  and  is  said  to  be  the  immediate  object. 
The  vulgar  know  nothing  about  this  idea  ; it  is  a crea- 
ture of  philosophy,  introduced  to  account  for,  and  ex- 
plain, the  manner  of  our  perceiving  external  objects. 

It  is  pleasant  to  observe,  that  while  philosophers,  for 

11 


122 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


more  than  a cenl;nry,  have  been  laboring,  by  means  of 
ideas,  to  explain  perception  and  the  other  operations  of 
the  mind,  those  ideas  have  by  degrees  usurped  the  place 
of  perception,  object,  and  even  of  the  mind  itself,  and 
have  supplanted  those  very  things  they  were  brought  to 
explain.  Descartes  reduced  all  the  operations  of  the 
understanding  to  perception ; and  what  can  be  more 
natural  to  those  who  believe  that  they  are  only  different 
modes  of  perceiving  ideas  in  our  own  minds  ? Locke 
confounds  ideas,  sometimes  with  the  perception  of  an 
external  object,  sometimes  with  the  external  object  it- 
self. In  Berkeley’s  system,  the  idea  is  the  only  object, 
and  yet  is  often  confounded  with  the  perception  of  it. 
But  in  Hume’s,  the  idea  or  the  impression,  which  is 
only  a more  lively  idea,  is  mind,  perception,  and  object, 
all  in  one  : so  that  by  the  term  perception^  in  Mr. 
Hume’s  system,  we  must  understand  the  mind  itself,  all 
its  operations,  both  of  understanding  and  will,  and  all 
the  objects  of  these  operations.  Perception  taken  in 
this  sense  he  divides  into  our  more  lively  perceptions, 
which  he  calls  impressions*  and  the  less  lively,  which 
he  calls  ideas, 

“We  may  divide,”  says  Mr.  PIume,f  “ all  the  percep- 
tions of  the  human  mind  into  two  classes  or  species, 
which  are  distinguished  by  their  different  degrees  of 
force  and  vivacity.  The  less  lively  and  forcible  are 
commonly  denominated  thoughts^  or  ideas.  The  other 
species  want  a name  in  our  language,  and  in  most 
others ; let  us  therefore  use  a little  freedom,  and  call 
them  impressions.  By  the  term  impressions,  then,  I 
mean  all  our  more  lively  perceptions^  when  we  hear,  or 


* Mr.  Stewart  {Elements^  Addenda  to  Vol.  I.)  seems  to  think  that  the 
word  impression  was  first  introduced,  as  a technical  term,  into  the  philosophy 
of  mind,  by  Mr.  Hume.  This  is  not  altogether  correct.  For,  besides  the 
instances  which  Mr.  Stewart  himself  adduces  of  the  illustration  attempted 
of  the  phenomena  of  memory  from  the  analogy  of  an  impress  and  a trace, 
words  corresponding  to  impression  were  among  the  ancients  familiarly  ap 
plied  to  the  processes  of  external  perception,  imagination,  &c.,  in  the  Atom- 
istic, the  Platonic,  the  Aristotelian,  and  the  Stoical  philosophies  ; while 
among  modern  psychologists  (as  Descartes  and  Gassendi),  the  term  was 
likewise  in  common  use.  — H. 

t Inquiry  concerniny  Human  Understanding,  Sect.  IT. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. HUME. 


123 


see,  or  feel,  or  love,  or  hate,  or  desire,  or  will.  Ideas  are 
the  less  lively  perceptions^  of  which  we  are  conscious 
when  we  reflect  on  any  of  those  sensations  or  move- 
ments above  mentioned.” 

When  Mr.  Hume  says,  that  vje  may  divide  all  the 
perceptions  of  the  human  mind  into  two  classes  or  species^ 
which  are  distinguished  by  their  degrees  of  force  and  vi- 
vacity^ the  manner  of  expression  is  loose  and  unphilo- 
sophical.  To  differ  in  species  is  one  thing;  to  differ  in 
degree  is  another.  Things  which  differ  in  degree  only 
must  be  of  the  same  species.  It  is  a maxim  of  common 
sense,  admitted  by  all  men,  that  greater  and  less  do  not 
make  a change  of  species.  The  same  man  may  differ 
in  the  degree  of  his  force  and  vivacity  in  the  morning 
and  at  night,  in  health  and  in  sickness ; but  this  is  so 
far  from  making  him  a different  species,  that  it  does  not 
so  much  as  make  him  a different  individual.  To  say, 
therefore,  that  two  different  classes  or  species  of  percep- 
tions are  distinguished  by  the  degrees  of  their  force  and 
vivacity,  is  to  confound  a difference  of  degree  with  a 
difference  of  species^  which  every  man  of  understanding 
knows  how  to  distinguish. 

Again,  we  may  object,  that  this  author,  having  given 
the  general  name  of  perceptions  to  all  the  operations  of 
the  mind,  and  distinguished  them  into  two  classes  or 
species,  which  differ  only  in  degree  of  force  and  vivacity, 
tells  us,  that  he  gives  the  name  of  impressions  to  all  our 
more  lively  perceptions,  — to  wit,  when  we  hear,  or  see, 
or  feel,  or  love,  or  hate,  or  desire,  or  will.  There  is  great 
confusion  in  this  account  of  the  meaning  of  the  word 
impression.  When  I see,  this  is  an  impression.  But 
why  has  not  the  author  told  us  whether  he  gives  the 
name  of  impression  to  the  object  seen,  or  to  that  act  of 
my  mind  by  which  I see  it  ? When  I see  the  full  moon, 
the  full  moon  is  one  thing,  my  perceiving  it  is  another 
thing.  Which  of  these  two  things  does  he  call  an  im- 
pression ? We  are  left  to  guess  this  ; nor  does  all  that 
this  author  writes  about  impressions  clear  this  point. 
Every  thing  he  says  tends  to  darken  it,  and  to  lead 
us  to  think  that  the  full  moon  which  I see,  and  my 


124 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


seeing  it,  are  not  two  things,  but  one  and  the  same 
thing.* 

The  same  observation  may  be  applied  to  every  other 
instance  the  author  gives  to  illustrate  the  meaning  of 
the  word  impression,  “ When  we  hear,  when  we  feel, 
when  we  love,  when  we  hate,  when  we  desire,  when  we 
will.”  In  all  these  acts  of  the  mind,  there  must  be  an 
object^  which  is  heard,  or  felt,  or  loved,  or  hated,  or  de- 
sired, or  willed.  Thus,  for  instance,  I love  my  country. 
This,  says  Mr.  Hume,  is  an  impression.  But  what  is 
the  impression?  Is  it  my  country,  or  is  it  the  affection 
I bear  to  it  ? I ask  the  philosopher  this  question  ; but 
I find  no  answer  to  it.  And  when  I read  all  that  he 
has  written  on  this  subject,  I find  this  word  impression 
sometimes  used  to  signify  an  operation  of  the  mind, 
sometimes  the  object  of  the  operation ; but,  for  the  most 
part,  it  is  a vague  and  indetermined  word  that  signifies 
both. 

I know  not  whether  it  may  be  considered  as  an  apol- 
ogy for  such  abuse  of  words,  in  an  author  who  under- 
stood the  language  so  well,  and  used  it  with  so  great 
propriety  in  writing  on  other  subjects,  that  Mr.  Hume’s 
system  with  regard  to  the  mind  required  a language  of 
a different  structure  from  the  common,  or,  if  expressed 
in  plain  English,  would  have  been  too  shocking  to  the 
common  sense  of  mankind.  To  give  an  instance  or 
two  of  this.  If  a man  receive  a present  on  which  he 
puts  a high  value,  if  he  see  and  handle  it,  and  put  it  in 


* This  objection  is  easily  answered.  The  thing  (Hume  would  say)  as 
unknown^  as  unperceived,  as  beyond  the  sphere  of  my  consciousness,  is  to  me  as 
zero ; to  that,  therefore,  I could  not  refer.  As  perceived,  as  known,  it  must 
be  within  the  sphere  of  my  consciousness;  but,  as  philosophers  concur  in 
maintaining  that  I can  only  be  conscious  of  my  mind  and  its  contents,  the 
object,  as  perceived,  must  be  either  a mode  of,  or  something  contained  within, 
my  mind,  and  to  that  internal  object,  as  perceived,  I give  the  name  of  impres- 
sion. Nor  can  the  act  of  perception  (he  would  add)  be  really  distinguished 
from  the  object  perceived.  Both  are  only  relatives,  mutually  constituent 
of  the  same  indivisible  relation  of  knowledge ; and  to  that  relation  and  these 
relatives  I give  the  name  of  impression,  precisely  as,  in  different  points  of 
view,  the  term  perception  is  applied  to  the  mind  perceiving,  to  the  object 
perceived,  and  to  the  act  of  which  these  are  the  inseparable  constituents. 
This  likewise  has  reference  to  what  follows.  — H. 


THEORIES  OF  PERCEPTION. HUME. 


125 


his  pocket,  this,  says  Mr.  Hume,  is  an  impression.  If 
the  man  only  dream  that  he  received  such  a present, 
this  is  an  idea.  Wherein  lies  the  difference  between 
this  impression  and  this  idea,  — between  the  dream  and 
the  reality  ? They  are  different  classes  or  species,  says 
Mr.  Hume.  So  far  all  men  will  agree  with  him.  But 
he  adds,  that  they  are  distinguished  only  by  different 
degrees  of  force  and  vivacity.  Here  he  insinuates  a 
tenet  of  his  own,  in  contradiction  to  the  common  sense 
of  mankind.  Common  sense  convinces  every  man,  that 
a lively  dream  is  no  nearer  to  a reality  than  a faint  one ; 
and  that  if  a man  should  dream  that  he  had  all  the 
wealth  of  Croesus,  it  would  not  put  one  farthing  in  his 
pocket. 

Philosophers  have  also  differed  very  much  with  re- 
gard to  the  origin  of  our  ideas,  or  the  sources  whence 
they  are  derived.  The  Peripatetics  held,  that  all  knowl- 
edge is  derived  originally  from  the  senses ; and  this  an- 
cient doctrine  seems  to  be  revived  by  some  late  French 
philosophers,  and  by  Dr.  Hartley  and  Dr.  Priestley 
among  the  British.  Descartes  maintained,  that  many 
of  our  ideas  are  innate,  Locke  opposed  the  doctrine  of 
innate  ideas  with  much  zeal,  and  employs  the  whole 
first  book  of  his  Essay  against  it.  But  he  admits  two 
different  sources  of  ideas  : the  operations  of  our  exter- 
nal senses,  which  he  calls  sensation,,  by  which  we  get 
all  our  ideas  of  body,  and  its  attributes ; and  reflection 
upon  the  operations  of  our  minds,  by  which  we  get  the 
ideas  of  every  thing  belonging  to  the  mind.  The  main 
design  of  the  second  book  of  Locke’s  Essay  is  to  show 
that  all  our  simple  ideas,  without  exception,  are  derived 
from  the  one  or  the  other,  or  both,  of  these  sources.  In 
doing  this,  the  author  is  led  into  some  paradoxes,  al- 
though, in  general,  he  is  not  fond  of  paradoxes  ; and 
had  he  foreseen  all  the  consequences  that  may  be  drawn 
from  his  account  of  the  origin  of  our  ideas,  he  would 
probably  have  examined  it  more  carefully. 

Mr.  Hume  adopts  Locke’s  account  of  the  origin  of 
our  ideas,  and  from  that  principle  infers,,  that  we  have 
no  idea  of  substance  corporeal  or  spiritual,  no  idea  of 

ir 


126 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


power ^ no  other  idea  of  a cause  than  that  it  is  something 
antecedent,  and  constantly  conjoined  to  that  which  we 
call  its  effect;  and,  in  a word,  that  we  can  have  no  idea 
of  any  thing  but  our  sensations,  and  the  operations  of 
mind  we  are  conscious  of. 

This  author  leaves  no  power  to  the  mind  in  framing 
its  ideas  and  impressions  ; and  no  wonder,  since  he 
holds  that  we  have  no  idea  of  power^  and  that  the  mind  is 
nothing  but  the  succession  of  impressions  and  ideas  of 
which  we  are  intimately  conscious.  He  thinks,  there- 
fore, that  our  impressions  arise  from  unknown  causes, 
and  that  the  impressions  are  the  causes  of  their  corre- 
sponding ideas.  By  this  he  means  no  more  than  that 
they  always  go  before  the  ideas ; for  this  is  all  that  is 
necessary  to  constitute  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect. 

As  to  the  order  and  succession  of  our  ideas,  he  holds 
it  to  be  determined  by  three  laics  of  attraction  or  asso- 
ciation, which  he  takes  to  be  original  properties  of  the 
ideas,  by  which  they  attract,  as  it  were,  or  associate 
themselves  with  other  ideas,  which  either  resemble 
them,  or  which  have  been  contiguous  to  them  in  time 
and  place,  or  to  which  they  have  the  relations  of  cause 
and  effect.  We  may  here  observe,  by  the  way,  that  the 
last  of  these  three  laws  seems  to  be  included  in  the 
second,  since  causation,  according  to  him,  implies  no 
more  than  contiguity  in  time  and  place. 

It  is  not  my  design  at  present  to  show  how  Mr. 
Hume,  upon  the  principles  he  has  borrowed  from  Locke 
and  Berkeley,  has,  with  great  acuteness,  reared  a sys- 
tem of  absolute  skepticism,  which  leaves  no  rational 
ground  to  believe  any  one  proposition  rather  than  its 
contrary : my  intention  in  this  place  being  only  to  give 
a detail  of  the  sentiments  of  philosophers  concerning 
ideas  since  they  became  an  object  of  speculation,  and 
concerning  the  manner  of  our  perceiving  external  ob- 
jects by  their  means.* 


* We  have  a full,  authentic,  and  interesting  Life  and  Correspondence  of 
Vavid  Hume.  Btj  John  Hill  Burton.  (2  vols.,  8vo,  Edinburgh,  1846.) 
There  is  also  an  excellent  edition  of  The  Philosophical  Works  of  David 
Hume  (4  vols.,  8vo,  Edinburgh,  1826).  Some  interesting  notices  are  given 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.  127 


CHAPTER  VI. 

REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  COMMON  THEORY  OF  IDEAS. 

1.  Statement  of  the  Question,\  After  so  long  a detail 
of  the  sentiments  of  philosophers,  ancient  and  modern, 
concerning  ideas,  it  may  seem  presumptuous  to  call  in 
question  their  existence.  But  no  philosophical  opinion, 
however  ancient,  however  generally  received,  ought  to 
rest  upon  authority.  There  is  no  presumption  in  re- 
quiring evidence  for  it,  or  in  regulating  our  belief  by 
the  evidence  we  can  find. 

To  prevent  mistakes,  the  reader  must  again  be  re- 
minded, that  if  by  ideas  are  meant  only  the  acts  or 
operations  of  our  minds  in  perceiving,  remembering,  or 
imagining  objects,  I am  far  from  calling  in  question 
the  existence  of  those  acts.  We  are  conscious  of  them 
every  day  and  every  hour  of  life ; and  I believe  no  man 
of  a sound  mind  ever  doubted  of  the  real  existence  of 
the  operations  of  mind,  of  which  he  is  conscious.  Nor 
is  it  to  be  doubted,  that,  by  the  faculties  which  God 
has  given  us,  we  can  conceive  things  that  are  absent, 
as  well  as  perceive  those  that  are  within  the  reach  of 
our  senses ; and  that  such  conceptions  may  be  more  or 
less  distinct,  and  more  or  less  lively  and  strong.  We 
have  reason  to  ascribe  to  the  all-knowing  and  all- 
perfect Being  distinct  conceptions  of  all  things  existent 
and  possible,  and  of  all  their  relations;  and  if  these 
conceptions  are  called  his  eternal  ideas^  there  ought  to 
be  no  dispute  among  philosophers  about  a word.  The 
ideas,  of  whose  existence  I require  the  proof,  are  not 
the  operations  of  any  mind,  but  supposed  objects  of 


of  Hume  and  his  philosophy  by  Stewart,  in  his  Dissertation^  Part  II.  Sect. 
VIII.  Jacobi’s  David  Hume^  uher  den  Glauben^  oder  Idealismus  und  Realis- 
mus  (8vo,  Breslau,  1787).  Kant’s  Prolegomena;  which  has  been  translated, 
professedly,  into  English  by  Richardson  (8vo,  London,  1819). 

For  a statement  of  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  theory  of  perception,  see  Appen- 
dix. — Ed. 


128 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


those  operations.  They  are  not  perception,  remem- 
brance, or  conception,  but  things  that  are  said  to  be 
perceived,  or  remembered,  or  imagined. 

Nor  do  I dispute  the  existence  of  what  the  vulgar 
call  the  objects  of  perception.  These,  by  all  who  ac- 
knowledge their  existence,  are  called  real  things.,  not 
ideas.  But  philosophers  maintain,  that,  besides  these, 
there  are  immediate  objects  of  perception  in  the  mind 
itself:  that,  for  instance,  we  do  not  see  the  sun  imme- 
diately, but  an  idea.,  or,  as  Mr.  Hume  calls  it,  an  im- 
pression., in  our  own  minds.  This  idea  is  said  to  be 
the  image,  the  resemblance,  the  representative  of  the 
sun,  if  there  be  a sun.  It  is  from  the  existence  of  the 
idea  that  we  must  infer  the  existence  of  the  sun.  But 
the  idea  being  immediately  perceived,  there  can  be  no 
doubt,  as  philosophers  think,  of  its  existence. 

In  like  manner,  when  I remember  or  when  I imagine 
any  thing,  all  men  acknowledge  that  there  must  be 
something  that  is  remembered,  or  that  is  imagined; 
that  is,  some  object  of  those  operations.  The  object 
remembered  must  be  something  that  did  exist  in  time 
past.  The  object  imagined  may  be  something  that 
never  existed.  But,  say  the  philosophers,  besides  these 
objects  which  all  men  acknowledge,  there  is  a more  im- 
mediate object  which  really  exists  in  the  mind  at  the 
same  time  we  remember  or  imagine.  This  object  is  an 
idea  or  image  of  the  thing  remembered  or  imagined. 

II.  The  Common  Theory  of  Ideas  opposed  by  the 
Common  Sense  of  Mankind.]  The  first  reflection  I 
would  make  on  this  philosophical  opinion  is,  that  it  is 
directly  contrary  to  the  universal  sense  of  men  who  have 
not  been  instructed  in  philosophy. 

There  is  the  less  need  of  any  further  proof  of  this, 
that  it  is  very  amply  acknowledged  by  Mr.  Hume,  in 
his  Essay  on  the  Academical  or  Skeptical  Philosophy.* 
“ It  seems  evident,”  says  he,  ‘‘  that  men  are  carried  by 
a natural  instinct,  or  prepossession,  to  repose  faith  in 


Inquiry  concerning  Human  Understanding.,  Sect  XII  Part  I. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.  129 

their  senses ; and  that  without  any  reasoning,  or  even 
almost  before  the  use  of  reason,  we  always  suppose  an 
external  universe,  which  depends  not  on  our  perception, 
but  would  exist  though  we  and  every  sensible  creature 
were  absent  or  annihilated.  Even  the  animal  creation 
are  governed  by  a like  opinion,  and  preserve  this  belief 
of  external  objects  in  all  their  thoughts,  designs,  and 
actions. 

It  seems  also  evident,  that,  when  men  follow  this 
blind  and  powerful  instinct  of  nature,  they  always  sup- 
pose the  very  images  presented  by  the  senses  to  be  the 
external  objects,  and  never  entertain  any  suspicion,  that 
the  one  are  nothing  but  representations  of  the  other. 
This  very  table  which  we  see  white,  and  feel  hard,  is 
believed  to  exist  independent  of  our  perception,  and  to 
be  something  external  to  the  mind  which  perceives  it. 
Our  presence  bestows  not  being  upon  it ; our  absence 
annihilates  it  not:  it  preserves  its  existence  uniform 
and  entire,  independent  of  the  situation  of  intelligent 
beings  who  perceive  or  contemplate  it. 

“ But  this  universal  and  primary  notion  of  all  men 
is  soon  destroyed  by  the  slightest  philosophy,  which 
teaches  us,  that  nothing  can  ever  be  present  to  the 
mind  but  an  image  or  perception ; and  that  the  senses 
are  only  the  inlets  through  which  these  images  are  re- 
ceived, without  being  ever  able  to  produce  any  imme- 
diate intercourse  between  the  mind  and  the  object.” 

It  is  therefore  acknowledged  by  this  philosopher  to 
be  a natural  instinct  or  prepossession,  a universal  and 
primary  opinion  of  all  men,  a primary  instinct  of  na- 
ture, that  the  objects  which  we  immediately  perceive 
by  our  senses  are  not  images  in  our  minds,  but  exter- 
nal objects,  and  that  their  existence  is  independent  of 
us  and  our  perception. 

In  this  acknowledgment,  Mr.  Hume,  indeed,  seems 
to  me  more  generous,  and  even  more  ingenuous,  than 
Bishop  Berkeley,  who  would  persuade  us,  that  his 
opinion  does  not  oppose  the  vulgar  opinion,  but  only 
that  of  the  philosophers ; and  that  the  external  exist- 
ence of  a material  world  is  a philosophical  hypothesis, 


130 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


and  not  the  natural  dictate  of  our  perceptive  powers. 
The  Bishop  shows  a timidity  of  engaging  such  an 
adversary  as  a primary  and  universal  opinion  of  all 
men.  He  is  rather  fond  to  court  its  patronage.  But 
the  philosopher  intrepidly  gives  a defiance  to  this  an- 
tagonist, and  seems  to  glory  in  a conflict  that  is  worthy 
of  his  arm. 

“ Optat  aprum  aut  fulvum  descendere  monte  leonem.” 

Alter  all,  I suspect  that  a philosopher  who  wages 
war  with  this  adversary  will  find  himself  in  the  same 
condition  as  a mathematician  who  should  undertake  to 
demonstrate  that  there  is  no  truth  in  the  axioms  of 
mathematics. 

III.  The  Common  Theory  of  Ideas  unsupported  by 
Evidence, \ A second  reflection  upon  this  subject  is, 
that  the  authors  who  have  treated  of  ideas  have  generally 
taken  their  existence  for  granted^  as  a thing  that  could 
not  be  called  in  question;  and  such  arguments  as  they 
have  mentioned  incidentally,,  in  order  to  prove  it^  seem 
too  weak  to  support  the  conclusion, 

Mr.  Norris  is  the  only  author  I have  met  with,  who 
professedly  puts  the  question,  whether  material  things 
can  be  perceived  by  us  immediately.  He  has  offered 
four  arguments  to  show  that  they  cannot.  Firsts  “ Ma- 
terial objects  are  without  the  mind,  and  therefore  there 
can  be  no  union  between  the  object  and  the  percip- 
ient.’’ Answer^  This  argument  is  lame,  until  it  is 
shown  to  be  necessary  that  in  perception  there  should 
be  a union  between  the  object  and  the  percipient.  Sec- 
ond,,  “ Material  objects  are  disproportioned  to  the  mind, 
and  removed  from  it  by  the  whole  diameter  of  being.” 
This  argument  I cannot  answer,  because  I do  not  un- 
derstand it.*  Thirds  Because,  if  material  objects  were 


* This  confession  would,  of  itself,  prove  how  superficially  Reid  was 
versed  in  the  literature  of  philosophy.  Norris’s  second  argument  is  only 
the  statement  of  a principle  generally  assumed  by  philosophers,  — that 
the  relation  of  knowledge  infers  a correspondence  of  nature  between  the 
subject  knowing  and  the  object  known.  This  principle  has,  perhaps,  ex- 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.  131 

immediate  objects  of  perception,  there  could  be  no 
physical  science ; things  necessary  and  immutable  being 
the  only  object  of  science.”  Answer^  Although  things 


erted  a more  extensive  influence  on  speculation  than  any  other  ; and  yet 
it  has  not  been  proved,  — nay,  is  contradicted  by  the  evidence  of  con- 
sciousness itself.  To  trace  the  influence  of  this  assumption  would  be,  in 
fact,  in  a certain  sort,  to  write  the  history  of  philosophy ; for,  though  this 
influence  has  never  yet  been  historically  developed,  it  would  be  easy  to 
show  that  the  belief,  explicit  or  implicit,  that  what  knows  and  what  is  im- 
mediately knowm  must  be  of  an  analogous  nature,  lies  at  the  root  of  almost 
every  theory  of  cognition,  from  the  very  earliest  to  the  very  latest  specu- 
lations. 

In  the  more  ancient  philosophy  of  Greece,  three  philosophers  (Anaxag- 
oras, Heraclitus,  and  Alcmseon)  are  found,  who  professed  the  opposite  doc- 
trine, — that  the  condition  of  knowledge  lies  in  the  contrariety^  in  the  natu- 
ral antithesis,  of  subject  and  object.  Aristotle,  likewise,  in  his  treatise  On 
the  Soul^  expressly  condemns  the  prevalent  opinion,  that  the  similar  is  only 
cognizable  by  the  similar;  but,  in  his  Nicomachean  Ethics,  he  reverts  to  the 
doctrine  which,  in  the  former  w'ork,  he  had  rejected.  With  these  excep- 
tions, no  principle,  since  the  time  of  Empedocles,  by  whom  it  seems  first 
to  have  been  explicitly  announced,  has  been  more  universally  received 
than  this,  — that  the  relation  of  knoivledge  infers  an  analogy  of  existence. 
This  analogy  may  be  of  two  degrees.  Whxit  knows  and  what  is  known 
may  be  either  similar  or  the  same ; and  if  the  principle  itself  be  admitted, 
the  latter  alternative  is  the  more  philosophical. 

Without  entering  on  details,  I may  here  notice  some  of  the  more  re- 
markable results  of  this  principle,  in  both  its  degrees.  The  general  prin- 
ciple, not,  indeed,  exclusively,  but  mainly,  determined  the  admission  of  a 
representative  perception,  by  disallowing  the  possibility  of  any  conscious- 
ness, or  immediate  knowledge,  of  matter  by  a nature  so  different  from  it 
as  mind ; and,  in  its  two  degrees,  it  determined  the  various  hypotheses  by 
which  it  w^as  attempted  to  explain  the  possibility  of  a representative  or 
mediate  perception  of  the  external  world.  To  this  principle,  in  its  lower 
potence,  — that  what  knows  must  be  similar  in  nature  to  what  is  immedi- 
ately known,  — we  owe  the  intentional  species  of  the  Aristotelians,  and  the 
ideas  of  Malebranche  and  Berkeley.  From  this  principle,  in  its  higher 
potence,  — that  what  knows  must  be  identical  in  nature  with  what  is  im- 
mediately known,  — there  flow  the  gnostic  reasons  of  the  Platonists,  the 
preexisting  forms  or  species  of  Theophrastus  and  Themistius,  of  Adelandus 
and  Avicenna,  the  (mental)  ideas  of  Descartes  and  Arnauld,  the  represen- 
tations, sensual  ideas,  &c.  of  Leibnitz  anjl  Wolf,  the  phenomena  of  Kant,  the 
states  of  Brown,  and  (shall  we  say?)  the  vacillating  doctrine  of  percep- 
tion held  by  Reid  himself.  Mediately,  this  principle  was  the  origin  of 
many  other  famous  theories  : — of  the  hierarchical  gradation  of  souls  or 
faculties  of  the  Aristotelians ; of  the  vehicular  media  of  the  Platonists  ; 
of  the  hypotheses  of  a common  intellect  of  Alexander,  Themistius,  Aver- 
roes,  Cajetanus,  and  Zabarella  ; of  the  vision  in  the  Deity  of  Malebranche ; 
and  of  the  Cartesian  and  Leibnitzian  doctrines  of  assistance  and  preestab- 
lished harmony.  Finally,  to  this  principle  is  to  be  ascribed  the  refusal  of 
the  evidence  of  consciousness  to  the  primary  fact,  the  duality  of  its  per- 
ception ; and  the  Unitarian  schemes  of  absolute  identity,  materialism,  and 
idealism  are  the  results.  — H. 


132 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


necessary  and  immutable  be  not  the  immediate  objects 
of  perception,  they  may  be  immediate  objects  of  other 
powers  of  the  mind.  Fourth^  “ If  material  things  were 
perceived  by  themselves,  they  would  be  a true  light  to 
our  minds,  as  being  the  intelligible  form  of  our  under- 
standings, and  consequently  perfective  of  them,  and 
indeed  superior  to  them.”  If  I comprehend  any  thing 
of  this  mysterious  argument,  it  follows  from  it,  that 
the  Deity  perceives  nothing  at  all,  because  nothing  can 
be  superior  to  his  understanding,  or  perfective  of  it. 

There  is  an  argument  which  is  hinted  at  by  Male- 
branche,  and  by  several  other  authors,  which  deserves 
to  be  more  seriously  considered.  As  I find  it  most 
clearly  expressed  and  most  fully  urged  by  Dr.  Samuel 
Clarke,  I shall  give  it  in  his  words,  in  his  second  reply 
to  Leibnitz,  § 4 : — The  soul,  without  being  present  to 
the  images  of  the  things  perceived,  could  not  possibly 
perceive  them.  A living  substance  can  only  there  per- 
ceive where  it  is  present,  either  to  the  things  them- 
selves, (as  the  omnipresent  God  is  to  the  whole  uni- 
verse,) or  to  the  images  of  things,  as  the  soul  is  in  its 
proper  sensoriumP 

That  nothing  can  act  immediately  where  it  is  not,  I 
think,  must  be  admitted ; for  I agree  with  Sir  Isaac 
Newton,  that  power  without  substance  is  inconceivable. 
It  is  a consequence  of  this,  that  nothing  can  be  acted 
upon  immediately  where  the  agent  is  not  present.  Let 
this,  therefore,  be  granted.  To  make  the  reasoning 
conclusive,  it  is  further  necessary,  that,  when  we  per- 
ceive objects,  either  they  act  upon  us^  or  we  act  upon 
them.  This  does  not  appear  self-evident,  nor  have  I 
ever  met  with  any  proof  of  it.  I shall  briefly  offer  the 
reasons  why  I think  it  ought  not  to  be  admitted. 

When  we  say  that  one  being  acts  upon  another,  we 
mean  that  some  power  or  force  is  exerted  by  the  agent, 
which  produces,  or  has  a tendency  to  produce,  a change 
in  the  thing  acted  upon.  If  this  be  the  meaning  of  the 
phrase,  as  I conceive  it  is,  there  appears  no  reason  for 
asserting,  that,  in  perception,  either  the  object  acts  upon 
the  mind,  or  the  mind  upon  the  object. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.  13e3 

An  object,  in  being  perceived,  does  not  act  at  all.  I 
perceive  the  walls  of  the  room  where  I sit;  but  they 
are  perfectly  inactive,  and  therefore  act  not  upon  the 
mind.  To  be  perceived  is  what  logicians  call  an  exter- 
nal denomination^  which  implies  neither  action  nor  quality 
in  the  object  perceived.  Nor  could  men  ever  have  gone 
into  this  notion,  that  perception  is  owing  to  some  ac- 
tion of  the  object  upon  the  mind,  were  it  not  that  we 
are  so  prone  to  form  our  notions  of  the  mind  from 
some  similitude  we  conceive  between  it  and  body. 
Thought  in  the  mind  is  conceived  to  have  some  analogy 
to  motion  in  a body ; and  as  a body  is  put  in  motion 
by  being  acted  upon  by  some  other  body,  so  we  are  apt 
to  think  the  mind  is  made  to  perceive  by  some  impulse 
it  receives  from  the  object.  But  reasonings  drawn 
from  such  analogies  ought  never  to  be  trusted.  They 
are,  indeed,  the  cause  of  most  of  our  errors  with  regard 
to  the  mind.  And  we  might  as  well  conclude,  that 
minds  may  be  measured  by  feet  and  inches,  or  weighed 
by  ounces  and  drams,  because  bodies  have  those  prop- 
erties.* 

I see  as  little  reason,  in  the  second  place,  to  believe 
that  in  perception  the  mind  acts  upon  the  object.  To 
perceive  an  object  is  one  thing;  to  act  upon  it  is  an- 
other. Nor  is  the  last  at  all  included  in  the  first.  To 


* This  reasoning,  which  is  not  original  with  Reid,  (see  Note  S,)  is  not 
clearly  or  precisely  expressed.  In  asserting  that  “ an  object,  in  being  per- 
ceived, does  not  act  at  all,”  our  author  cannot  mean  that  it  does  not  act 
upon  the  organ  of  sense ; for  this  would  not  only  be  absurd  in  itself,  but 
in  contradiction  to  his  own  doctrine,  — “ it  being,”  he  says,  “ a law  of  our 
nature  that  we  perceive  not  external  objects  unless  certain  impressions  he 
made  on  the  nerves  and  brain.^’  The  assertion,  — “I  perceive  the  walls  of 
the  room  where  I sit,  but  they  are  perfectly  inactive,  and  therefore  act  not 
upon  the  mind,”  is  equally  incorrect  in  statement.  The  walls  of  the  room^ 
strictly  so  called,  assuredly  do  not  act  on  the  mind,  or  on  the  eye  ; but  the 
walls  of  the  room,  in  this  sense,  are,  in  fact,  no  object  of  (visual)  percep- 
tion at  all.  What  we  see  in  this  instance,  and  what  we  loosely  call  the 
walls  of  the  room,  is  only  the  light  reflected  from  their  surface  in  its  relation 
to  the  organ  of  sight,  i.  e.  color ; but  it  cannot  be  affirmed  that  the  rays  of 
light  do  not  act  on  and  affect  the  retina,  optic  nerve,  and  brain.  What 
Aristotle  distinguished  as  the  concomitants  of  sensation  — as  extension, 
motion,  position,  &c.  — are,  indeed,  perceived  without  any  relative  passion 
of  the  sense.  But,  whatever  may  be  Reid’s  meaning,  it  is,  at  best,  vague 
and  inexplicit.  — H. 

n 


134 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


say,  that  I act  upon  the  wall  by  looking  at  it,  is  an 
abuse  of  language,  and  has  no  meaning.  Logicians 
distinguish  two  kinds  of  operations  of  mind ; the  first 
kind  produces  no  effect  without  the  mind ; the  last  does. 
The  first  they  call  immanent  acts ; the  second  transitive. 
All  intellectual  operations  belong  to  the  first  class ; they 
produce  no  effect  upon  any  external  object.  But,  with- 
out having  recourse  to  logical  distinctions,  every  man 
of  common  sense  knows,  that  to  think  of  an  object  and 
to  act  upon  it  are  very  different  things. 

As  we  have,  therefore,  no  evidence  that,  in  percep- 
tion, the  mind  acts  upon  the  object,  or  the  object  upon 
the  mind,  but  strong  reasons  to  the  contrary,  Dr. 
Clarke’s  argument  against  our  perceiving  external  ob- 
jects immediately,  falls  to  the  ground. 

This  notion,  that,  in  perception,  the  object  must  be 
contiguous  to  the  percipient,  seems,  with  many  other 
prejudices,  to  be  borrowed  from  analogy.  In  all  the 
external  senses,  there  must,  as  has  been  before  ob- 
served, be  some  impression  made  upon  the  organ  of 
sense  by  the  object,  or  by  something  coming  from  the 
object.  An  impression  supposes  contiguity.  Hence 
we  are  led  by  analogy  to  conceive  something  similar  in 
the  operations  of  the  mind.  Many  philosophers  resolve 
almost  every  operation  of  mind  into  impressions  and 
feelings,  words  manifestly  borrowed  from  the  sense  of 
touch.  And  it  is  very  natural  to  conceive  contiguity 
necessary  between  that  which  makes  the  impression 
and  that  which  receives  it,  between  that  which  feels 
and  that  which  is  felt.  And  though  no  philosopher  will 
now  pretend  to  justify  such  analogical  reasoning  as 
this,  yet  it  has  a powerful  influence  upon  the  judgment, 
while  we  contemplate  the  operations  of  our  minds  only 
as  they  appear  through  the  deceitful  medium  of  such 
analogical  notions  and  expressions.*-:^^ 

■ ^ — vT ; — : 

* It  is  selDevident,  that,  if  a thing  is  to  be  an  object  immediately  known, 
it  must  be  known  as  it  exists.  Now  a body  must  exist  in  some  definite 
part  of  space,  — in  a certain  place ; it  cannot,  therefore,  be  immediately 
known  as  existing.^  except  it  be  known  in  its  place.  But  this  supposes  the 
mind  to  be  immediately  present  to  it  in  space.  — H. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS.  135 

IV.  Hume^s  Argument  stated  and  refuted,]  There 
remains  only  one  other  argument  that  I have  been  able 
to  find  urged  against  our  perceiving  external  objects 
immediately.  It  is  proposed  by  Mr.  Hume,  who,  in 
the  essay  already  quoted,  after  acknowledging  that  it 
is  a universal  and  primary  opinion  of  all  men  that  we 
perceive  external  objects  immediately,  subjoins  what 
follows : — 

“ But  this  universal  and  primary  opinion  of  all  men 
is  soon  destroyed  by  the  slightest  philosophy,  which 
teaches  us  that  nothing  can  ever  be  present  to  the 
mind  but  an  image  or  perception ; and  that  the  senses 
are  only  the  inlets  through  which  these  images  are  re- 
ceived, without  being  ever  able  to  produce  any  imme- 
diate intercourse  between  the  mind  and  the  object. 
The  table  which  we  see  seems  to  diminish  as  we  re- 
move farther  from  it ; but  the  real  table,  which  exists 
independent  of  us,  suffers  no  alteration.  It  was,  there- 
fore, nothing  but  its  image  which  was  present  to  the 
mind.  These  are  the  obvious  dictates  of  reason ; and 
no  man  who  reflects  ever  doubted  that  the  existences 
which  we  consider,  when  we  say  this  house^  and  that 
tree^  are  nothing  but  perceptions  in  the  mind,  and  fleet- 
ing copies  and  representations  of  other  existences  which 
remain  uniform  and  independent.  So  far,  then,  we  are 
necessitated  by  reasoning  to  depart  from  the  primary 
instincts  of  nature,  and  to  embrace  a new  system  with 
regard  to  the  evidence  of  our  senses.” 

We  have  here  a remarkable  conflict  between  two 
contradictory  opinions,  wherein  all  mankind  are  en- 
gaged. On  the  one  side  stand  all  the  vulgar,  who  are 
unpractised  in  philosophical  researches,  and  guided  by 
the  uncorrupted  primary  instincts  of  nature.  On  the 
other  side  stand  all  the  philosophers,  ancient  and  mod- 
ern,— every  man  without  exception  who  reflects.  In 
this  division,  to  my  great  humiliation,  I find  myself 
classed  with  the  vulgar. 

The  passage  now  quoted  is  all  I have  found  in  Mr. 
Hume’s  writings  upon  this  point ; and,  indeed,  there  is 
more  reasoning  in  it  than  I have  found  in  any  other 
author ; I shall  therefore  examine  it  minutely. 


136 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Firsts  he  tells  ns,  that  “ this  universal  and  primary 
opinion  of  all  men  is  soon  destroyed  by  the  slightest 
philosophy,  which  teaches  us  that  nothing  can  ever  be 
present  to  the  mind  but  an  image  or  perception^ 

The  phrase  of  being  present  to  the  mind  has  some 
obscurity ; but  I conceive  he  means  being  an  immediate 
object  of  thought,  — an  immediate  object,  for  instance, 
of  perception,  of  memory,  or  of  imagination.  If  this 
be  the  meaning  (and  it  is  the  only  pertinent  one  I can 
think  of),  there  is  no  more  in  this  passage  than  an  as- 
sertion of  the  proposition  to  be  proved,  and  an  asser- 
tion that  philosophy  teaches  it.  If  this  be  so,  I beg 
leave  to  dissent  from  philosophy  till  she  gives  me  rea- 
son for  what  she  teaches.  For  though  common  sense 
and  my  external  senses  demand  my  assent  to  their  dic- 
tates upon  their  own  authority,  yet  philosophy  is  not 
entitled  to  this  privilege.  But  that  I may  not  dissent 
from  so  grave  a personage  without  giving  a reason,  I 
give  this  as  the  reason  of  my  dissent.  I see  the  sun 
when  he  shines ; I remember  the  battle  of  Culloden ; 
and  neither  of  these  objects  is  an  image  or  perception. 

He  tells  us,  in  the  next  place,  “ That  the  senses  are 
only  the  inlets  through  which  these  images  are  re- 
ceived.” 

Mr.  Hume  surely  did  not  seriously  believe  that  an 
image  of  sound  is  let  in  by  the  ear,  an  image  of  smell 
by  the  nose,  an  image  of  hardness  and  softness^  of  solid- 
ity and  resistance^  by  the  touch.  For,  besides  the  ab- 
surdity of  the  thing,  which  has  often  been  shown,  Mr. 
Hume  and  all  modern  philosophers  maintain  that  the 
images  which  are  the  immediate  objects  of  perception 
have  no  existence  when  they  are  not  perceived;  where- 
as, if  they  were  let  in  by  the  senses,  they  must  be  be- 
fore they  are  perceived,  and  have  a separate  existence. 

Hitherto  I see  nothing  that  can  be  called  an  argu- 
ment. Perhaps  it  was  intended  only  for  illustration. 
The  argument,  the  only  argument,  follows  : — 

“ The  table  which  we  see  seems  to  diminish  as  we 
remove  farther  from  it ; but  the  real  table,  which  exists 
independent  of  us,  suffers  no  alteration.  It  was,  there- 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  THEORY  OF  IDEAS. 


137 


fore,  nothing  but  its  image  which  was  presented  to  the 
mind.  These  are  the  obvious  dictates  of  reason.” 

To  judge  of  the  strength  of  this  argument,  it  is 
necessary  to  attend  to  a distinction  which  is  familiar  to 
those  who  are  conversant  with  the  mathematical  sci- 
ences ; I mean  the  distinction  between  real  and  apparent 
magnitude.  The  real  magnitude  of  a line  is  measured 
by  some  known  measure  of  length,  as  inches,  feet,  or 
miles : the  real  magnitude  of  a surface  or  solid,  by 
known  measures  of  surface  or  of  capacity.  This  mag- 
nitude is  an  object  of  touch  only,  and  not  of  sight; 
nor  could  we  even  have  had  any  conception  of  it,  with- 
out the  sense  of  touch  ; and  Bishop  Berkeley,  on  that 
account,  calls  it  tangible  magnitude,*  Apparent  magni- 
tude is  measured  by  the  angle  which  an  object  subtends 
at  the  eye.  Supposing  two  right  lines  drawn  from  the 
eye  to  the  extremities  of  the  object,  making  an  angle 
of  which  the  object  is  the  subtense,  the  apparent  mag- 
nitude is  measured  by  this  angle.  This  apparent  mag- 
nitude is  an  object  of  sight,  and  not  of  touch.  Bishop 
Berkeley  calls  it  visible  magnitude. 

If  it  is  asked.  What  is  the  apparent  magnitude  of 
the  sun’s  diameter  ? the  answer  is,  that  it  is  about 
thirty-one  minutes  of  a degree.  But  if  it  is  asked. 
What  is  the  real  magnitude  of  the  sun’s  diameter  ? the 
answer  must  be.  So  many  thousand  miles,  or  so  many 
diameters  of  the  earth.  From  which  it  is  evident,  that 
real  magnitude  and  apparent  magnitude  are  things  of 
a different  nature,  though  the  name  of  magnitude  is 


* The  doctrine  of  Reid  — that  real  magnitude  or  extension  is  the  object 
of  touch  and  of  touch  alone  — is  altogether  untenable.  For,  in  ihQ  first 
place,  magnitude  appears  greater  or  less  in  proportion  to  the  different  size 
of  the  tactile  organ  in  different  subjects ; thus,  an  apple  is  larger  to  the 
hand  of  a child  than  to  the  hand  of  an  adult.  Touch,  therefore,  can,  at 
best,  afford  a knowledge  of  the  relation  of  magnitudes  in  proportion  to  the 
organ  of  this  or  that  individual.  But,  in  the  second  place,  even  in  the 
same  individual,  the  same  object  appears  greater  or  less,  according  as  it  is 
touched  by  one  part  of  the  body  or  by  another.  On  this  subject,  see 
Weber’s  Annotationes  de  Pulsu^  Resorptione,  Auditu^  et  Tactu.  Leipsic, 
1834.  — H. 

Compare  Bailey’s  Review  of  Berkeleifs  Theory  of  Vision^  Chap.  III.  — 
Ed. 

12* 


138 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


given  to  both.  The  first  has  three  dimensions,  the  last 
only  two.  The  first  is  measured  by  a line,  the  last  by 
an  angle. 

From  what  has  been  said,  it  is  evident  that  the  real 
magnitude  of  a body  must  continue  unchanged  while 
the  body  is  unchanged.  This  we  grant.  But  is  it  like- 
wise evident  that  the  apparent  magnitude  must  con- 
tinue the  same  while  the  body  is  unchanged  ? So  far 
otherwise,  that  every  man  who  knows  any  thing  of 
mathematics  can  easily  demonstrate,  that  the  same 
individual  object,  remaining  in  the  same  place,  and  un- 
changed, must  necessarily  vary  in  its  apparent  magni- 
tude, according  as  the  point  from  which  it  is  seen  is 
more  or  less  distant ; and  that  its  apparent  length  or 
breadth  will  be  nearly  in  a reciprocal  proportion  to  the 
distance  of  the  spectator.  This  is  as  certain  as  the 
principles  of  geometry.* 

We  must  likewise  attend  to  this,  that  though  the  real 
magnitude  of  a body  is  not  originally  an  object  of 
sight,  but  of  touch,  yet  we  learn  by  experience  to  judge 
of  the  real  magnitude  in  many  cases  by  sight.  We 
learn  by  experience  to  judge  of  the  distance  of  a body 
from  the  eye,  within  certain  limits ; and  from  its  dis- 
tance and  apparent  magnitude  taken  together,  we  learn 
to  judge  of  its  real  magnitude.  And  this  kind  of 
judgment,  by  being  repeated  every  hour,  and  almost 
every  minute,  of  our  lives,  becomes,  when  we  are  grown 
up,  so  ready  and  so  habitual,  that  it  very  much  resem- 
bles the  original  perceptions  of  our  senses,  and  may  not 
improperly  be  called  acquired  perception. 

Whether  we  call  it  judgment  or  acquired  perception 
is  a verbal  difference.  But  it  is  evident,  that,  by  means 
of  it,  we  often  discover  by  one  sense  things  which  are 


* The  whole  confusion  and  difficulty  in  this  matter  arise  from  not  de- 
termining what  is  the  true  object  in  visual  perception.  This  is  not  any 
distant  thing,  but  merely  the  rays  of  light  in  immediate  relation  to  the 
organ.  We  therefore  see  a different  object  at  every  movement,  by  which 
a different  complement  of  rays  is  reflected  to  the  eye.  The  things  from 
which  these  rays  arc  reflected  are  not,  in  truth,  perceived  at  all ; and  to 
conceive  them  as  objects  of  perception  is,  therefore,  erroneous,  and  produc- 
tive of  error.  — H. 


REFLECTIONS  ON  THE  TPIEORY  OF  IDEAS.  139 

properly  and  naturally  the  objects  of  another.  Thus 
I can  say  without  impropriety,  I hear  a drum,  I hear  a 
great  bell,  or  I hear  a small  bell ; though  it  is  certain 
that  the  figure  or  size  of  the  sounding  body  is  not 
originally  an  object  of  hearing.  In  like  manner,  we 
learn  by  experience  how  a body  of  such  a real  magni- 
tude, and  at  such  a distance,  appears  to  the  eye : but 
neither  its  real  magnitude,  nor  its  distance  from  the 
eye,  is  properly  an  object  of  sights  any  more  than  the 
form  of  a drum,  or  the  size  of  a bell,  is  properly  an  ob- 
ject of  hearing. 

If  these  things  be  considered,  it  will  appear  that  Mr. 
Hume’s  argument  has  no  force  to  support  his  conclu- 
sion, nay,  that  it  leads  to  a contrary  conclusion.  The 
argument  is  this: — The  table  we  see  seems  to  diminish 
as  we  remove  farther  from  it ; that  is,  its  apparent  mag- 
nitude is  diminished;  but  the  real  table  suffers  no  alter- 
ation, to  wit,  in  its  real  magnitude ; therefore  it  is  not 
the  real  table  we  see.  I admit  both  the  premises  in 
this  syllogism,  but  I deny  the  conclusion.  The  syllo- 
gism has  what  the  logicians  call  two  middle  terms  : 
apparent  magnitude  is  the  middle  term  in  the  first  pre- 
mise ; real  magnitude  in  the  second.  Therefore,  accord- 
ing to  the  rules  of  logic,  the  conclusion  is  not  justly 
drawn  from  the  premises.  But,  laying  aside  the  rules  of 
logic,  let  us  examine  it  by  the  light  of  common  sense. 

Let  us  suppose,  for  a moment,  that  it  is  the  real 
table  we  see.  Must  not  this  real  table  seem  to  dimin- 
ish as  we  remove  farther  from  it  ? It  is  demonstrable 
that  it  must.  How,  then,  can  this  apparent  diminution 
be  an  argument  that  it  is  not  the  real  table  ? When 
that  which  must  happen  to  the  real  table,  as  we  remove 
farther  from  it,  does  actually  happen  to  the  table  we 
see,  it  is  absurd  to  conclude  from  this  that  it  is  not  the 
real  table  we  see.  It  is  evident,  therefore,  that  this 
ingenious  author  has  imposed  upon  himself  by  con- 
founding real  magnitude  with  apparent  magnitude,  and 
that  his  argument  is  a mere  sophism. 

Thus  I have  considered  every  argument  I have  found 
advanced  to  prove  the  existence  of  ideas,  or  images  of 


140 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTIOxN. 


external  things,  in  the  mind : and  if  no  better  arguments 
can  be  found,  I cannot  help  thinking  that  the  whole 
history  of  philosophy  has  never  furnished  an  instance 
of  an  opinion  so  unanimously  entertained  by  philoso- 
phers upon  so  slight  grounds. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

OF  SENSATION. 

I.  The  Names  of  many  of  our  Sensations  Ambiguous^ 
Having  finished  what  I intend,  with  regard  to  that  act 
of  mind  which  we  call  the  perception  of  an  external  ob- 
ject, I proceed  to  consider  another,  which,  by  our  con- 
stitution, is  conjoined  with  perception,  and  not  with 
perception  only,  but  with  many  other  acts  of  our  minds ; 
and  that  is  sensation. 

Sensation  is  a name  given  by  philosophers  to  an  act 
of  mind,  which  may  be  distinguished  from  all  others  by 
this,  that  it  has  no  object  distinct  from  itself*  Pain  of 
every  kind  is  an  uneasy  sensation.  When  I am  pained, 
I cannot  say  that  the  pain  I feel  is  one  thing,  and  that 
my  feeling  it  is  another  thing.  They  are  one  and  the 
same  thing,  and  cannot  be  disjoined  even  in  imagina- 
tion. Pain,  when  it  is  not  felt,  has  no  existence.  It 
can  be  neither  greater  or  less  in  degree  or  duration,  nor 
any  thing  else  in  kind,  than  it  is  felt  to  be.  It  cannot 
exist  by  itself,  nor  in  any  subject  but  a sentient  being. 
No  quality  of  an  inanimate,  insentient  being  can  have 
the  least  resemblance  to  it. 

Almost  all  our  perceptions  have  corresponding  sensa- 
tions which  constantly  accompany  them,  and,  on  that 


* But  sensation,  in  the  language  of  philosophers,  has  been  generally 
employed  to  denote  the  whole  process  of  sensitive  cognition,  includ- 
ing perception  proper  and  sensation  proper.  On  this  distinction,  see  Note 

D*.  — H. 


OF  SENSATION  PROPER. 


141 


account,  are  very  apt  to  be  confounded  with  them. 
Neither  ought  we  to  expect  that  the  sensation  and  its 
corresponding  perception  should  be  distinguished  in 
common  language,  because  the  purposes  of  common 
life  do  not  require  it.  Language  is  made  to  serve  the 
purposes  of  ordinary  conversation  ; and  we  have  no  rea- 
son to  expect  that  it  should  make  distinctions  that  are 
not  of  common  use.  Hence  it  happens,  that  a quality 
perceived^  and  the  sensation  corresponding  to  that  per- 
ception, often  go  under  the  same  name. 

This  makes  the  names  of  most  of  our  sensations  am- 
biguous, and  this  ambiguity  has  very  much  perplexed 
philosophers.  It  will  be  necessary  to  give  some  in- 
stances, to  illustrate  the  distinction  between  our  sensa- 
tions and  the  objects  of  perception. 

When  I smell  a rose,  there  is  in  this  operation  both 
sensation  and  perception.  The  agreeable  odor  I feel, 
considered  by  itself,  without  relation  to  any  external 
object,  is  merely  a sensation.  It  affects  the  mind  in  a 
certain  ^vay ; and  this  affection  of  the  mind  may  be 
conceived,  without  a thought  of  the  rose,  or  any  other 
object.  This  sensation  can  be  nothing  else  than  it  is 
felt  to  be.  Its  very  essence  consists  in  being  felt ; and 
when  it  is  not  felt,  it  is  not.  There  is  no  difference  be- 
tween the  sensation  and  the  feeling  of  it ; they  are  one 
and  the  same  thing.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  we  be- 
fore observed,  that  in  sensation  there  is  no  object  dis- 
tinct from  that  act  of  the  mind  by  which  it  is  felt ; and 
this  holds  true  with  regard  to  all  sensations. 

Let  us  next  attend  to  the  perception  which  we  have 
in  smelling  a rose.  Perception  has  always  an  external 
object ; and  the  object  of  my  perception,  in  this  case,  is 
that  quality  in  the  rose  which  I discern  by  the  sense  of 
smell.  Observing  that  the  agreeable  sensation  is  raised 
when  the  rose  is  near,  and  ceases  when  it  is  removed,  I 
am  led  by  my  nature  to  conclude  some  quality  to  be 
in  the  rose  which  is  the  cause  of  this  sensation.  This 
quality  in  the  rose  is  the  object  perceived ; and  that  act 
of  my  mind  by  which  I have  the  conviction  and  belief 
of  this  quality,  is  what  in  this  case  I call  perception. 


142 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


But  it  is  here  to  be  observed,  that  the  sensation  I feel, 
and  the  quality  in  the  rose  which  I perceive,  are  both 
called  by  the  same  name.  The  smell  of  a rose  is  the 
name  given  to  both  : so  that  this  name  has  two  mean- 
ings ; and  the  distinguishing  its  different  meanings  re- 
moves all  perplexity,  and  enables  us  to  give  clear  and 
distinct  answers  to  questions  about  which  philosophers 
have  held  much  dispute.* 

Thus,  if  it  is  asked  whether  the  smell  be  in  the  rose, 
or  in  the  mind  that  feels  it,  the  answer  is  obvious;  — 
that  there  are  two  different  things  signified  by  the  smell 
of  a rose ; one  of  which  is  in  the  mind^  and  can  be  in 
nothing  but  in  a sentient  being ; the  other  is  truly  and 
properly  in  the  rose.  The  sensation  which  I feel  is  in 
my  mind.  The  mind  is  the  sentient  being  ; and  as  the 
rose  is  insentient,  there  can  be  no  sensation,  nor  any 
thing  resembling  sensation,  in  it.  But  this  sensation 
in  my  mind  is  occasioned  by  a certain  quality  in  the 
rose,  which  is  called  by  the  same  name  with  the  sensa- 
tion, not  on  account  of  any  similitude^  but  because  of 
their  constant  concomitancy. 

All  the  names  we  have  for  smells,  tastes,  sounds,  and 
for  the  various  degrees  of  heat  and  cold,  have  a like 
ambiguity ; and  what  has  been  said  of  the  smell  of  a 
rose  may  be  applied  to  them.  They  signify  both  a sen- 
sation and  a quality  perceived  by  means  of  that  sensa- 
tion. The  first  is  the  sign,  the  last  the  thing  signified. 
As  both  are  conjoined  by  nature,  and  as  the  purposes 
of  common  life  do  not  require  them  to  be  disjoined  in 
our  thoughts,  they  are  both  expressed  by  the  same 
name ; and  this  ambiguity  is  to  be  found  in  all  lan- 
guages, because  the  reason  of  it  extends  to  all. 


* In  reference  to  this  and  the  following  paragraphs,  I may  observe,  that 
the  distinction  of  subjective  and  objective  qualities,  here  vaguely  attempted, 
had  been  already  precisely  accomplished  by  Aristotle,  in  his  discrimination 
of  TraOrjTLKCLL  iroioTr^res  {qualitates  patibiles)  and  irddr)  (passiones).  In  re- 
gard to  the  Cartesian  distinction,  which  is  equally  precise,  but  of  which 
Reid  is  unaware,  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  they  called  color,  as  a sensation 
in  the  mind,  formal  color ; color,  as  a quality  in  bodies  capable  of  pro- 
ducing the  sensation,  primitive  or  radical  color.  — H. 


OF  SENSATION  PROPER. 


143 


The  same  ambiguity  is  found  in  the  names  of  such 
diseases  as  are  indicated  by  a particular  painful  sensa- 
tion, such  as  the  toothache  or  the  headache.  The  tooth- 
ache signifies  a painful  sensation,  which  can  only  be  in 
a sentient  being ; but  it  signifies  also  a disorder  in  the 
body,  which  has  no  similitude  to  a sensation,  but  is 
naturally  connected  with  it. 

Pressing  my  hand  with  force  against  the  table,  I feel 
pain,  and  I feel  the  table  to  be  hard.  The  pain  is  a sen- 
sation of  the  mind,  and  there  is  nothing  that  resembles 
it  in  the  table.  The  hardness  is  in  the  table,  nor  is  there 
any  thing  resembling  it  in  the  mind.  Feeling  is  applied 
to  both,  but  in  a different  sense ; being  a word  common 
to  the  act  of  sensation,  and  to  that  of  perceiving  by  the 
sense  of  touch. 

I touch  the  table  gently  with  my  hand,  and  I feel  it 
to  be  smooth,  hard,  and  cold.  These  are  qualities  of 
the  table  perceived  by  touch ; but  I perceive  them  by 
means  of  a sensation  which  indicates  them.  This  sen- 
sation not  being  painful,  I commonly  give  no  attention 
to  it.  It  carries  my  thought  immediately  to  the  thing 
signified  by  it,  and  is  itself  forgot,  as  if  it  had  never 
been.  But  by  repeating  it,  and  turning  my  attention 
to  it,  and  abstracting  my  thought  from  the  thing  signi- 
fied by  it,  I find  it  to  be  merely  a sensation,  and  that  it 
has  no  similitude  to  the  hardness,  smoothness,  or  cold- 
ness of  the  table  which  is  signified  by  it. 

It  is  indeed  difficult,  at  first,  to  disjoin  things  in  our 
attention  which  have  always  been  conjoined,  and  to 
make  that  an  object  of  reflection  which  never  was  so 
before ; but  some  pains  and  practice  will  overcome  this 
difficulty  in  those  who  have  got  the  habit  of  reflecting 
on  the  operations  of  their  own  minds. 

Although  the  present  subject  leads  us  only  to  con- 
sider the  sensations  which  we  have  by  means  of  our 
external  senses,  yet  it  will  serve  to  illustrate  what  has 
been  said,  and  I apprehend  is  of  importance  in  itself,  to 
observe,  that  many  operations  of  mind,  to  which  we 
give  one  name,  and  which  we  always  consider  as  one 
thing,  are  complex  in  their  nature,  and  made  up  of  sev- 


144 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


eral  more  simple  ingredients  ; and  of  these  ingredients 
sensation  very  often  makes  one.  Of  this  we  shall  give 
some  instances. 

The  appetite  of  hunger  includes  an  uneasy  sensation, 
and  a desire  of  food.  Sensation  and  desire  are  different 
acts  of  mind.  The  last,  from  its  nature,  must  have  an 
object;  the  first  has  no  object.  These  two  ingredients 
may  always  be  separated  in  thought ; perhaps  they 
sometimes  are,  in  reality  ; but  hunger  includes  both. 

Benevolence  towards  our  fellow-creatures  includes  an 
agreeable  feeling ; but  it  includes  also  a desire  of  the 
happiness  of  others.  The  ancients  commonly  called  it 
desire.  Many  moderns  choose  rather  to  call  it  a feeling. 
Both  are  right;  and  they  only  err  who  exclude  either 
of  the  ingredients.  Whether  these  two  ingredients  are 
necessarily  connected  is  perhaps  difficult  for  us  to  de- 
termine, there  being  many  necessary  connections  which 
we  do  not  perceive  to  be  necessary ; but  we  can  dis- 
join them  in  thought.  They  are  different  acts  of  the 
mind. 

An  uneasy  feeling,  and  a desire,  are  in  like  manner 
the  ingredients  of  malevolent  affections ; such  as  malice, 
envy,  revenge.  The  passion  of  fear  includes  an  uneasy 
sensation  or  feeling,  and  an  opinion  of  danger ; and 
hope  is  made  up  of  the  contrary  ingredients.  When 
we  hear  of  a heroic  action,  the  sentiment  which  it  raises 
in  our  mind  is  made  up  of  various  ingredients.  There 
is  in  it  an  agreeable  feeling,  a benevolent  affection  to 
the  person,  and  a judgment  or  opinion  of  his  merit. 

If  we  thus  analyze  the  various  operations  of  our 
minds,  we  shall  find  that  many  of  them  which  we  con- 
sider as  perfectly  simple,  because  we  have  been  accus- 
tomed to  call  them  by  one  name,  are  compounded  of 
more  simple  ingredients;  and  that  sensation,  or  feelings 
which  is  only  a more  refined  kind  of  sensation^  makes 
one  ingredient,  not  only  in  the  perception  of  external 
objects,  but  in  most  operations  of  the  mind. 

II.  Variety  and  Distribution  of  our  Sensations,']  A 
small  degree  of  reflection  may  satisfy  us,  that  the  num- 


OF  SENSATION  PROPER. 


145 


ber  and  variety  of  our  sensations  and  feelings  are  pro- 
digious. For,  to  omit  all  those  which  accompany  our 
appetites,  passions,  and  affections,  our  moral  sentiments, 
and  sentiments  of  taste,  even  our  external  senses  furnish 
a great  variety  of  sensations  differing  in  kind,  and  al- 
most in  every  kind  an  endless  variety  of  degrees.  Every 
variety  we  discern,  with  regard  to  taste,  smell,  sound, 
color,  heat  and  cold,  and  in  the  tangible  qualities  of 
bodies,  is  indicated  by  a sensation  corresponding  to  it.* 
The  most  general  and  the  most  important  division 
of  our  sensations  and  feelings  is  into  the  agreeable^  the 
disagreeable^  and  the  indiffereiit.  Every  thing  we  call 
pleasure,  happiness,  or  enjoyment,  on  the  one  hand,  and, 
on  the  other,  every  thing  we  call  misery,  pain,  or  un- 
easiness, is  sensation  or  feeling.  For  no  man  can  for 
the  present  be  more  happy,  or  more  miserable,  than  he 
feels  himself  to  be.  He  cannot  be  deceived  with  regard 
to  the  enjoyment  or  suffering  of  the  present  moment. 
But  I apprehend,  that,  besides  the  sensations  that  are 
either  agreeable  or  disagreeable,  there  is  still  a greater 


* It  has  been  commonly  held  by  philosophers,  both  in  ancient  and  mod- 
ern times,  that  the  division  of  the  senses  into  five  is  altogether  inadequate ; 
and  psychologists,  though  not  at  one  in  regard  to  the  distribution,  are  now 
generally  agreed,  that  under  touch  — or  feeling  in  the  strictest  signification 
of  the  term  — are  comprised  perceptions  which  are,  at  least,  as  well  entitled 
to  be  opposed  in  species  as  those  of  taste  and  smell. — H. 

Mill  says,  — “A  sense  of  something  on  the  skin,  and  perhaps  also  on 
the  interior  parts  of  the  body,  taken  purely  by  itself,  seems  alone  the  feeling 
of  touchy  It  is  “ the  feeling  which  we  have  when  something,  without  being 
seen,  comes  gently  into  contact  with  our  skin,  in  such  a way  that  we  can- 
not say  whether  it  is  hard  or  soft,  rough  or  smooth,  or  what  figure  it  is,  or 
of  what  size.”  To  these  he  adds  as  distinct  sensations,  though  commonly 
reckoned  under  the  head  of  touch,  — the  sensations  of  heat  and  cold,  resem- 
bling the  ordinary  sensations  of  touch  in  nothing  but  this,  that  the  organ 
of  them  is  diffused  over  the  whole  body;  sensations  of  disorganization,  or  of 
the  approach  to  disorganization,  in  any  part  of  the  body,  as  in  lacerations, 
burnings,  internal  inflammations,  itchings,  &c. ; muscular  sensations,  or  those 
feelings  which  accompany  the  action  of  the  muscles,  necessary  to  our  idea 
of  resistance,  and  manifesting  themselves  confusedly  in  a sense  of  fatigue 
or  of  restlessness  ; and,  finally,  sensations  in  the  alimentary  canal,  such  as 
hunger,  sea-sickness,  the  exhilarating  effects  of  opium,  the  sense  of  wretch- 
edness attending  indigestion,  and  the  like.  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of 
the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  I.  Sect.  V.  - VIII.  Compare  Brown’s  Philosophy 
of  the  Human  Mind,  Sect.  XXI. -XXIV.,  and  Tissot,  Anthropologic,  P"® 
Partie,  Lib.  I.  Sect.  III.  § i.  — Ed. 

13 


146 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


number  that  are  indifferent*  To  these  we  give  so  lit- 
tle attention,  that  they  have  no  name,  and  are  imme- 
diately forgot,  as  if  they  had  never  been ; and  it  requires 
attention  to  the  operations  of  our  minds  to  be  convinced 
of  their  existence. 

For  this  end,  we  may  observe,  that  to'  a good  ear 
every  human  voice  is  distinguishable  from  all  others. 
Some  voices  are  pleasant,  some  disagreeable ; but  the 
far  greater  part  can  be  said  to  be  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  other  sounds, 
and  no  less  of  tastes,  smells,  and  colors ; and  if  we  con- 
sider that  our  senses  are  in  continual  exercise  while  we 
are  awake,  that  some  sensation  attends  every  object 
they  present  to  us,  and  that  familiar  objects  seldom 
raise  any  emotion,  pleasant  or  painful,  we  shall  see 
reason,  besides  the  agreeable  and  disagreeable,  to  ad- 
mit a third  class  of  sensations,  that  may  be  called  indif- 
ferent. 

The  sensations  that  are  indifferent  are  far  from  being 
useless.  They  serve  as  signs  to  distinguish  things  that 
differ ; and  the  information  we  have  concerning  things 
external  comes  by  their  means.  Thus,  if  a man  had  no 
ear  to  receive  pleasure  from  the  harmony  or  melody  of 
sounds,  he  would  still  find  the  sense  of  hearing  of  great 
utility.  Though  sounds  gave  him  neither  pleasure  nor 
pain  of  themselves,  they  would  give  him  much  useful 
information  ; and  the  like  may  be  said  of  the  sensations 
we  have  by  all  the  other  senses. 

As  to  the  sensations  and  feelings  that  are  agreeable 
or  disagreeable,  they  differ  much,  not  only  in  degree, 
but  in  kind  and  in  dignity.  Some  belong  to  the  animal 
part  of  our  nature,  and  are  common  to  us  with  the 
brutes.  Others  belong  to  the  rational  and  moral  part. 
The  first  are  more  properly  called  sensations^  the  last 
feelinsrs.  The  French  word  sentiment  is  common  to 
both.f 


* This  is  a point  in  dispute  among  philosophers.  — H. 
t Some  French  philosophers,  since  Keid,  have  attempted  the  distinction 
of  sentiment  and  sensation.  — IT. 


OF  SENSATION  PROPER. 


147 


The  intention  of  nature  in  them  is  for  the  most  part 
obvious,  and  well  deserving  our  notice.  It  has  been 
beautifully  illustrated  by  a very  elegant  French  writer, 
in  his  Theorie  des  Sentiments  Agreables* 

The  Author  of  nature,  in  the  distribution  of  agreeable 
and  painful  feelings,  has  wisely  and  benevolently  con- 
sulted the  good  of  the  human  species,  and  has  even 
shown  us,  by  the  same  means,  what  tenor  of  conduct 
we  ought  to  hold.  firsts  The  painful  sensations  of 
the  animal  kind  are  admonitions  to  avoid  what  would 
hurt  us ; f and  the  agreeable  sensations  of  this  kind  in- 


* Levesque  de  Pouilly.  — H. 

t On  the  uses,  or  the  final  cause,  of  pain,  see  Sir  C.  Bell’s  Bridgewater 
Treatise  On  the  Hand^  its  Mechanism^  and  Vital  Endowments^  as  evincing  De- 
sign^ Chap.  VII.  With  great  force  and  beauty,  this  author  illustrates  the 
doctrine,  that  sensibility  to  pain  is  a wise  and  beneficent  provision,  evidently 
intended  to  protect  us  against  more  serious  harm.  Accordingly  he  shows, 
that,  where  pain  is  of  use,  it  is  found  ; where,  from  any  cause,  it  would  not 
be  of  use,  the  part  is  insensible.  Thus,  as  he  says,  the  skin,  by  its  exqui- 
site sensibility,  is  made  a better  safeguard  to  the  delicate  textures  which  are 
contained  within  “ than  if  our  bodies  were  covered  with  the  hide  of  the  rhi- 
noceros.” Quoting  from  a lecture  which  he  had  delivered  before  the  Col- 
lege of  Surgeons,  he  puts  the  argument  in  another  form ; — “ Without 
meaning  to  impute  to  you  inattention  or  restlessness,  I may  request  you  to 
observe  how  every  one  occasionally  changes  his  position,  and  shifts  the 
pressure  of  the  weight  of  his  body : were  you  constrained  to  retain  one  po- 
sition during  the  whole  hour,  you  would  rise  stiff  and  lame.  The  sensibil- 
ity of  the  skin  is  here  guiding  you  to  that  which,  if  neglected,  would  be 
followed  even  by  the  death  of  the  part.” 

“ In  pursuing  the  inquiry,  we  learn  with  much  interest,  that,  when  the 
bones,  joints,  and  all  the  membranes  and  ligaments  which  cover  them,  are 
exposed,  they  may  be  cut,  pricked,  or  even  burned,  without  the  patient  or 
the  animal  suffering  the  slightest  pain.”  The  reason  is,  that  the  pain  is 
not  needed,  since  no  such  injuries  can  reach  the  parts  referred  to,  or  never 
without  warning  being  received  through  the  sensibility  of  the  skin.  The 
only  injuries  to  which  the  bones,  joints,  and  sinews  are  liable,  without  the 
sensibility- of  the  skin  being  first  excited,  are  sprains,  ruptures,  concussions, 
and  the  like.  In  such  cases,  therefore,  our  doctrine  would  lead  us  to  ex- 
pect that  these  inward  parts  would  be  sensible  to  pain,  that  we  might  be 
w'arned,  in  the  only  way  we  could  be  effectually,  of  the  presence  of  the 
evil ; and  so  in  fact  it  is. 

“ How  consistent,  then,  and  beautiful,  is  the  distribution  of  this  quality 
of  life  ! The  sensibility  to  pain  varies  with  the  function  of  the  part.  The 
skin  is  endowed  with  sensibility  to  every  possible  injurious  impression 
which  may  be  made  upon  it.  But  had  this  kind  and  degree  of  sensibility 
been  made  universal,  we  should  have  been  racked  with  pain  in  the  common 
motions  of  the  body  ; the  mere  weight  of  one  part  on  another,  or  the  mo- 
tion of  the  joint,  would  have  been  attended  with  that  degree  of  suffering 
which  we  experience  in  using  or  walking  with  an  inflamed  limb.  But,  on 


148 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


vite  US  to  those  actions  that  are  necessary  to  the  preser- 
vation of  the  individual,  or  of  the  kind.  Secondly^  By 
the  same  means  nature  invites  us  to  moderate  bodily 
exercise,  and  admonishes  us  to  avoid  idleness  and  inac- 
tivity on  the  one  hand,  and  excessive  labor  and  fatigue 
on  the  other.  Thirdly ^ The  moderate  exercise  of  all  our 
rational  powers  gives  pleasure.  Fourthly^  Every  species 
of  beauty  is  beliel.d  with  pleasure,  and  every  species  of 
deformity  with  disgust ; andwe  shall  find  all  that  we 
call  beautiful  to  be  something  estimable  or  useful  in 
itself,  or  a sign  of  something  that  is  estimable  or  use- 
ful. Fifthly^  The  benevolent  affections  are  all  accom- 
panied with  an  agreeable  feeling,  the  malevolent  with 
the  contrary.  And,  sixthly^  The  highest,  the  noblest, 
and  most  durable  pleasure  is  that  of  doing  well,  and 
acting  the  part  that  becomes  us ; and  the  most  bitter 
and  painful  sentiment,  the  anguish  and  remorse  of  a 
guilty  conscience.  These  observations,  with  regard  to 
the  economy  of  nature  in  the  distribution  of  our  pain- 
ful and  agreeable  sensations  and  feelings,  are  illustrated 
by  the  author  last  mentioned  so  elegantly  and  ju- 
diciously, that  1 shall  not  attempt  to  say  any  thing 
upon  them  after  him. 

I shall  conclude  this  chapter  by  observing,  that,  as 


the  other  hand,  had  the  deeper  parts  possessed  no  sensibility,  we  should 
have  had  no  guide  in  our  exertions.  They  have  a sensibility  .limited  to 
the  kind  of  injury  which  it  is  possible  may  reach  them,  and  which  teaches 
us  what  we  can  do  with  impunity. 

“ To  contrast  still  more  strongly  the  sensibility  of  the  surface  with  the 
property  of  internal  parts,  to  show  how  very  dhferent  sensibility  is  in  real- 
ity from  what  is  suggested  by  first  experience,  and  how  admirably  it  is 
varied  and  accommodated  to  the  functions,  we  shall  add  one  other  fact. 
The  brain  is  insensible,  — that  part  of  the  brain  which,  if  disturbed  or  dis- 
eased, takes  away  consciousness,  is  as  insensible  as  the  leather  of  our  shoe ! 
That  the  brain  may  be  touched,  or  a portion  cut  off,  without  interrupting 
the  patient  in  the  sentence  that  he  is  uttering,  is  a surprising  circumstance ! ” 
The  reason  he  supposes  to  be,  that  the  safety  of  the  brain  is  otherwise  pro- 
vided for  by  its  strong  osseous  integuments,  so  that  sensibility  here  would 
only  have  the  effect  to  expose  man  to  superfluous  suffering.  “Reason  on 
it,  however,  as  we  may,  the  fact  is  so ; — the  brain,  through  which  every 
impression  must  be  conveyed  before  it  is  perceived,  is  itself  insensible. 
This  informs  us  that  sensibility  is  not  a necessary  attendant  on  the  delicate 
texture  of  a living  part,  but  that  it  must  have  an  appropriate  organ^  and 
that  it  is  an  especial  provision. — Ed. 


OF  SENSATION  PROPER. 


149 


the  confounding  our  sensations  with  that  perception  of 
external  objects  which  is  constantly  conjoined  with 
them  has  been  the  occasion  of  most  of  the  errors  and 
false  theories  of  philosophers  with  regard  to  the  senses, 
so  the  distinguishing  these  operations  seems  to  me  to/ 
be  the  key  that  leads  to  a right  understanding  of  both. 

The  purposes  of  life,  as  was  before  observed,  do  not 
require  them  to  be  distinguished.  It  is  the  philosopher 
alone  who  has  occasion  to  distinguish  them,  when  he 
would  analyze  the  operation  compounded  of  them. 
But  philosophers,  as  well  as  the  vulgar,  have  been  ac- 
customed to  comprehend  both  sensation  and  perception 
under  one  name,  and  to  consider  them  as  one  uncom- 
pounded operation.  Philosophers,  even  more  than  the 
vulgar,  have  generally  given  the  name  of  sensation  to 
the  whole  operation  of  the  senses ; and  all  the  notions 
we  have  of  material  things  have  been  called  ideas  of 
sensation.  This  led  Bishop  Berkeley  to  take  one  ingre- 
dient of  a complex  operation  for  the  whole ; and  having 
clearly  discovered  the  nature  of  sensation,  taking  it  for 
granted  that  all  that  the  senses  present  to  the  mind 
is  sensation,  which  can  have  no  resemblance  to  any 
thing  material,  he  concluded  that  there  is  no  material 
world. 

If  the  senses  furnish  us  with  no  materials  of  thought 
but  sensations,  his  conclusion  must  be  just;  for  no  sen- 
sation can  give  us  the  conception  of  material  things,  far 
less  any  argument  to  prove  their  existence.  But  if  it 
is  true  that  by  our  senses  we  have  not  only  a variety 
of  sensations,  but  likewise  a conception  and  an  imme- 
diate natural  conviction  of  external  objects,  he  reasons 
from  a false  supposition,  and  his  arguments  fall  to  the 
ground.* 


* In  his  Supplementary  Dissertations^  Note  D*,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  says  of 
“ sensation  proper  and  perception  proper^  in  correlation  ” : — “ In  perception 
proper  there  is  a higher  energy  of  intelligence  than  in  sensation  proper. 
For  though  the  latter  be  the  apprehension  of  an  affection  of  the  ego^  and 
therefore,  in  a certain  sort,  the  apprehension  of  an  immaterial  quality,  still 
it  is  only  the  apprehension  of  the  fact  of  an  organic  passion ; whereas  the 
former,  though  supposing  sensation  as  its  condition,  and  though  only  the 
apprehension  of  the  attributes  of  a material  non-ego.,  is,  however,  itself 

13* 


150 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 

L (1.)  Primary  and  Secondary  Qualities  of  Body\ 
The  objects  of  perception  are  the  various  qualities  of 
bodies.  Intending  to  treat  of  these  only  in  general, 
and  chiefly  with  a view  to  explain  the  notions  which 
our  senses  give  us  of  them,  I begin  with  the  distinction 
between  primary  and  secondary  qualities.  These  were 
distinguished  very  early.  The  Peripatetic  system  con- 
founded them,  and  left  no  difference.  The  distinction 
was  again  revived  by  Descartes  and  Locke,  and  a sec- 
ond time  abolished  by  Berkeley  and  Hume.*  If  the 


without  corporeal  passion,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  recognition  not 
merely  of  a fact,  but  of  relations. 

“ Sensation  proper  is  the  conditio  sine  qua  non  of  a perception  proper  of  the 
primary  qualities.  For  we  are  only  aware  of  the  existence  of  our  organ- 
ism in  being  sentient  of  it,  as  thus  or  thus  affected ; and  are  only  aware  of 
it  being  the  subject  of  extension,  figure,  division,  motion,  &c.,  in  being 
percipient  of  its  affections,  as  like  or  as  unlike,  and  as  out  of,  or  locally 
external  to,  each  other. 

“ Every  perception  proper  has  a sensation  proper  as  its  condition  ; but 
every  sensation  has  not  a paxeption  proper  as  its  conditionate,  — unless, 
what  I think  ought  to  be  done,  we  view  the  general  consciousness  of  the 
locality  of  a sensorial  affection  as  a perception  proper.  In  this  case,  the 
two  apprehensions  will  be  always  coexistent. 

“ But  though  the  fact  of  sensation  proper  and  the  fact  of  perception  proper 
imply  each  other,  this  is  all ; for  the  two  cognitions,  though  coexistent, 
are  not  proportionally  coexistent.  On  the  contrary,  although  we  can  only 
take  note  of,  that  is,  perceive.,  the  special  relations  of  sensations,  on  the 
hypothesis  that  these  sensations  exist;  a sensation,  in  proportion  as  it 
rises  above  a low  degree  of  intensity,  interferes  with  the  perception  of 
its  relations,  by  concentrating  consciousness  on  its  absolute  affection  alone. 
It  may  accordingly  be  stated  as  a general  rule,  That,  above  a certain  point, 
the  stronger  the  sensation,  the  iveaker  the  perception ; and  the  distincter  the  per- 
ception,  the  less  obtrusive  the  sensation:  in  other  words.  Though  perception 
proper  and  sensation  proper  exist  only  as  they  coexist,  in  the  degree  or  intensity 
of  their  existence  they  are  ahvays  found  in  an  inverse  ratio  to  each  other'''  — 
Ed. 

* For  the  history  of  this  distinction,  see  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  Supplemen- 
tary Dissertations,  Note  H,  § 1 . Here,  as  in  many  other  places,  by  “ the 
Peripatetic  system  ” we  must  understand  the  system  as  held  by  some  of 
the  followers  of  Aristotle,  and  not  as  held  by  himself.  “Aristotle,”  says 
Hamilton,  “ does  not  abolish  the  distinction ; — nay,  I am  confident  of 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


151 


real  foundation  of  this  distinction  can  be  pointed  out, 
it  will  enable  us  to  account  for  the  various  revolutions 
in  the  sentiments  of  philosophers  concerning  it. 

Every  one  knows  that  extension^  divisibility^  figure^ 
motion^  solidity^  hardness^  softness^  and  fluidity  were  by 
Mr.  Locke  called  primary  qualities  of  body ; and  that 
sounds  color^  taste,  smell,  and  heat  or  cold  were  called 
secondary  qualities.  Is  there  a just  foundation  for  this 
distinction  ? Is  there  any  thing  common  to  the  primary 
which  belongs  not  to  the  secondary  ? And  what  is  it  ? 

I answer,  that  there  appears  to  me  to  be  a real  foun- 
dation for  the  distinction,  and  it  is  this  : that  our  senses 
give  us  a direct  and  distinct  notion  of  the  primary 
qualities,  and  inform  us  what  they  are  in  themselves ; 
but  of  the  secondary  qualities,  our  senses  give  us  only 
a relative  and  obscure  notion.* *  They  inform  us  only, 
that  they  are  qualities  that  affect  us  in  a certain  man- 
ner, that  is,  produce  in  us  a certain  sensation ; but  as 
to  what  they  are  in  themselves,  our  senses  leave  us  in 
the  dark.f 

Every  man  capable  of  reflection  may  easily  satisfy 
himself,  that  he  has  a perfectly  clear  and  distinct  notion 
of  extension,  divisibility,  figure,  and  motion.  The  so- 


showing,  that,  to  whatever  merit  modern  philosophers  may  pretend  in  this 
analysis,  all  and  each  of  their  observations  are  to  be  found,  clearly  stated, 
in  the  writings  of  the  Stagirite.”  He  also  says  of  Locke : — “ His  doctrine 
in  regard  to  the  attributes  of  bodies,  in  so  far  as  these  have  power  to  pro- 
duce sensations  and  perceptions,  or  simple  ideas,  in  us,  contains  absolutely 
nothing  new.”  — Ed. 

* By  the  expression,  “ what  they  are  in  themselves^"'  in  reference  to  the 
primary  qualities,  and  of  “ relative  notion'"'  in  reference  to  the  secondary, 
Ileid  cannot  mean  that  the  former  are  known  to  us  absolutely  and  in  them- 
selves^— that  is,  out  of  relation  to  our  cognitive  faculties  ; for  he  elsew^here 
admits  that  all  our  knowledge  is  relative.  Further,  if  “our  senses  give  us 
a direct  and  distinct  notion  of  the  primary  qualities,  and  inform  us  what  they 
are  in  themselves^"  these  qualities,  as  known,  must  resemble^  or  be  identical 
with,  these  qualities  as  existing.  — H. 

t The  distinctions  of  perception  and  sensation,  and  of  primary  and  sec- 
ondary qualities,  may  be  reduced  to  one  higher  principle.  Knowledge  is 
partly  objective  and  partly  subjective : both  these  elements  are  essential  to 
every  cognition,  l)ut  in  every  cognition  they  are  always  in  the  inverse  ratio 
of  each  other.  In  perception  and  the  primary  qualities,  the  objective  ele- 
T>icnt  preponderates  5 whereas  the  subjective  element  preponderates  in  sen- 
sation and  the  secondary  qualities.  — H. 


152 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


lidity  of  a body  means  no  more  than  that  it  excludes 
other  bodies  from  occupying  the  same  place  at  the 
same  time.  Hardness,  softness,  and  fluidity  are  differ- 
ent degrees  of  cohesion  in  the  parts  of  a body.  It  is 
fluid  when  it  has  no  sensible  cohesion,  soft  when  the 
cohesion  is  weak,  and  hard  when  it  is  strong.  Of  the 
cause  of  this  cohesion  we  are  ignorant,  but  the  thing 
itself  we  understand  perfectly,  being  immediately  in- 
formed of  it  by  the  sense  of  touch.  It  is  evident,  there- 
fore, that  of  the  primary  qualities  we  have  a clear  and 
distinct  notion ; we  know  what  they  are,  though  we 
may  be  ignorant  of  their  causes. 

I observe,  further,  that  the  notion  we  have  of  pri- 
mary qualities  is  direct^  and  not  relative  only.  A rel- 
ative notion  of  a thing  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  notion 
of  a thing  at  all,  but  only  of  some  relation  which  it 
bears  to  something  else. 

Thus  gravity  sometimes  signifies  the  tendency  of 
bodies  towards  the  earth ; sometimes  it  signifies  the 
cause  of  that  tendency.  When  it  means  the  first,  I 
have  a direct  and  distinct  notion  of  gravity : I see  it, 
and  feel  it,  and  know  perfectly  what  it  is ; but  this  ten- 
dency must  have  a cause.  We  give  the  same  name  to 
the  cause ; and  that  cause  has  been  an  object  of  thought 
and  of  speculation.  Now  what  notion  have  we  of  this 
cause  when  we  think  and  reason  about  it?  It  is  evident 
we  think  of  it  as  an  unknown  cause  of  a known  effect. 
This  is  a relative  notion,  and  it  must  be  obscure,  be- 
cause it  gives  us  no  conception  of  what  the  thing  is, 
but  of  what  relation  it  bears  to  something  else.  Every 
relation  which  a thing  unknown  bears  to  something 
that  is  known  may  give  a relative  notion  of  it ; and 
there  are  many  objects  of  thought,  and  of  discourse,  of 
which  our  faculties,  can  give  no  better  than  a relative 
notion. 

Having  premised  these  things  to  explain  what  is 
meant  by  a relative  notion,  it  is  evident  that  our  notion 
of  primary  qualities  is  not  of  this  kind ; we  know  what 
they  are,  and  not  barely  what  relation  they  bear  to 
something  else. 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


153 


It  is  otherwise  with  secondary  qualities.  If  you  ask 
me,  what  is  that  quality  or  modification  in  a rose  which 
I call  its  smell,  I am  at  a loss  to  answer  directly.  Up- 
on reflection,  I find  that  I have  a distinct  notion  of  the 
sensation  which  it  produces  in  my  mind.  But  there 
can  be  nothing  like  to  this  sensation  in  the  rose,  be- 
cause it  is  insentient.  The  quality  in  the  rose  is  some- 
thing which  occasions  the  sensation  in  me ; but  what 
that  something  is,  I know  not.  My  senses  give  me  no 
information  upon  this  point.  The  only  notion,  there- 
fore, my  senses  give  is  this,  that  smell  in  the  rose  is  an 
unknown  quality  or  modification,  which  is  the  cause 
or  occasion  of  a sensation  which  I know  well.  The 
relation  which  this  unknown  quality  bears  to  the  sen- 
sation with  which  nature  has  connected  it,  is  all  I learn 
from  the  sense  of  smelling ; but  this  is  evidently  a rel- 
ative notion.  The  same  reasoning  will  apply  to  every 
secondary  quality. 

Thus  I think  it  appears  that  there  is  a real  foun- 
dation for  the  distinction  of  primary  from  secondary 
qualities,  and  that  they  are  distinguished  by  this : that 
of  the  primary  we  have  by  our  senses  a direct  and  dis- 
tinct notion;  but  of  the  secondary  only  a relative  no- 
tion, which  must,  because  it  is  only  relative,  be  obscure  ; 
they  are  conceived  only  as  the  unknown  causes  or 
occasions  of  certain  sensations  with  which  we  are  well 
acquainted. 

II.  Remarks  on  the  Distinction  between  Primary  and 
Secondary  Qualities.]  The  account  I have  given  of  this 
distinction  is  founded  upon  no  hypothesis.  Whether 
our  notions  of  primary  qualities  are  direct  and  distinct, 
those  of  the  secondary  relative  and  obscure,  is  a matter 
of  fact,  of  which  every  man  may  have  certain  knowl- 
edge by  attentive  reflection  upon  them.  To  this  reflec- 
tion I appeal,  as  the  proper  test  of  what  has  been  ad- 
vanced, and  proceed  to  make  some  remarks  on  the 
subject. 

1.  The  primary  qualities  are  neither  sensations^  nor 
are  they  resemblances  of  sensations.  This  appears  to 


154 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


me  self-evident.  I have  a clear  and  distinct  notion  of 
each  of  the  primary  qualities.  I have  a clear  and  dis- 
tinct notion  of  sensation.  I can  compare  the  one  with 
the  other;  and  when  I do  so,  I am  not  able  to  discern 
a resembling  feature.  Sensation  is  the  act,  or  the  feel- 
ing, (I  dispute  not  which,)  of  a sentient  being.  Figure, 
divisibility,  solidity,  are  neither  acts  nor  feelings.  Sen- 
sation supposes  a sentient  being  as  its  subject;  for  a 
sensation  that  is  not  felt  by  some  sentient  being  is  an 
absurdity.  Figure  and  divisibility  suppose  a subject 
that  is  figured  and  divisible,  but  not  a subject  that  is 
sentient. 

2.  We  have  no  reason  to  think  that  the  sensations  by 
which  we  have  notice  of  secondary  qualities  resemble 
any  quality  of  body.  The  absurdity  of  this  notion  has 
been  clearly  shown  by  Descartes,  Locke,  and  many 
modern  philosophers.  It  was  a tenet  of  the  ancient 
philosophy,  and  is  still  by  many  imputed  to  the  vulgar, 
but  only  as  a vulgar  error.  It  is  too  evident  to  need 
proof,  that  the  vibrations  of  a sounding  body  do  not 
resemble  the  sensation  of  sound,  nor  the  effluvia  of  an 
odorous  body  the  sensation  of  smell. 

3.  The  distinctness  of  our  notions  of  primary  qualities 
prevents  all  questions  and  disputes  about  their  nature. 
There  are  no  different  opinions  about  the  nature  of  ex- 
tension, figure,  or  motion,  or  the  nature  of  any  primary 
quality.  Their  nature  is  manifest  to  our  senses,  and 
cannot  be  unknown  to  any  man,  or  mistaken  by  him, 
though  their  causes  may  admit  of  dispute. 

The  primary  qualities  are  the  objects  of  the  mathe- 
matical sciences ; and  the  distinctness  of  our  notions 
of  them  enables  us  to  reason  demonstratively  about 
them  to  a great  extent.  Their  various  modifications 
are  precisely  defined  in  the  imagination,  and  thereby 
capable  of  being  compared,  and  their  relations  deter- 
mined with  precision  and  certainty. 

It  is  not  so  with  secondary  qualities.  Their  nature, 
not  being  manifest  to  the  sense,  may  be  a subject  of 
dispute.  Our  feeling  informs  us  that  the  fire  is  hot ; 
but  it  does  not  inform  us  what  that  heat  of  the  fire  is. 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


155 


But  does  it  not  appear  a contradiction  to  say  we  know 
that  the  fire  is  hot.  but  we  know  not  what  that  heat  is  ? 
I answer,  There  is  the  same  appearance  of  contradic- 
tion in  many  things,  that  must  be  granted.  We  know 
that  wine  has  an  inebriating  quality ; but  we  know  not 
what  that  quality  is.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that,  if  we  had 
not  some  notion  of  what  is  meant  by  the  heat  of  fire, 
and  by  an  inebriating  quality,  we  could  affirm  nothing 
of  either  with  understanding.  We  have  a notion  of 
both;  but  it  is  only  a relative  notion.  We  know  that 
they  are  the  causes  of  certain  known  effects. 

4.  The  nature  of  secondary  qualities  is  a proper  sub- 
ject of  disquisition;  and  in  this  philosophy 

has  made  some  progress.  It  has  been  discovered,  that 
the  sensation  of  smell  is  occasioned  by  the  effluvia  of 
bodies;  that  of  sound  by  their  vibration.  The  dispo- 
sition of  bodies  to  reflect  a particular  kind  of  light 
occasions  the  sensation  of  color.  Very  curious  dis- 
coveries have  been  made  of  the  nature  of  heat,  and  an 
ample  field  of  discovery  in  these  subjects  remains. 

5.  We  may  see  why  the  sensations  belonging  to  sec- 
ondary qualities  are  an  object  of  our  attention^  while 
those  which  belong  to  the  primary  are  not. 

The  first  are  not  only  signs  of  the  object  perceived, 
but  they  bear  a capital  part  in  the  notion  we  form  of 
it.  We  conceive  it  only  as  that  which  occasions  such 
a sensation,  and  therefore  cannot  reflect  upon  it  with- 
out thinking  of  the  sensation  which  it  occasions:  we 
have  no  other  mark  whereby  to  distinguish  it.  The 
thought  of  a secondary  quality,  therefore,  always  carries 
us  back  to  the  sensation  which  it  produces.  We  give 
the  same  name  to  both,  and  are  apt  to  confound  them 
together.  But  having  a clear  and  distinct  conception 
of  primary  qualities,  we  have  no  need  when  we  think 
ot  them  to  recall  their  sensations.  W^hen  a primary 
quality  is  perceived,  the  sensation  immediately  leads 
our  thought  to  the  quality  signified  by  it,  and  is  itself 
forgot.  We  have  no  occasion  afterwards  to  reflect 
upon  it;  and  so  we  come  to  be  as  little  acquainted 
with  it  as  if  we  had  never  felt  it.  This  is  the  case 


156 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


with  the  sensations  of  all  primary  qualities,  when  they 
are  not  so  painful  or  pleasant  as  to  draw  our  attention. 

When  a man  moves  his  hand  rudely  against  a point- 
ed hard  body,  he  feels  pain,  and  may  easily  be  per- 
suaded that  this  pain  is  a sensation,  and  that  there  is 
nothing  resembling  it  in  the  hard  body ; at  the  same 
time  he  perceives  the  body  to  be  hard  and  pointed,  and 
he  knows  that  these  qualities  belong  to  the  body  only. 
In  this  case,  it  is  easy  to  distinguish  what  he  feels  from 
what  he  perceives.  Let  him  again  touch  the  pointed 
body  gently,  so  as  to  give  him  no  pain ; and  now  you 
can  hardly  persuade  him  that  he  feels  any  thing  but 
the  figure  and  hardness  of  the  body ; so  difficult  it 
is  to  attend  to  the  sensations  belonging  to  primary 
qualities,  when  they  are  neither  pleasant  nor  painful. 
They  carry  the  thought  to  the  external  object,  and  im- 
mediately disappear  and  are  forgot.  Nature  intended 
them  only  as  signs ; and  when  they  have  served  that 
purpose,  they  vanish. 

6.  We  are  now  to  consider  a supposed  contradiction 
between  the  vulgar  and  the  philosophers  upon  this 
subject.  As  to  the  former,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that 
they  should  make  distinctions  which  have  no  connec- 
tion with  the  common  affairs  of  life  ; they  do  not,  there- 
fore, distinguish  the  primary  from  the  secondary  qual- 
ities, but  speak  of  both  as  being  equally  qualities  of  the 
external  object.  Of  the  primary  qualities  they  have  a 
distinct  notion,  as  they  are  immediately  and  distinctly 
perceived  by  the  senses  ; of  the  secondary,  their  notions, 
as  I apprehend,  are  confused  and  indistinct,  rather  than 
erroneous.  A secondary  quality  is  the  unknown  cause 
or  occasion  of  a well-known  effect;  and  the  same 
name  is  common  to  the  cause  and  the  effect.  Now,  to 
distinguish  clearly  the  different  ingredients  of  a com- 
plex notion,  and,  at  the  same  time,  the  different  mean- 
ings of  an  ambiguous  word,  is  the  work  of  a philoso- 
pher ; and  it^  not  to  be  expected  of  the  vulgar,  when 
their  occasions  do  not  require  it. 

I grant,  therefore,  that  the  notion  which  the  vulgar 
have  of  secondary  qualities  is  indistinct  and  inaccu- 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


157 


rate.  But  there  seems  to  be  a contradiction  between  the 
vulgar  and  the  philosopher  upon  this  subject,  and  each 
charges  the  other  with  a gross  absurdity.  The  vulgar 
say,  that  fire  is  hot,  and  snow  cold,  and  sugar  sweet ; 
and  that  to  deny  this  is  a gross  absurdity,  and  contra- 
dicts the  testimony  of  our  senses.  The  philosopher 
says,  that  heat  and  cold  and  sweetness  are  nothing 
but  sensations  in  our  minds ; and  it  is  absurd  to  con- 
ceive that  these  sensations  are  in  the  fire,  or  in  the 
snow,  or  in  the  sugar. 

I believe  this  contradiction  between  the  vulgar  and 
the  philosopher  is  more  apparent  than  real;  and  that  it 
is  owing  to  an  abuse  of  language  on  the  part  of  the 
philosopher,  and  to  indistinct  notions  on  the  part  of  the 
vulgar.  The  philosopher  says,  there  is  no  heat  in  the 
fire,  meaning  that  the  fire  has  not  the  sensation  of  heat. 
His  meaning  is  just;  and  the  vulgar  will  agree  with 
him,  as  soon  as  they  understand  his  meaning:  but  his 
language  is  improper ; for  there  is  really  a quality  in 
the  fire,  of  which  the  proper  name  is  heat;  and  the 
name  of  heat  is  given  to  this  quality^  both  by  philoso- 
phers and  by  the  vulgar,  much  more  frequently  than  to 
the  sensation  of  heat.  This  speech  of  the  philosopher, 
therefore,  is  meant  by  him  in  one  sense  ; it  is  taken  by 
the  vulgar  in  another  sense.  In  the  sense  in  which 
they  take  it,  it  is  indeed  absurd,  and  so  they  hold  it  to 
be.  In  the  sense  in  which  he  means  it,  it  is  true;  and 
the  vulgar,  as  soon  as  they  are  made  to  understand 
that  sense,  will  acknowledge  it  to  be  true.  They  know 
as  well  as  the  philosopher,  that  the  fire  does  not  feel 
heat ; and  this  is  all  that  he  means  by  saying  there  is 
no  heat  in  the  fire.* 


* On  the  subject  of  Primary  and  Secondary  Qualities,  compare  Stewart, 
Philosophical  Essays,  Essay  II.  Chap.  II.  Sect.  II.  Royer- Collard,  Frag- 
ments, in  Jouffroy’s  CEuvres  de  Reid,  Tome  III.  p.  426  et  seq.  Gamier, 
Critique  de  la  Philosophie  de  Thomas  Reid,  p.  73  et  seq.  Remusat,  Essais  de 
Philosophie,  Essai  IX.  Brown,  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  Lect.  XXV. 
Sir  W.  Hamilton,  in  his  Supplementary  Dissertations,  Note  D. 

Hamilton  divides  the  qualities  of  body  or  matter  into  primary,  secundo- 
primary, and  secondary. 

Starting  with  the  simple  datum,  body  considered  as  substance  occupying 

14 


158 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


III.  Other  Objects  of  Perception,  (2.)  Local  Affec- 
tions in  our  own  Bodies,^  Besides  primary  and  secon- 
dary qualities  of  bodies,  there  are  many  other  immedi- 
ate objects  of  perception.  Without  pretending  to  a 
complete  enumeration,  I think  they  mostly  fall  under 
one  or  other  of  the  following  classes : — Firsts  Certain 
states  or  conditions  of  our  own  bodies.  Second^  Me- 
chanical powers  or  forces.  Thirds  Chemical  powers. 
Fourth^  Medical  powers  or  virtues.  Fifths  Vegetable 
and  animal  powers. 

That  we  perceive  certain  disorders  in  our  own  bodies 
by  means  of  uneasy  sensations,  which  nature  has  con- 
joined with  them,  will  not  be  disputed.  Of  this  kind 
are  toothache,  headache,  gout,  and  every  distemper  and 
hurt  which  we  feel.  The  notions  which  our  sense 
gives  of  these  have  a strong  analogy  to  our  notions  of 
secondary  qualities.  Both  are  similarly  compounded, 
and  may  be  similarly  resolved,  and  they  give  light  to 
each  other. 

In  the  toothache,  for  instance,  there  is,  firsts  a pain- 


space^  he  deduces  a priori^  as  necessary  to  the  very  conception,  its  primary 
qualities,  which  are  the  following  : — 1.  Extension ; 2.  Divisibility ; 3.  Size  ; 
4.  Density,  or  Rarity;  5.  Eigure ; 6.  Incompressibility  absolute ; 7.  Mo- 
bility; 8.  Situation. 

The  secundo-primary  qualities  are  modifications,  but  contingent  modifica- 
tions, of  the  primary.  They  suppose  the  primary,  but  the  primary  do  not 
suppose  them,  and  hence  they  are  not  conceived  by  us  as  necessary  proper- 
ties of  matter.  They  are  the  following,  with  their  various  modifications  : 
— 1.  Gravity;  2.  Cohesion;  3.  Inertia ; 4.  Repulsion. 

The  secondary  qualities,  as  manifested  to  us,  are  not,  in  propriety,  quali- 
ties of  body  at  all.  “As  apprehended,  they  are,”  he  says,  “ only  subjective 
affections,  and  belong  to  bodies  in  so  far  only  as  these  are  supposed  fur- 
nished with  the  powers  capable  of  specifically  determining  the  various 
parts  of  our  nervous  apparatus  to  the  peculiar  action,  or  rather  passion,  of 
which  they  are  susceptible;  which  determined  action  or  passion  is  the 
quality  of  which  alone  we  are  immediately  cognizant,  the  external  con- 
cause  of  that  internal  effect  remaining  to  perception  altogether  unknown.” 
He  adds : — “Of  the  secondary  qualities,  in  this  relation,  there  are  various 
kinds;  the  variety  principally  depending  on  the  differences  of  the  different 
parts  of  our  nervous  apparatus.  Such  are  the  proper  scnsibles,  the  idio- 
pathic affections  of  our  several  organs  of  sense,  as  color,  sound,  flavor, 
savor,  and  tactual  sensation ; such  are  the  feelings  from  heat,  electricity 
galvanism,  &c.;  nor  need  it  be  added,  such  are  the  muscular  and  cutaneous 
sensations  which  accompany  the  perception  of  the  secundo-primary  quali- 
ties. Such,  though  less  directly  the  result  of  foreign  causes,  are  titillation, 
sneezing,  horripilation,  shuddering,  the  feeling  of  what  is  called  setting- 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


159 


fal  feeling ; and,  secondly^  a conception  and  belief  of 
some  disorder  in  the  tooth,  which  is  believed  to  be  the 
cause  of  the  uneasy  feeling.  The  first  of  these  is  a 
sensation,  the  second  is  a perception  ; * for  it  includes 
a conception  and  belief  of  an  external  object.  But 
these  ‘two  things,  though  of  different  natures,  are  so 
constantly  conjoined  in  our  experience  and  in  our  im- 
agination, that  we  consider  them  as  one.  We  give  the 
same  name  to  both ; for  the  toothache  is  the  proper 
name  of  the  pain  we  feel ; and  it  is  the  proper  name  of 
the  disorder  in  the  tooth  which  causes  that  pain.  If  it 
should  be  made  a question,  whether  the  toothache  be 
in  the  mind  that  feels  it,  or  in  the  tooth  that  is  affected, 
much  might  be  said  on  both  sides,  while  it  is  not  ob- 
served that  the  word  has  two  meanings.  But  a little 
reflection  satisfies  us,  that  the  pain  is  in  the  mind,  and 
the  disorder  in  the  tooth.  If  some  philosopher  should 
pretend  to  have  made  a discovery,  that  the  toothache, 
the  gout,  the  headache,  are  only  sensations  in  the  mind, 
and  that  it  is  a vulgar  error  to  conceive  that  they  are 


the-teeth-on-edge,  &c.,  &c. ; such,  in  fine,  are  all  the  various  sensations  of 
bodily  pleasure  and  pain  determined  by  the  action  of  external  stimuli,” 

To  mark  the  difference  between  the  three  classes  of  qualities,  he  ob- 
serves: — “ The  primary^  being  thought  as  essential  to  the  notion  of  body, 
are  distinguished  from  the  secundo-primary  and  secondary  as  accidental; 
while  the  primary  and  secundo-primary,  being  thought  as  manifest  or  con- 
ceivable in  their  own  natu7'e,  are  distinguished  from  the  secondary  as  in  their 
own  nature  occult  and  inconceivable. And  again  : — “ Using  the  terms 
strictly,  the  apprehensions  of  the  primary  are  perceptions,  not  sensations ; 
of  the  secondayy,  sensations,  not  perceptions ; of  the  secundo-primary,  per- 
ceptions sensations  together.”  Still  further:  — “In  the  apprehension 
of  the  primary  (\\xdlit\QS,  the  mind  is  primarily  and  principally  active ; it 
feels  only  as  it  knows  [because  it  only  feels,  i.  e.  is  conscious,  that  it 
knows].  In  that  of  the  secondary,  the  mind  is  primarily  and  principally 
pqssive;  it  knows  only  as  it  feels  [because  it  only  knows,  i,  e.  is  conscious, 
that  it  feels] . In  that  of  the  secundo-primary,  the  mind  is  equally  and  at 
once  active  2iwdi  passive ; in  one  respect  it  feels -as  it  knows,  in  another,  it 
knows  as  it  feels,”  To  illustrate  the  last  statement  he  adduces  the  ex- 
ample of  the  secundo-primary  quality  of  hardness,  a modification  of  co- 
hesion; which  consists  of  two  parts,  — pressure,  which  is  felt  in  the  subject, 
and  resistance,  which  is  perceived  to  belong  to  the  object.  — Ed, 

* There  is  no  such  “perception,”  properly  so  called.  The  cognition  is 
merely  an  inference  from  the  feeling ; and  its  object,  at  least,  only  some 
hypothetical  representation  of  a really  ignotum  quid.  Here  the  sub- 
jective element  preponderates  so  greatly  as  almost  to  extinguish  the 
objective.  — H. 


160 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


distempers  of  the  body,  he  might  defend  his  system  in 
the  same  manner  as  those  who  affirm  that  there  is  no 
sound  nor  color  nor  taste  in  bodies  defend  that  para- 
dox. But  both  these  systems,  like  most  paradoxes,  will 
be  found  to  be  only  an  abuse  of  words. 

We  say  that  we  feel  the  toothache,  not  that  we  per- 
ceive it.  On  the  other  hand,  we  say  that  we  perceive 
the  color  of  a body,  not  that  we  feel  it.  Can  any  rea- 
son be  given  for  this  difference  of  phraseology  ? In 
answer  to  this  question,  I apprehend,  that,  both  when 
we  feel  the  toothache  and  when  we  see  a colored  body, 
there  is  sensation  and  perception  conjoined.  But  in 
the  toothache,  the  sensation,  being  very  painful,  en- 
grosses the  attention ; and  therefore  we  speak  of  it  as  if 
it  were  felt  only,  and  not  perceived  : whereas,  in  seeing 
a colored  body,  the  sensation  is  indifferent,  and  draws 
no  attention.  The  quality  in  the  body  which  we  call 
its  color  is  the  only  object  of  attention;  and  therefore 
we  speak  of  it  as  if  it  were  perceived,  and  not  felt. 
Though  all  philosophers  agree  that  in  seeing  color 
there  is  sensation,  it  is  not  easy  to  persuade  the  vulgar, 
that,  in  seeing  a colored  body,  when  the  light  is  not 
too  strong,  nor  the  eye  inflamed,  they  have  any  sensa- 
tion or  feeling  at  all. 

There  are  some  sensations,  which,  though  they  are 
very  often  felt,  are  never  attended  to,  nor  reflected 
upon.  We  have  no  conception  of  them  ; and  there- 
fore, in  language,  there  is  neither  any  name  for  them, 
nor  any  form  of  speech  that  supposes  their  existence. 
Such  are  the  sensations  of  color,  and  of  all  primary 
qualities ; and  therefore  those  qualities  are  said  to  be 
perceived,  but  not  to  be  felt.  Taste  and  smell,  and 
heat  and  cold,  have  sensations  that  are  often  agreeable 
or  disagreeable,  in  such  a degree  as  to  draw  our  atten- 
tion ; and  they  are  sometimes  said  to  be  felt,  and  some- 
times to  be  perceived.  When  disorders  of  the  body 
occasion  very  acute  pain,  the  uneasy  sensation  en- 
grosses the  attention,  and  they  are  said  to  be  felt,  not 
to  be  perceived.* 

* As  already  repeatedly  observed,  the  objective  element  (perception)  and 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


161 


There  is  another  question  relating  to  phraseology, 
which  this  subject  suggests.  A man  says,  he  feels  pain 
in  such  a particular  part  of  his  body,  — in  his  toe,  for 
instance.  Now,  reason  assures  us,  that  pain,  being  a 
sensation,  can  only  be  in  the  sentient  being  as  its  sub- 
ject, that  is,  in  the  mind.  And  though  philosophers 
have  disputed  much  about  the  place  of  the  mind,  yet 
none  of  them  ever  placed  it  in  the  toe.* *  What  shall 
we  say,  then,  in  this  case  ? Do  our  senses  really  de- 
ceive us,  and  make  us  believe  a thing  which  our  reason 
determines  to  be  impossible?  I answer,  firsts  that, 
when  a man  says  he  has  a pain  in  his  toe,  he  is  per- 
fectly understood,  both  by  himself  and  those  who  hear 
him.  This  is  all  that  he  intends.  He  really  feels  what 
he  and  all  men  call  a pain  in  the  toe ; and  there  is  no 
deception  in  the  matter.  Whether,  therefore,  there  be 
any  impropriety  in  the  phrase  or  not,  is  of  no  conse- 
quence in  common  life.  It  answers  all  the  ends  of 
speech,  both  to  the  speaker  and  the  hearers. 

In  all  languages,  there  are  phrases  which  have  a dis- 
tinct meaning ; while,  at  the  same  time,  there  may  be 
something  in  the  structure  of  them  that  disagrees  with 
the  analogy  of  grammar,  or  with  the  principles  of  phi- 
losophy. And  the  reason  is,  because  language  is  not 
made  either  by  grammarians  or  philosophers.  Thus 
we  speak  of  feeling  pain,  as  if  pain  was  something  dis- 
tinct from  the  feeling  of  it.  We  speak  of  a pain  com- 
ing and  going,  and  removing  from  one  place  to  another. 
Such  phrases  are  meant  by  those  who  use  them  in  a 


the  subjective  element  (feeling,  sensation)  are  always  in  the  inverse  ratio  of 
each  other.  This  is  a law  of  which  Reid  and  the  philosophers  were  not 
aware.  — H. 

* Not  in  the  toe  exclusively.  But,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  the 
opinion  has  been  held  that  the  mind  has  as  much  a local  presence  in  the 
toe  as  in  the  head.  The  doctrine,  indeed,  long  generally  maintained  was, 
that,  in  relation  to  the  body,  the  soul  is  all  in  the  whole,  and  all  in  every  part. 
On  the  question  of  the  seat  of  the  soul,  which  has  been  marvellously  per- 
plexed, I cannot  enter.  I shall  only  say,  in  general,  that  the  first  condition 
of  the  possibility  of  an  immediate,  intuitive,  or  real  perception  of  external 
things,  which  our  consciousness  assures  that  we  possess,  is  the  immediate 
connection  of  the  cognitive  principle  with  every  part  of  the  corporeal 
organism.  — H. 

14* 


162 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


sense  that  is  neither  obscure  nor  false.  But  the  phi- 
losopher puts  them  into  his  alembic,  reduces  them  to 
their  first  principles,  draws  out  of  them  a sense  that 
was  never  meant,  and  so  imagines  that  he  has  discov- 
ered an  error  of  the  vulgar. 

I observe,  secondly^  that,  when  we  consider  the  sen- 
sation of  pain  by  itself,  without  any  respect  to  its  cause, 
we  cannot  say  with  propriety  that  the  toe  is  either  the 
place  or  the  subject  of  it.  But  it  ought  to  be  remem- 
bered, that,  when  we  speak  of  pain  in  the  toe,  the  sen- 
sation is  combined  in  our  thought  with  the  cause  of  it, 
which  really  is  in  the  toe.  The  cause  and  the  effect 
are  combined  in  one  complex  notion,  and  the  same 
name  serves  for  both.  It  is  the  business  of  the  philos- 
opher to  analyze  this  complex  notion,  and  to  give  dif- 
ferent names  to  its  different  ingredients.  He  gives  the 
name  of  pain  to  the  sensation  only,  and  the  name  of 
disorder  to  the  unknown  cause  of  it.  Then  it  is  evi- 
dent that  the  disorder  only  is  in  the  toe,  and  that  it 
would  be  an  error  to  think  that  the  pain  is  in  it.  But 
we  ought  not  to  ascribe  this  error  to  the  vulgar,  who 
never  made  the  distinction,  and  who  under  the  name  of 
pain  comprehend  both  the  sensation  and  its  cause.* 

Cases  sometimes  happen,  which  give  occasion  even 
to  the  vulgar  to  distinguish  the  painful  sensation  from 
the  disorder  which  is  the  cause  of  it.  A man  who  has 
had  his  leg  cut  off,  many  years  after  feels  pain  in  a toe 
of  that  leg.  The  toe  has  now  no  existence ; and  he 
perceives  easily,  that  the  toe  can  neither  be  the  place 
nor  the  subject  of  the  pain  which  he  feels:  yet  it  is  the 
same  feeling  he  used  to  have  from  a hurt  in  the  toe ; 
and  if  he  did  not  know  that  his  leg  was  cut  off*,  it 
would  give  him  the  same  immediate  conviction  of  some 
hurt  or  disorder  in  the  toe.f 

* That  the  pain  is  where  it  is  felt  is,  however,  the  doctrine  of  common 
sense.  We  only  feel  inasmuch  as  we  have  a body  and  a soul ; we  only 
feel  pain  in  the  toe  inasmuch  as  we  have  such  a member,  and  inasmuch  as 
the  mind,  or  sentient  principle,  pervades  it.  We  just  as  much  feel  in  the 
toe  as  we  think  in  the  head.  If  (but  only  if)  the  latter  be  a intiuni  subrep- 
tionis,  as  Kant  thinks,  so  is  the  former.  — H. 

1 This  illustration  is  Descartes’s.  If  correct,  it  only  shows  that  the  con- 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


163 


The  same  phenomenon  may  lead  the  philosopher,  in 
all  cases,  to  distinguish  sensation  from  perception.  We 
say,  that  the  man  had  a deceitful  feeling,  when  he  felt 
a pain  in  his  toe  after  the  leg  was  cut  off ; and  we 
have  a true  meaning  in  saying  so.  But,  if  we  will 
speak  accurately,  our  sensations  cannot  be  deceitful; 
they  must  be  what  we  feel  them  to  be,  and  can  be 
nothing  else.  Where,  then,  lies  the  deceit  ? I answer, 
it  lies  not  in  the  sensation^  which  is  real,  but  in  the 
seeming  perception  he  had  of  a disorder  in  his  toe. 
This  perception,  which  nature  had  conjoined  with  the 
sensation,  was  in  this  instance  fallacious. 

The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  every  phe- 
nomenon that  can,  with  propriety,  be  called  a decep- 
tion of  sense.  As  when  one  who  has  the  jaundice 
sees  a body  yellow  which  is  really  white ; or  when 
a man  sees  an  object  double,  because  his  eyes  are 
not  both  directed  to  it ; in  these,  and  other  like  cases, 
the  sensations  we  have  are  real,  and  the  deception 
is  only  in  the  perception  which  nature  has  annexed  to 
them. 

Nature  has  connected  our  perception'  of  external  ob- 
jects with  certain  sensations.  If  the  sensation  is  pro- 
duced, the  corresponding  perception  follows  even  when 
there  is  no  object,  and  in  this  case  is  apt  to  deceive  us. 
In  like  manner,  nature  has  connected  our  sensations 
with  certain  impressions  that  are  made  upon  the  nerves 
and  brain : and,  when  the  impression  is  made,  from 
whatever  cause,  the  corresponding  sensation  and  per- 
ception immediately  follow.  Thus,  in  the  man  who 
feels  pain  in  his  toe  after  the  leg  is  cut  off,  the  nerve 
that  went  to  the  toe,  part  of  which  was  cut  off  with 
the  leg,  had  the  same  impression  made  upon  the  re- 
maining part,  which,  in  the  natural  state  of  his  body, 
was  caused  by  a hurt  in  the  toe : and  immediately  this 


nection  of  mind  with  organization  extends  from  the  centre  to  the  circum- 
ference of  the  nervous  system,  and  is  not  limited  to  any  part.  — H. 

Mailer  makes  the  fact,  as  stated  in  the  text,  incontestable.  Physiology^ 
Yol.  L p.  745.  — Ed. 


164 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


impression  is  followed  by  the  sensation  and  perception 
which  nature  connected  with  it.* 


* This  is  a doctrine  which  cannot  be  reconciled  with  that  of  an  intuition 
or  objective  perception.  All  here  is  subjective.  — H. 

In  his  Supplementary  Dissertations^  Note  D,  § 2,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  returns 
to  this  example,  modifying  somewhat  tlie  view  he  had  previously  enter- 
tained : — “ Take,  for  instance,  a man  whose  leg  has  been  amputated.  If 
how  two  nervous  filaments  be  irritated,  the  one  of  which  ran  to  his  great, 
the  Other  to  his  little  toe,  he  will  experience  two  pains,  as  in  these  two 
members.  Nor  is  there,  in  propriety,  any  deception  in  such  sensations. 
For  his  toes,  as  all  his  members,  are  his  only  as  they  are  to  him  sentient, 
as  endowed  with  nerves  and  distinct  nerves.  The  nerves  thus  constitute 
alone  the  whole  sentient  organism.  In  these  circumstances,  the  peculiar 
nerves  of  the  several  toes,  running  isolated  from  centre  to  periphery,  and 
thus  remaining,  though  curtailed  in  length,  unmutilated  in  function,  will, 
if  irritated  at  any  point,  continue  to  manifest  their  original  sensations ; 
and  these  being  now,  as  heretofore,  manifested  out  of  each  other^  must 
afford  the  condition  of  a perceived  extension.,  not  less  real  than  that  which 
they  afforded  prior  to  the  amputation. 

The  hypothesis  of  an  extended  sensorium  commune.,  or  complex  ner- 
vous centre,  the  mind  being  supposed  in  proximate  connection  with  each 
of  its  constituent  nervous  terminations  or  origins,  may  thus  be  reconciled 
to  the  doctrine  of  natural  realism. 

“ It  is,  however,  I think,  more  philosophical  to  consider  the  nervous 
system  as  one  whole,  with  each  part  of  which  the  animating  principle  is 
equally  and  immediately  connected,  so  long  as  each  part  remains  in  con- 
tinuity with  the  centre.  As  to  the  question  of  materialism,  this  doctrine 
is  indifferent.  For  the  connection  of  an  unextended  with  an  extended 
substance  is  equally  incomprehensible,  whether  we  contract  the  place  of 
union  to  a central  point,  or  whether  we  leave  it  coextensive  with  organiza- 
tion.” 

Several  authorities  are  referred  to  in  support  of  this  view,  among  which 
are  the  following:  — St.  Gregory  of  Nyssa,  De  Horn.  Opif,  cc.  12,  14,  15 ; 
Tiedemann,  Psychologies  p.  309  et  seq. ; Berard,  Des  Rapports  du  Phys.  et 
du  Mor.,  Chap.  I.  § 2 ; R.  G.  Cams,  Varies,  ueb.  Psychologies  passim  ; Um- 
hrcit.  Psychologies  c.  I.,  and  passim;  F.  Fischer,  Ueb.  d.  Sitz  d. 

Seeks  passim.  This  theory  is  also  supposed  to  be  in  accordance  with  the 
doctrine  of  Aristotle,  De  Anima,  Lib.  I.  Cap.  IX.  § 4,  “ that  the  soul  con- 
tains the  body,  rather  than  the  body  the  soul  ” ; — a doctrine  on  which  was 
founded  the  common  dogma  of  the  schoolmen,  “ that  the  soul  is  all  in  the 
whole  body,  and  all  in  every  of  its  parts,”  meaning  thereby,  that  the  simple, 
unextended  mind,  in  some  inconceivable  manner  present  to  all  the  organs, 
is  percipient  of  the  peculiar  affection  which  each  is  adapted  to  receive, 
and  actuates  each  in  the  peculiar  function  which  it  is  qualified  to  dis- 
charge. 

Still  the  common  doctrine,  as  well  with  psychologists  as  with  physiolo- 
gists, would  seem  to  be,  that  the  brain  is  the  sole  organ  of  the  mind,  and 
that  the  mind  is  peculiarlys  if  not  exclusively,  present  to  that  organ,  by 
means  of  which  it  feels  as  well  as  thinks.  Compare  Descartes,  Les  Pas- 
sions de  VA  we,  Fartie  I.  Art.  XXX.  et  seq. ; Hartley’s  Observations  on  Man, 
Part  I.  Chap.  I.  Sect.  I.;  Haller’s  Pirst  Lines  of  Physiologys  Chap.  X. 
§ 372;  Gall’s  Functions  of  the  Brain,  Sect  I.;  Broussais,  De  V Irritation  et 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION. 


165 


In  like  manner,  if  the  same  impressions  which  are 
made  at  present  upon  my  optic  nerves  by  the  objects 
before  me  could  be  made  in  the  dark,  I apprehend  that 
I should  have  the  same  sensations,  and  see  the  same 
objects  which  I now  see.  The  impressions  and  sensa- 
tions would  in  such  a case  be  real,  and  the  perception 
only  fallacious. 

IV.  (3.)  Powers  of  Bodies.]  Let  us  next  consider 
the  notions  which  our  senses  give  us  of  those  attributes 
of  bodies  called  poivers.  This  is  the  more  necessary, 
because  power  seems  to  imply  some  activity ; yet  we 
consider  body  as  a dead,  mactive  thing,  which  does  not 
act,  but  may  be  acted  upon. 

Of  the  mechanical  powers  ascribed  to  bodies,  that 
which  is  called  their  vis  insita,  or  vis  inerticcj  may  first  be 
considered.  By  this  is  meant  no  more  than  that  bodies 
never  change  their  state  of  themselves,  either  from  rest 
to  motion,  or  from  motion  to  rest,  or  from  one  degree 
of  velocity,  or 'one  direction,  to  another.  In  order  to 
produce  any  such  change,  there  must  be  some  force  im- 
pressed upon  them ; and  the  change  produced  is  pre- 
cisely proportioned  to  the  force  impressed,  and  in  the 
direction  of  that  force. 

That  all  bodies  have  this  property  is  a matter  of  fact, 
which  we  learn  from  daily  observation,  as  well  as  from 
the  most  accurate  experiments.  Now  it  seems  plain, 
that  this  does  not  imply  any  activity  in  body,  but  rather 
the  contrary.  A power  in  body  to  change  its  state 
would  much  rather  imply  activity  than  its  continuing 
in  the  same  state : so  that,  although  this  property  of 
bodies  is  called  their  vis  insita,  or  vis  inertice.^  it  implies 
no  proper  activity. 

If  we  consider,  next,  the  power  of  gravity,  it  is  a 
fact,  that  all  the  bodies  of  our  planetary  system  gra vi- 


c/e la  Folie,  Partie  I.  Chap.  VI. ; Tissot,  Anthropologies  Partie  II  Chap.  V. ; 
Muller’s  Physiology ^ Vol.  I.  p.  816  et  seq.  Most  of  them  hold,  that  it  is 
only  by  experience  and  association  of  ideas  that  we  are  led  to  refer  the 
pain  which  we  feel  in  the  brain  to  the  part  of  the  body  wdiere  the  cause  of 
the  pain  exists.  — Ed. 


166 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


tate  towards  each  other.  This  has  been  fully  proved 
by  the  great  Newton.  But  this  gravitation  is  not  con- 
ceived by  that  philosopher  to  be  a power  inherent  in 
bodies,  which  they  exert  of  themselves,  but  a force  im- 
pressed upon  them,  to  which  they  must  necessarily 
yield.  Whether  this  force  be  impressed  by  some  sub- 
tile ether,  or  whether  it  be  impressed  by  the  power  of 
the  Supreme  Being,  or  of  some  subordinate  spiritual 
being,  we  do  not  know ; but  all  sound  natural  philoso- 
phy, particularly  that  of  Newton,  supposes  it  to  be  an 
impressed  force,  and  not  inherent  in  bodies.* 

So  that,  when  bodies  gravitate,  they  do  not  properly 
act,  but  are  acted  upon.  They  only  yield  to  an  impres- 
sion that  is  made  upon  them.  It  is  common  in  lan- 
guage to  express,  by  active  verbs,  many  changes  in 
things,  wherein  they  are  merely  passive.  And  this  way 
of  speaking  is  used  chiefly  when  the  cause  of  the  change 
is  not  obvious  to  sense.  Thus  we  say  that  a ship  sails, 
when  every  man  of  common  sense  knows  that  she  has 
no  inherent  power  of  motion,  and  is  only  driven  by 
wind  and  tide.  In  like  manner,  when  we  say  that  the 
planets  gravitate  towards  the  sun,  we  mean  no  more 
than  that,  by  some  unknown  power,  they  are  drawn  or 
impelled  in  that  direction. 

What  has  been  said  of  the  power  of  gravitation 
may  be  applied  to  other  mechanical  powers,  such  as 
cohesion,  magnetism,  electricity,  and  no  less  to  chemi- 
cal and  medical  powers.  By  all  these,  certain  effects 
are  produced,  upon  the  application  of  one  body  to  an- 
other. Our  senses  discover  the  effect;  but  the  power 
is  latent.  We  know  there  must  be  a cause  of  the 
effect,  and  we  form  a relative  notion  of  it  from  its  effect ; 
and  very  often  the  same  name  is  used  to  signify  the 
unknown  cause  and  the  known  effect. 

We  ascribe  to  vegetables  the  powers  of  drawing 
nourishment,  growing,  and  multiplying  their  kind. 
Here,  likewise,  the  effect  is  manifest,  but  the  cause  is 


* That  all  activity  supposes  an  immaterial  or  spiritual  agent  is  an  ancient 
doctrine.  It  is,  however,  only  an  h}^othesis.  — H. 


OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  PERCEPTION.  167 

latent  to  sense.  These  powers,  therefore,  as  well  as  all 
the  other  powers  we  ascribe  to  bodies,  are  unknown 
causes  of  certain  known  effects.  It  is  the  business  of 
philosophy  to  investigate  the  nature  of  those  powers  as 
far  as  we  are  able,  but  our  senses  leave  us  in  the  dark. 

V.  Manifest  and  Occult  Qualities,]  We  may  ob- 
serve  a great  similarity  in  the  notions  which  our  senses 
give  us  of  secondary  qualities,,  of  the  disorders  we  feel- 
in  our  own  bodies,,  and  of  the  various  poivers  of  bodies 
which  we  have  enumerated.  (1.)  They  are  all  obscure 
and  relative  notions,  being  a conception  of  some  un- 
known cause  of  a known  effect.  (2.)  Their  names  are, 
for  the  most  part,  common  to  the  effect  and  to  its 
cause.  And  (3.)  they  are  a proper  subject  of  philo- 
sophical disquisition.  They  might,  therefore,  I think, 
not  improperly  be  called  occult  qualities. 

This  name,  indeed,  has  fallen  into  disgrace  since  the 
time  of  Descartes.  It  is  said  to  have  been  used  by  the 
Peripatetics  to  cloak  their  ignorance,  and  to  stop  all 
inquiry  into  the  nature  of  those  qualities  called  occult. 
Be  it  so.  Let  those  answer  for  this  abuse  of  the  word 
who  were  guilty  of  it.  To  call  a thing  occult,  if  we 
attend  to  the  meaning  of  the  word,  is  rather  modestly 
to  confess  ignorance  than  to  cloak  it.  It  is  to  point  it 
out  as  a proper  subject  for  the  investigation  of  philoso- 
phers, whose  proper  business  it  is  to  better  the  con- 
dition of  humanity  by  discovering  what  was  before  hid 
from  human  knowledge. 

Were  I,  therefore,  to  make  a division  of  the  qualities 
of  bodies  as  they  appear  to  our  senses,  I would  divide 
them  first  into  those  that  are  manifest,,  and  those  that 
are  occult.  The  manifest  qualities  are  those  which  Mr. 
Locke  calls  primary ; such  as  extension,  figure,  divisi- 
bility, motion,  hardness,  softness,  fluidity.  The  nature 
of  these  is  manifest  even  to  sense  ; and  the  business  of 
the  philosopher  with  regard  to  them  is  not  to  find  out 
their  nature,,  which  is  well  known,  but  to  discover  the 
effects  produced  by  their  various  combinations ; and,  with 
regard  to  those  of  them  which  are  not  essential  to  mat- 
ter, to  discover  their  causes  as  far  as  he  is  able. 


168 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


The  second  class  consists  of  occult  qualities,  which 
may  be  subdivided  into  various  kinds;  as,^r5^,  the  sec- 
ondary qualities ; secondly^  the  disorders  we  feel  in  our 
own  bodies  ; and,  thh'dly^  all  the  qualities  which  we  call 
pouters  of  bodies^  whether  mechanical,  chemical,  medi- 
cal, animal,  or  vegetable;  or  if  there  be  any  other 
powers  not  comprehended  under  these  heads.  Of  all 
these  the  existence  is  manifest  to  sense,  but  the  nature 
is  occult;  and  here  the  philosopher  has  an  ample  field. 

What  is  necessary  for  the  conduct  of  our  animal  life, 
the  bountiful  Author  of  nature  has  made  manifest  to 
all  men.  But  there  are  many  other  choice  secrets  of 
nature,  the  discovery  of  which  enlarges  the  power  and 
exalts  the  state  of  man.  These  are  left  to  be  discov- 
ered by  the  proper  use  of  our  rational  powers.  They 
are  hid,  not  that  they  may  be  always  concealed  from 
human  knowledge,  but  that  we  may  be  excited  to 
search  for  them.  This  is  the  proper  business  of  a phi- 
losopher, and  it  is  the  glory  of  a man,  and  the  best 
reward  of  his  labor,  to  discover  what  nature  has  thus 
concealed. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

OF  MATTER  AND  SPACE. 

I.  Origin  and  Characteristics  of  our  Notion  of  Body^ 
or  Material  Substance,]  The  objects  of  sense  we  have 
hitherto  considered  are  qualities.  But  qualities  must 
have  a subject.  We  give  the  names  of  matter,^  material 
sub  stance  body  to  the  subject  of  sensible  quali- 

ties : and  it  may  be  asked  what  this  matter  is. 

I perceive  in  a billiard-ball,  figure,  color,  and  motion ; 
but  the  ball  is  not  figure,  nor  is  it  color,  nor  motion, 
nor  all  these  taken  together ; it  is  something  that  has 
figure,  and  color,  and  motion.  This  is  a dictate  of  na- 
ture, and  the  belief  of  all  mankind. 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


169 


As  to  the  nature  of  this  something,  I am  afraid  we 
can  give  little  account  of  it  but  that  it  has  the  qualities 
which  our  senses  discover. 

But  how  do  we  know  that  they  are  qualities,  and 
cannot  exist  without  a subject?  I confess  I cannot 
explain  how  we  know  that  they  cannot  exist  without 
a subject,  any  more  than  I can  explain  how  we  know 
that  they  exist.  We  have  the  information  of  nature 
for  their  existence ; and  I think  we  have  the  informa- 
tion of  nature  that  they  are  qualities. 

The  belief  that  figure,  motion,  and  color  are  quali- 
ties, and  require  a subject,  must  either  be  a judgment 
of  nature,  or  it  must  be  discovered  by  reason,  or  it 
must  be  a prejudice  that  has  no  just  foundation.  There 
are  philosophers  who  maintain  that  it  is  a mere  preju- 
dice ; that  a body  is  nothing  but  a collection  of  what 
we  call  sensible  qualities;  and  that  they  neither  have 
nor  need  any  subject  This  is  the  opinion  of  Bishop 
Berkeley  and  Mr.  Hume ; and  they  we^e  led  to  it  by 
finding  that  they  had  not  in  their  minds  any  idea  of 
substance.  It  could  neither  be  an  idea  of  sensation  nor 
of  reflection,  the  only  sources  of  original  and  simple 
ideas  which  they  recognized.  But  to  me  nothing  seems 
more  absurd  than  that  there  should  be  extension  with- 
out any  thing  extended,  or  motion  without  any  thing 
moved ; yet  I cannot  give  reasons  for  my  opinion,  be- 
cause it  seems  to  me  self-evident,  and  an  immediate 
dictate  of  my  nature. 

And  that  it  is  the  belief  of  all  mankind  appears  in 
the  structure  of  all  languages;  in  which  we  find  adjec- 
tive nouns  used  to  express  sensible  qualities.  It  is  well 
known  that  every  adjective  in  language  must  belong  to 
some  substantive  expressed  or  understood ; that  is,  every 
quality  must  belong  to  some  subject. 

Sensible  qualities  make  so  great  a part  of  the  furni- 
ture of  our  minds,  their  kinds  are  so  many  and  their 
number  so  great,  that  if  prejudice,  and  not  nature,  teach 
us  to  ascribe  them  all  to  a subject,  it  must  have  a great 
work  to  perform,  which  cannot  be  accomplished  in  a 
short  time,  nor  carried  on  to  the  same  pitch  in  every 


170 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


individual.  We  should  find,  not  individuals  only,  but 
nations  and  ages  differing  from  each  other  in  the 
progress  which  this  prejudice  had  made  in  their  senti- 
ments; but  we  find  no  such  difference  among  men. 
What  one  man  accounts  a quality,  all  men  do,  and 
ever  did. 

It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  a judgment  of  nature,  that 
the  things  immediately  perceived  are  qualities,  which 
must  belong  to  a subject;  and  all  the  information  that 
our  senses  give  us  about  this  subject  is,  that  it  is  that 
to  which  such  qualities  belong.  From  this  it  is  evident, 
that  our  notion  of  body  or  matter,  as  distinguished 
from  its  qualities,  is  a relative  notion  ; * and  I am  afraid 
it  must  always  be  obscure  until  men  have  other  fac- 
ulties. 

The  philosopher  in  this  seems  to  have  no  advantage 
above  the  vulgar ; for  as  they  perceive  color  and  figure 
and  motion  by  their  senses  as  well  as  he  does,  and  both 
are  equally  certain  that  there  is  a subject  of  those  qual- 
ities, so  the  notions  which  both  have  of  this  subject  are 
equally  obscure.  When  the  philosopher  calls  it  a sub- 
stratum^ and  a subject  of  inhesion^  those  learned  words 
convey  no  meaning  but  what  every  man  understands 
and  expresses  by  saying  in  common  language  that  it 
is  a thing  extended,  and  solid,  and  movable. 

The  relation  which  sensible  qualities  bear  to  their 
subject,  that  is,  to  body,  is  not,  however,  so  dark  but 
that  it  is  easily  distinguished  from  all  other  relations. 
Every  man  can  distinguish  it  from  the  relation  of  an 


* That  is,  our  uotion  of  absolute  body  is  relative.  This  is  incorrectly 
expressed.  We  can  know,  M^e  can  conceive,  only  what  is  relative.  Our 
knowledge  of  qualities  or  phenomena  is  necessarily  relative ; for  these  exist 
only  as  they^  exist  in  relation  to  our  faculties.  The  knowledge,  or  even  the 
conception,  of  a substance  in  itself,  and  apart  from  any  qualities  in  relation 
to,  and  therefore  cognizable  or  conceivable  by,  our  minds,  involves  a con- 
tradiction. Of  such  we  can  form  only  a negative  notion  ; that  is,  we  can 
merely  conceive  it  as  inconceivable.  But  to  call  this  negative  notion  a 
relative  notion  is  wrong;  — 1st,  because  all  our  (positive)  notions  are  relative ; 
and,  2d,  because  this  is  itself  a negative  notion,  — i.  e.  no  notion  at  all, — 
simply  because  there  is  no  relation.  The  same  improper  application  of  the 
term  relative  was  also  made  by  Reid  when  speaking  of  the  secondary  qual- 
ities. — H. 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


171 


effect  to  its  cause,  of  a mean  to  its  end,  or  of  a sign  to 
the  thing  signified  by  it. 

I think  it  requires  some  ripeness  of  understanding  to 
distinguish  the  qualities  of  a body  from  the  body.  Per- 
haps this  distinction  is  not  made  by  brutes,  nor  by  in- 
fants ; and  if  any  one  thinks  that  this  distinction  is  not 
made  by  our  senses,  but  by  some  other  power  of  the 
mind,  I will  not  dispute  this  point,  provided  it  be  grant- 
ed that  men,  when  their  faculties  are  ripe,  have  a natu- 
ral conviction  that  sensible  qualities  cannot  exist  by 
themselves  without  some  subject  to  which  they  belong. 

I think,  indeed,  that  some  of  the  determinations  we 
form  concerning  matter  cannot  be  deduced  solely  from 
the  testimony  of  sense,  but  must  be  referred  to  some 
other  source. 

There  seems  to  be  nothing  more  evident,  than  that 
all  bodies  must  consist  of  parts  ; and  that  every  part 
of  a body  is  a body,  and  a distinct  being  which  may 
exist  without  the  other  parts ; and  yet  I apprehend  this 
conclusion  is  not  deduced  solely  from  the  testimony  of 
sense : for  besides  that  it  is  a necessary  truth,  and 
therefore  no  object  of  sense,*  there  is  a limit  beyond 
which  we  cannot  perceive  any  division  of  a body. 
The  parts  become  too  small  to  be  perceived  by  our 
senses ; but  we  cannot  believe  that  it  becomes  then 
incapable  of  being  further  divided,  or  that  such  division 
would  make  it  not  to  be  a body.  We  carry  on  the 
division  and  subdivision  in  our  thought  far  beyond  the 
reach  of  our  senses,  and  we  can  find  no  end  to  it : nay, 
I think  we  plainly  discern,  that  there  can  be  no  limit 
beyond  which  the  division  cannot  be  carried.  For  if 
there  be  any  limit  to  this  division,  one  of  two  things 
must  necessarily  happen.  Either  we  have  come  by 
division  to  a body  which  is  extended,  but  has  no  parts, 


* It  is  creditable  to  Reid  that  he  perceived  that  the  quality  of  necessity 
is  the  criterion  which  distinguishes  native  from  adventitious  notions  or 
judgments.  He  did  not,  however,  always  make  the  proper  use  of  it. 
Leibnitz  has  the  honor  of  first  explicitly  enouncing  this  criterion,  and 
Kant,  of  first  fully  applying  it  to  the  phenomena.  In  none  has  Kant  been 
more  successful  than  in  this  under  consideration.  — H. 


172 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


and  is  absolutely  indivisible ; or  this  body  is  divisible, 
but  as  soon  as  it  is  divided  it  becouies  no  body.  Both 
these  positions  seem  to  me  absurd,  and  one  or  the  other 
is  the  necessary  consequence  of  supposing  a limit  to 
the  divisibility  of  matter.  On  the  other  hand,  if  it  be 
admitted  that  the  divisibility  of  matter  has  no  limit,  it 
will  follow  that  no  body  can  be  called  one  individual 
substance.  You  may  as  well  call  it  two,  or  twenty,  or 
two  hundred.  For  when  it  is  divided  into  parts,  every 
part  is  a being  or  substance  distinct  from  all  the  other 
parts,  and  was  so  even  before  the  division : any  one 
part  may  continue  to  exist,  though  all  the  other  parts 
are  annihilated. 

There  is,  indeed,  a principle  long  received  as  an 
axiom  in  metaphysics,  which  I cannot  reconcile  to  the 
divisibility  of  matter.  It  is,  that  every  being  is  one, — 
Omne  ens  est  unum.  By  which,  I suppose,  is  meant, 
that  every  thing  that  exists  must  either  be  one  indivisi- 
ble being,  or  composed  of  a determinate  number  of  indi- 
visible beings.  Thus  an  army  may  be  divided  into 
regiments,  a regiment  into  companies,  and  a company 
into  men.  But  here  the  division  has  its  limit;  for  you 
cannot  divide  a man  without  destroying  him,  because 
he  is  an  individual ; and  every  thing,  according  to  this 
axiom,  must  be  an  individual,  or  made  up  of  indi- 
viduals. 

That  this  axiom  will  hold  with  regard  to  an  army, 
and  with  regard  to  many  other  things,  must  be  granted : 
but  I require  the  evidence  of  its  being  applicable  to  all 
beings  whatsoever.  Leibnitz,  conceiving  that  all  beings 
must  have  this  metaphysical  unity,  was  by  this  led  to 
maintain,  that  matter,  and  indeed  the  whole  universe, 
is  made  up  of  monads^  that  is,  simple  and  indivisible 
substances.  Perhaps  the  same  apprehension  might 
lead  Boscovich  into  his  hypothesis,  which  seems  much 
more  ingenious ; to  wit,  that  matter  is  composed  of  a 
definite  number  of  mathematical  points^  endowed  with 
certain  powers  of  attraction  and  repulsion. 

The  divisibility  of  matter  without  any  limit  seems  to 
me  more  tenable  than  either  of  these  hypotheses ; nor 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


173 


do  I lay  much  stress  upon  the  metaphysical  axiom, 
considering  its  origin.  Metaphysicians  thought  proper 
to  make  the  attributes  common  to  all  beings  the  sub- 
ject of  a science.  It  must  be  a matter  of  some  diffi- 
culty to  find  out  such  attributes:  and,  after  racking 
their  invention,  they  have  specified  three,  to  wit,  unity^ 
verity^  and  goodness ; and  these,  I supp  se,  have  been 
invented  to  make  a number,  rather  than  from  any  clear 
evidence  of  their  being  universal. 

There  are  other  determinations  concerning  matter, 
which,  I think,  are  not  solely  founded  upon  the  testi- 
mony of  sense ; such  as,  that  it  is  impossible  that  two 
bodies  should  occupy  the  same  place  at  the  same  time, 
or  that  the  same  body  should  be  in  different  places  at 
the  same  time,  or  that  a body  can  be  moved  from  one 
place  to  another  without  passing  through  the  inter- 
mediate places,  either  in  a straight  course  or  by  some 
circuit.  These  appear  to  be  necessary  truths,  and 
therefore  cannot  be  conclusions  of  our  senses ; for  our 
senses  testify  only  what  is,  and  not  what  must  necessa- 
rily be. 

11.  Origin  and  Characteristics  of  our  Notions  of  Ex- 
tension and  Space.]  We  are  next  to  consider  our  notion 
of  space.  It  may  be  observed,  that  although  space  be 
not  perceived  by  any  of  our  senses  when  all  matter  is 
removed,  yet,  when  we  perceive  any  of  the  primary 
qualities,  space  presents  itself  as  a necessary  concom- 
itant: for  there  can  neither  be  extension,  nor  motion, 
nor  figure,  nor  division,  nor  cohesion  of  parts,  without 
space. 

There  are  only  two  of  our  senses  by  which  the  notion 
of  space  enters  into  the  mind, — to  wit,  touch  and 
sight.  If  we  suppose  a_man  to  have  neither  of  these 
senses,  I do  not  see  how  he  could  ever  have  any  con- 
ception of  space.*  Supposing  him  to  have  both,  until 

* According  to  Reid,  extension  (space)  is  a notion  a posteriori^  the  result 
of  experience.  According  to  Kant,  it  is  a priori ; experience  only  afford- 
ing the  occasions  required  by  the  mind  to  exert  the  acts  of  which  the  intu- 
ition of  space  is  a condition.  To  the  former  it  is  thus  a contingent^  to  the 

15* 


174 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


he  sees  or  feels  other  objects,  he  can  have  no  notion  of 
space.  It  has  neither  color  nor  figure  to  make  it  an 
object  of  sight;  it  has  no  tangible  quality  to  make  it 
an  object  of  touch.  But  other  objects  of  sight  and 
touch  carry  the  notion  of  space  along  ivith  them ; and 
not  the  notion  only,  but  the  belief  of  it:  for  a body 
could  not  exist  if  there  were  no  space  to  contain  it : it 
could  not  move  if  there  were  no  space : its  situation,  its 
distance,  and  every  relation  it  has  to  other  bodies,  sup- 
pose space. 

But  though  the  notion  of  space  seems  not  to  enter 
at  first  into  the  mind  until  it  is  introduced  by  the 
proper  objects  of  sense,  yet,  being  once  introduced,  it 
remains  in  our  conception  and  belief,  though  the  ob- 
jects which  introduced  it  be  removed.  We  see  no 
absurdity  in  supposing  a body  to  be  annihilated ; but 
the  space  that  contained  it  remains,  and  to  suppose 
that  annihilated  seems  to  be  absurd.  It  is  so  much 


latter,  a necessary  mental  possession.  That  the  notion  of  space  is  a neces- 
sary condition  of  thought,  and  that,  as  such^  it  is  impossible  to  derive  it 
from  experience,  has  been  cogently  demonstrated  by  Kant.  But  that  we 
may,  through  sense,  have  empirically  an  immediate  perception  of  something 
extended^  I have  yet  seen  no  valid  reason  to  doubt.  The  a priori  concep- 
tion does  not  exclude  the  a posteriori  perception  ; and  this  latter  cannot  be 
rejected  without  belying  the  evidence  of  consciousness,  which  assures  us 
that  we  are  immediately  cognizant,  not  only  of  a sef  but  of  a not-sef  — 
not  only  of  mind^  but  of  matter ; and  matter  cannot  be  immediately  known, 
— that  is,  known  as  existing,  — except  as  something  extended.  In  this, 
however,  I venture  a step  beyond  Reid  and  Stewart,  no  less  than  beyond 
Kant  5 though  I am  convinced  that  the  philosophy  of  the  two  former 
tended  to  this  conclusion,  which  is,  in  fact,  that  of  the  common  sense  of 
mankind.  — H. 

In  his  Supplementary  Dissertations  I),  § 1,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  retracts 
one  of  the  statements  in  the  preceding  note.  He  says  ; — “I  may  take 
this  opportunity  of  modifying  a former  statement,  that,  according  to  Reid, 
space  is  a notion  a posteriori^  the  result  of  experience.  On  reconsidering 
more  carefully  his  different  statements  on  this  subject,  I am  now  inclined 
to  think  that  his  language  implies  no  more  than  the  chronological  posteri- 
ority of  this  notion ; and  that  he  really  held  it  to  be  a native,  necessary, 
a priori  form  of  thought,  requiring  only  certain  prerequisite  conditions  to 
call  it  from  virtual  into  manifest  existence.  I am  confirmed  in  this  view 
by  finding  it  is  also  that  of  M.  Royer- Collard.  Mr.  Stewart  is,  however, 
less  defensible,  when  he  says,  in  opposition  to  Kant’s  doctrine  of  space^  — 
‘ I rather  lean  to  the  common  theory  which  supposes  our  first  ideas  of 
space  or  extension  to  be  formed  by  other  qualities  of  matter.’  Dissertation^ 
Rotes  and  Illustrations,  Note  (S  s).”  — Ed. 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


175 


allied  to  nothing  or  emptiness,  that  it  seems  incapable 
of  annihilation  or  of  creation. 

Space  not  only  retains  a firm  hold  of  our  belief,  even 
when  we  suppose  all  the  objects  that  introduced  it  to 
be  annihilated,  but  it  swells  to  immensity.  We  can  set 
no  limits  to  it,  either  of  extent  or  of  duration.  Hence 
we  call  it  immense^  eternal^  immovable^  and  indestructible. 

But  it  is  only  an  immense,  eternal,  immovable,  and 
indestructible  void  or  emptiness.  Perhaps  we  may  ap- 
ply to  it  what  the  Peripatetics  said  of  their  first  mat- 
ter^ — that  whatever  it  is,  it  is  potentially  only.^  not 
actually. 

When  we  consider  parts  of  space  that  have  measure 
and  figure^  there  is  nothing  we  understand  better,  noth- 
ing about  which  we  can  reason  so  clearly  and  to  so 
great  extent.  Extension  and  figure  are  circumscribed 
parts  of  space,  and  are  the  object  of  geometry,  a sci- 
ence in  which  human  reason  has  the  most  ample  field, 
and  can  go  deeper  and  with  more  certainty  than  in  any 
other.  But  when  we  attempt  to  comprehend  the  whole 
of  space,  and  to  trace  it  to  its  origin,  we  lose  ourselves 
in  the  search.  The  profound  speculations  of  ingenious 
men  upon  this  subject  differ  so  widely,  as  may  lead  us 
to  suspect  that  the  line  of  human  understanding  is  too 
short  to  reach  the  bottom  of  it. 

Bishop  Berkeley,  I think,  was  the  first  who  observed 
that  the  extension,  figure,  and  space  of  which  we  speak 
in  common  language,  and  of  which  geometry  treats, 
are  originally  perceived  by  the  sense  of  touch  only; 
but  that  there  is  a notion  of  extension,  figure,  and 
space  which  may  be  got  by  sight,  without  any  aid  from 
touch.  To  distinguish  these,  he  calls  the  first  tangible 
extension,  tangible  figure,  and  tangible  space ; the  last 
he  calls  visible. 

As  I think  this  distinction  very  important  in  the  phi- 
losophy of  our  senses,  I shall  adopt  the  names  used  by 
the  inventor  to  express  it;  remembering  what  has  been 
already  observed,  that  space,  whether  tangible  or  vis- 
ible, is  not  so  properly  an  object  of  sense  as  a necessary 
concomitant  of  the  objects  both  of  sight  and  touch. 


176 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


The  reader  may  likewise  be  pleased  to  attend  to  this, 
that  when  I use  the  names  of  tangible  and  visible  space^ 
I do  not  mean  to  adopt  Bishop  Berkeley’s  opinion,  so 
far  as  to  think  that  they  are  really  different  things,  and 
altogether  unlike.  I take  them  to  be  different  concep- 
tions of  the  same  thing;  the  one  very  partial,  and  the 
other  more  complete,  but  both  distinct  and  just,  as  far 
as  they  reach. 

Thus,  when  I see  a spire  at  a very  great  distance, 
it  seems  like  the  point  of  a bodkin;  there  appears  no 
vane  at  the  top,  no  angles.  But  when  I view  the  same 
object  at  a small  distance,  I see  a huge  pyramid  of  sev- 
eral angles  with  a vane  on  the  top.  Neither  of  these 
appearances  is  fallacious.  Each  of  them  is  what  it 
ought  to  be,  and  what  it  must  be,  from  such  an  object 
seen  at  such  different  distances.  These  different  ap- 
pearances of  the  same  object  may  serve  to  illustrate 
the  different  conceptions  of  space,  according  as  they 
are  drawn  from  the  information  of  sight  alone,  or  as 
they  are  drawn  from  the  additional  information  of 
touch. 

Our  sight  alone,  unaided  by  touch,  gives  a very  par- 
tial notion  of  space,  but  yet  a distinct  one.  When  it 
is  considered  according  to  this  partial  notion,  I call  it 
visible  space.  The  sense  of  touch  gives  a much  more 
complete  notion  of  space;  and  when  it  is  considered 
according  to  this  notion,  I call  it  tangible  space.  Per- 
haps there  may  be  intelligent  beings  of  a higher  order, 
whose  conceptions  of  space  are  much  more  complete 
than  those  we  have  from  both  senses.  Another  sense 
added  to  those  of  sight  and  touch  might,  for  what  I 
know,  give  us  conceptions  of  space  as  different  from 
those  we  can  now  attain  as  tangible  space  is  from  vis- 
ible, and  might  resolve  many  knotty  points  concerning 
it,  which,  from  the  imperfection  of  our  faculties,  we 
cannot  by  any  labor  untie.* 


* On  the  origin  of  the  notion  of  space  and  its  relation  to  that  of  body, 
compare  Cousin,  Elements  of  Psychology ^ Chap.  II. 

He  makes  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  space  to  be  as  follows : 
— 1 . Space  is  given  us  as  necessary^  while  body  is  given  as  that  which 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


177. 


III.  Visible  and  Tangible  Extension.]  Berkeley  ac- 
knowledges that  there  is  an  exact  correspondence  be- 
tween the  visible  figure  and  magnitude  pf  objects  and 
the  tangible ; and  that  every  modification  of  the  one 
has  a modification  of  the  other  corresponding.  He 
acknowledges,  likewise,  that  nature  has  established 
such  a connection  between  the  visible  figure  and  mag- 
nitude of  an  object  and  the-  tangible,  that  we  learn  by 
experience  to  know  the  tangible  figure  and  magnitude 
from  the  visible.  And  having  been  accustomed  to  do 
so  from  infancy,  we  get  the  habit  of  doing  it  with  such 


may  or  may  not  exist ; 2.  Space  is  given  ns  as  without  limits^  while  body 
is  given  as  limited  on  every  side ; 3.  The  idea  of  space  is  a pure  and 
wholly  rational  conception^  that  is,  we  cannot  bring  it  up  before  us  under  any 
determinate  form  or  image,  while  the  idea  of  body  is  always  accompanied 
with  an  image,  a sensible  representation. 

In  tracing  these  ideas  to  their  origin,  he  is  led  to  notice  two  orders  of 
relations  among  our  ideas,  which  it  is  important  clearly  to  distinguish  in 
respect  not  only  to  space,  but  to  all  our  a priori  conceptions. 

“ Two  ideas  being  given,  we  may  inquire  whether  the  one  does  not  sup- 
pose the  other ; whether,  the  one  being  admitted,  we  must  not  admit  the 
other  likewise,  or  be  guilty  of  a paralogism.  This  is  the  logical  order  of 
ideas.  If  we  regard  the  question  of  the  origin  of  ideas  under  this  point 
of  view,  let  us  see  what  result  it  will  give  in  respect  to  the  particular  in- 
quiry before  us.  The  idea  of  body  and  the  idea  of  space  being  given, 
which  supposes  the  other?  Which  is  the  logical  condition  of  the  admission 
of  the  other  ? Evidently  the  idea  of  space  is  the  logical  condition  of  the 
admission  of  the  idea  of  body.  In  fact,  take  any  body  you  please,  and 
you  cannot  admit  the  idea  of  it  but  under  the  condition  of  admitting,  at 
the  same  time,  the  idea  of  space : otherwise  you  would  admit  a body 
which  was  noivhere^  which  was  in  no  place,  and  such  a body  is  incon- 
ceivable. 

" But  this  is  not  the  sole  order  of  cognition  5 the  logical  relation  does 
not  comprise  all  the  relations  which  ideas  mutually  sustain.  There  is  still 
another,  that  of  anterior  or  posterior,  the  order  of  the  relative  develop- 
ment of  ideas  in  time,  — their  chronological  order.  And  the  question  of 
the  origin  of  ideas  may  be  regarded  under  this  point  of  view.  Now  the 
idea  of  space,  we  have  just  seen,  is  clearly  the  logical  condition  of  all  sen- 
sible experience.  Is  it  also  the  chronological  condition  of  all  experience, 
and  of  the  idea  of  body  ? I believe  no  such  thing.  If  we  take  ideas  in 
tlie  order  in  which  they  actually  evolve  themselves  in  the  intelligence,  if 
we  investigate  only  their  history  and  successive  appearance,  it  is  not  true 
that  the  idea  of  space  is  antecedent  to  the  idea  of  body.  Indeed,  it  is  so 
little  true  that  the  idea  of  space  chronologically  supposes  the  idea  of  body, 
that,  in  fact,  if  you  had  not  the  idea  of  body,  you  would  never  have  the 
idea  of  space.  Take  away  sensation,  take  away  the  sight  and  touch,  and 
you  have  no  longer  any  idea  of  body,  and  consequently  none  of  space.” 

His  conclusion  is,  that  our  notion  of  body  is  empirical.,  — that  is  to  say, 
derived  from,  experience,  or  a posteriori;  but  our  notion  of  space,  though 


178 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


facility  and  quickness,  that  we  think  we  see  tangible 
figure,  magnitude,  and  distance  of  bodies,  when,  in 
reality,  we  only  collect  those  tangible  qualities  from  the 
corresponding  visible  qualities,  which  are  natural  signs 
of  them. 

The  correspondence  and  connection  which  Berkeley 
shows  to  be  between  the  visible  figure  and  magnitude 
of  objects  and  their  tangible  figure  and  magnitude,  is 
in  some  respects  very  similar  to  that  which  we  have 
observed  between  our  sensations  and  the  primary  qual- 
ities with  which  they  are  connected.  No  sooner  is  the 


developed  on  occasion  of  experience,  is  not  derived  from  it,  inasmuch  as 
experience  does  not  contain  it  in  any  other  sense  than  as,  in  the  view  of 
reason^  it  presupposes  it.  Experience  does  not  give  the  notion  of  space  to 
reason,  but  reason  gives  it  to  experience ; and  hence  it  is  said  to  be  not 
empirical,  but  a necessary  and  a priori  conception  of  the  reason. 

Others  still  maintain  that  the  notion  of  space  is  wholly  empirical,  being 
nothing  but  one  of  the  sensible  qualities  of  body  considered  abstractly. 
Of  these  psychologists,  the  ablest,  perhaps,  is  James  Mill,  who  says,  — 
“ Concrete  terms  are  connotative  terms  ; abstract  terms  are  non-connotative 
terms.  Concrete  terms,  along  with  a certain  quality  or  qualities,  which  is 
their  principal  meaning,  or  notation,  connote  the  object  to  which  the  quality 
belongs.  Thus  the  concrete  red  always  means,  that  is,  connotes,  something 
red,  as  a rose.  We  have  already  by  sufficient  examples  seen,  that  the 
Abstract  formed  from  the  Concrete  notes  precisely  that  which  is  noted  by 
the  Concrete,  leaving  out  the  co?znotation.  Thus,  take  away  the  connota- 
tion from  red^  and  you  have  redness ; from  hot^  take  away  the  connotation, 
and  you  have  heat.  The  very  same  is  the  distinction  between  the  concrete 
extended.,  and  the  abstract  extension.  What  extended  is  with  its  connotation, 
extension  is  without  that  connotation.” 

According  to  him,  therefore,  the  word  space,  understood  in  its  most  com- 
prehensive sense,  or  infinite  extension,  “is  an  abstract,  differing  from  its 
concrete,  like  other  abstracts,  by  dropping  the  connotation.  Much  of  the 
mystery  in  which  the  idea  has  seemed  to  be  involved  is  owing  to  this  single 
circumstance,  that  the  abstract  term  space  has  not  had  an  appropriate 
concrete.  We  have  observed,  that  in  all  cases  abstract  terms  can  be  ex- 
plained only  through  their  concretes  ; because  they  note  or  name  a part  of 
Avhat  the  concrete  names,  leaving  out  the  rest.  If  we  were  to  make  a 
concrete  term,  corresponding  to  the  abstract  term  space,  it  must  be  a word 
equivalent  to  the  terms  infinitely  extended.  From  the  ideas  included  under 
the  name  infinitely  extended,  leave  out  resisting,  and  you  have  all  that  is 
marked  by  the  abstract  space.'^^  — Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  XIV. 
Sect.  IV. 

See  also  Kant’s  Critic  of  Pure  Reason,  Part  I.  Sect.  I. ; Fearn’s  Fir’st 
Lines  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  V. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive 
Sciences,  Part  I.  Book  II.  Chap.  I.  -VI. ; Brown’s  Philosophy  of  the  Human 
Mind,  Lect.  XXIV. ; Ballantyne’s  Examination  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap. 
I Sect.  I. ; Brook  Taylor’s  Contemplatio  Philosophica,  p.  45  et  scq. ; Hic- 
kok’s  Rational  Psychology,  Book  II.  Part  I.  Chap.  I.  — Ed. 


MATTER  AND  SPACE. 


179 


sensation  felt,  than  immediately  we  have  the  concep- 
tion and  belief  of  the  corresponding  quality.  We  give 
no  attention  to  the  sensation ; it  has  not  a name ; and 
it  is  difficult  to  persuade  us  that  there  was  any  such 
thing. 

In  like  manner,  no  sooner  are  the  visible  figure  and 
magnitude  of  an  object  seen,  than  immediately  we 
have  the  conception  and  belief  of  the  corresponding 
tangible  figure  and  magnitude.  We  give  no  attention 
to  the  visible  figure  and  magnitude.  They  are  imme- 
diately forgotten,  as  if  they  had  never  been  perceived ; 
they  have  no  name  in  common  language ; and,  indeed, 
until  Berkeley  pointed  them  out  as  a subject  of  specu- 
iation,  and  gave  them  a name,  they  had  none  among 
philosophers,  excepting  in  one  instance,  relating  to  the 
heavenly  bodies,  which  are  beyond  the  reach  of  touch. 
With  regard  to  them,  what  Berkeley  calls  visible  mag- 
nitude was  by  astronomers  called  apparent  magni- 
tude. 

There  is  surely  an  apparent  magnitude  and  an  ap- 
parent figure  of  terrestrial  objects,  as  well  as  of  celes- 
tial ; and  this  is  what  Berkeley  calls  their  visible  figure 
and  magnitude.  But  they  were  never  made  an  object 
of  thought  among  philosophers,  until  that  author  gave 
them  a name,  and  observed  the  correspondence  and 
connection  between  them  and  tangible  magnitude  and 
figure,  and  how  the  mind  gets  the  habit  of  passing  so 
instantaneously  from  the  visible  figure,  as  a sign,  to  the 
tangible  figure,  as  the  thing  signified  by  it, . that  the 
first  is  perfectly  forgotten,  as  if  it  had  never  been  per- 
ceived. 

Visible  figure,  extension,  and  space  may  be  made  a 
subject  of  mathematical  speculation,  as  well  as  the 
tangible.  In  the  visible,  we  find  two  dimensions  only ; 
in  the  tangible,  three.  In  the  one,  magnitude  is  meas- 
ured by  angles ; in  the  other,  by  lines.  Every  part  of 
visible  space  bears  some  proportion  to  the  whole ; but 
tangible  space  being  immense,  any  part  of  it  bears  no 
proportion  to  the  whole. 

Such  differences  in  their  properties  led  Bishop  Berke- 


180 


SENSATION  AxND  PERCEPTION. 


ley  to  think,  that  visible  and  tangible  magnitude  and 
figure  are  things  totally  different  and  dissimilar,  and 
cannot  both  belong  to  the  same  object.  And  upon  this 
dissimilitude  is  grounded  one  of  the  strongest  argu- 
ments by  which  his  system  is  supported.  For  it  may 
be  said,  if  there  be  external  objects  which  have  a real 
extension  and  figure,  it  must  be  either  tangible  exten- 
sion and  figure,  or  visible^  or  both*  The  last  appears 
absurd ; nor  was  it  ever  maintained  by  any  man,  that 
the  same  object  has  two  kinds  of  extension  and  figure, 
totally  dissimilar.  There  is,  then,  only  one  of  the  two 
really  in  the  object;  and  the  other  must  be  ideal.  But 
no  reason  can  be  assigned  why  the  perceptions  of  one 
sense  should  be  real,  while  those  of  another  are  only 
ideal ; and  he  who  is  persuaded  that  the  objects  of  sight 
are  ideas  only  has  equal  reason  to  believe  so  of  the 
objects  of  touch. 

This  argument,  however,  loses  all  its  force,  if  it  be 
true,  as  was  formerly  hinted,  that  visible  figure  and  ex- 
tension are  only  a partial  conception,  and  the  tangible 
figure  and  extension  a more  complete  conception  of 
that  figure  and  extension  which  are  really  in  the  ob- 
ject. 

It  has  been  proved  very  fully  by  Bishop  Berkeley, 
that  sight  alone,  without  any  aid  from  the  informations 
of  touch,  gives  us  no  perception,  nor  even  conception, 
of  the  distance  of  any  object  from  the  eye.  But  he 
was  not  aware  that  this  very  principle  overturns  the 
argument  for  his  system,  taken  from  the  difference  be- 
tween visible  and  tangible  extension  and  figure : for, 
supposing  external  objects  to  exist,  and  to  have  that 
tangible  extension  and  figure  which  we  perceive,  it  fol- 
lows demonstrably,  from  the  principle  now  mentioned, 
that  their  visible  extension  and  figure  must  be  just 
what  we  see  them  to  be.  The  rules  of  perspective,  and 
of  the  projection  of  the  sphere,  which  is  a branch  of 


* Or  neither.  And  this  omitted  supposition  is  the  true.  For  neither 
sight  nor  touch  gives  us  fall  and  accurate  information  in  regard  to  the  real 
extension  and  figure  of  objects.  — H. 


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE. 


181 


perspective,  are  demonstrable.  They  suppose  the  ex- 
istence of  external  objects,  which  have  a tangible  ex- 
tension and  figure;  and,  upon  that  supposition,  they 
demonstrate  what  must  be  the  visible  extension  and 
figure  of  such  objects,  when  placed  in  such  a position 
and  at  such  a distance. 

Hence  it  is  evident,  that  the  visible  figure  and  exten- 
sion of  objects  are  so  far  from  being  incompatible  with 
the  tangible,  that  the  first  are  a necessary  consequence 
from  the  last,  to  beings  that  see  as  we  do.  The  corre- 
spondence between  them  is  not  arbitrary,  like  that  be- 
tween words  and  the  things  they  signify,  as  Berkeley 
thought,  but  it  results  necessarily  from  the  nature  of 
the  two  senses ; and  this  correspondence,  being  always 
found  in  experience  to  be  exactly  what  the  rules  of  per- 
spective show  that  it  ought  to  be  if  the  senses  give 
true  information^  is  an  argument  for  the  truth  of  both. 


CHAPTER  X. 

OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE,  AND  OF  BELIEF  IN 
GENERAL. 

I.  On  Belief  in  general^  and  the  Different  Kinds  of 
Evidence.^  Belief  assent^  conviction^  are  words  which 
I think  do  not  admit  of  logical  definition,  because  the 
operation  of  mind  signified  by  them  is  perfectly  simple, 
and  of  its  own  kind.  Nor  do  they  need  to  be  defined, 
because  they  are  common  words,  and  well  understood. 

Belief  must  have  an  object.  For  he  that  believes 
must  believe  something;  and  that  which  he  believes  is 
called  the  object  of  his  belief.  Of  this  object  of  his 
belief,  he  must  have  some  conception,  clear  or  obscure ; 
for  although  there  may  be  the  most  clear  and  distinct 
conception  of  an  object  without  any  belief  of  its  exist- 
ence, there  can  be  no  belief  without  conception. 

Belief  is  always  expressed  in  language  bv  a propo- 
16  ' ^ 


182 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


sition,  wherein  something  is  affirmed  or  denied.  This 
is  the  form  of  speech  which  in  all  languages  is  appro- 
priated to  that  purpose,  and  without  belief  there  could 
be  neither  affirmation  nor  denial,  nor  should  we  have 
any  form  of  words  to  express  either.  Belief  admits  of 
all  degrees,  from  the  slightest  suspicion  to  the  fullest 
assurance.  These  things  are  so  evident  to  every  man 
that  reflects,  that  it  would  be  abusing  the  reader’s  pa- 
tience to  dwell  upon  them. 

I proceed  to  observe,  that  there  are  many  operations 
of  mind  in  which,  when  we  analyze  them  as  far  as  we 
are  able,  we  find  belief  to  be  an  essential  ingredient. 
A man  cannot  be  conscious  of  his  own  thoughts,  with- 
out believing  that  he  thinks.  He  cannot  perceive  an 
object  of  sense,  without  believing  that  it  exists.*  He 
cannot  distinctly  remember  a past  event,  without  be- 
lieving that  it  did  exist.  Belief,  therefore,  is  an  ingre- 
dient in  consciousness^  in  perception^  and  in  remem- 
brance. 


* Mr.  Stewart,  Elements^  Part  I.  Chap.  III.,  and  Essays^  II.  Chap.  II., 
proposes  a supplement  to  this  doctrine  of  Reid,  in  order  to  explain  why 
we  believe  in  the  existence  of  the  qualities  of  external  objects  when  they 
are  not  the  objects  of  our  perception.  This  belief  he  holds  to  be  the  result 
of  experience^  in  combination  with  an  original  principle  of  our  constitution, 
tVhereby  we  are  determined  to  believe  in  the  permanence  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

Mr.  Stewart’s  words  are : — “It  has  always  appeared  to  me,  that  some- 
thing of  this  sort  was  necessary  to  complete  Dr.  Reid’s  speculations  on 
the  Berkeleian  controversy;  for,  although  he  has  shown  our  notions  con- 
cerning the  primary  qualities  of  bodies  to  be  connected,  by  an  original 
law  of  our  constitution,  with  the  sensations  which  they  excite  in  our  minds, 
he  has  taken  no  notice  of  the  grounds  of  our  belief  that  these  qualities 
have  an  existence  independent  of  our  perceptions.  This  belief  (as  I have 
elsewhere  observed)  is  plainly  the  result  of  experience;  inasmuch  as  a 
repetition  of  the  perceptive  act  must  have  been  prior  to  any  judgment,  on 
our  part,  with  respect  to  the  separate  and  permanent  reality  of  its  object. 
Nor  does  experience  afford  a complete  solution  of  the  problem ; for,  as  we 
are  irresistibly  led  by  our  perceptions  to  ascribe  to  their  objects  a future^ 
as  well  as  a present,  reality,  the  question  still  remains,  how  are  we  deter- 
mined by  the  experience  of  the  past  to  carry  our  inferences  forward  to  a 
portion  pf  time  which  is  yet  to  come.  To  myself,  the  difficulty  appears  to 
resolve  itself,  in  the  simplest  and  most  philosophical  manner,  into  that  law 
of  our  constitution  to  which  Turgot,  long  ago,  attempted  to  trace  it,  — 
into  our  belief  of  the  continuance  of  ‘ the  laws  of  nature  ’ ; or,  in  other 
words,  into  an  expectation  that,  in  the  same  combination  of  circumstances, 
the  same  event  will  recur.”  — Ep. 


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE. 


183 


Not  only  in  most  of  oiir  intellectual  operations,  but 
in  many  of  the  active  principles  of  the  human  mind, 
belief  enters  as  an  ingredient.  Joy  and  sorrow,  hope 
and  fear,  imply  a belief  of  good  or  ill,  either  present  or 
in  expectation.  Esteem,  gratitude,  pity,  and  resent- 
ment imply  a belief  of  certain  qualities  in  their  objects. 
In  every  action  that  is  done  for  an  end,  there  must  be 
a belief  of  its  tendency  to  that  end.  So  large  a share 
has  belief  in  our  intellectual  operations,  in  our  active 
principles,  and  in  our  actions  themselves,  that,  as  faith 
in  things  divine  is  represented  as  the  mainspring  in  the 
life  of  a Christian,  so  belief  in  general  is  the  main- 
spring in  the  life  of  a man. 

That  men  often  believe  what  there  is  no  just  ground 
to  believe,  and  thereby  are  led  into  hurtful  errors,  is  too 
evident  to  be  denied : and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  there 
are  just  grounds  of  belief  can  as  little  be  doubted  by 
any  man  who  is  not  a perfect  skeptic. 

We  give  the  name  of  evidence  to  whatever  is  a ground 
of  belief.  To  believe  without  evidence  is  a weakness 
which  every  man  is  concerned  to  avoid,  and  which 
every  man  wishes  to  avoid.  Nor  is  it  in  a man’s 
power  to  believe  any  thing  longer  than  he  thinks  he 
has  evidence. 

What  this  evidence  is,  is  more  easily  felt  than  de- 
scribed. Those  who  never  reflected  upon  its  nature 
feel  its  influence  in  governing  their  belief.  It  is  the 
business  of  the  logician  to  explain  its  nature,  and  to 
distinguish  its  various  kinds  and  degrees ; but  every 
man  of  understanding  can  judge  of  it,  and  commonly 
judges  right,  when  the  evidence  is  fairly  laid  before 
him,  and  his  mind  is  free  from  prejudice.  A man  who 
knows  nothing  of  the  theory  of  vision  may  have  a 
good  eye;  and  a man  who  never  speculated  about 
evidence  in  the  abstract  may  have  a good  judgment. 

The  common  occasions  of  life  lead  us  to  distinguish 
evidence  into  different  kinds,  to  which  we  give  names 
that  are  well  understood;  such  as  the  evidence  of  sense^ 
the  evidence  of  memory^  the  evidence  of  consciousness^ 
the  evidence  of  testimony^  the  evidence  of  axioms^  the 


184 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


evidence  of  reasoning.  All  men  of  common  under- 
standing agree,  that  each  of  these  kinds  of  evidence 
may  afford  just  ground  of  belief,  and  they  agree  very 
generally  in  the  circumstances  that  strengthen  or  weak- 
en them. 

Philosophers  have  endeavoured,  by  analyzing  the 
different  sorts  of  evidence,  to  find  out  some  common 
nature  wherein  they  all  agree,  and  thereby  to  reduce 
them  all  to  one.  This  was  the  aim  of  the  schoolmen 
in  their  intricate  disputes  about  the  criterion  of  truth, 
Descartes  placed  this  criterion  of  truth  in  clear  and  dis- 
tinct perception^  and  laid  it  down  as  a maxim,  that 
whatever  we  clearly  and  distinctly  perceive  to  be  true 
is  true ; but  it  is  difficult  to  know  what  he  understands 
by  clear  and  distinct  perception  in  this  maxim.*  Mr. 
Locke  placed  it  in  a perception  of  the  agreement  or 
disagreement  of  our  ideas^  which  perception  is  immedi- 
ate in  intuitive  knowledge,  and  by  the  intervention  of 
other  ideas  in  reasoning. 

I confess  that,  although  I have,  as  I think,  a distinct 
notion  of  the  different  kinds  of  evidence  above  men- 
tioned, and  perhaps  of  some  others,  which  it  is  un- 
necessary here  to  enumerate,  yet  I am  not  able  to  find 
any  common  nature  to  which  they  may  all  be  reduced. 
They  seem  to  me  to  agree  only  in  this,  that  they  are 
all  fitted  by  nature  to  produce  bedief  in  the  human  mind^ 
— some  of  them  in  the  highest  degree,  which  we  call 
certainty^  others  in  various  degrees  according  to  circum- 
stances. 

II.  On  the  Peculiar  Nature  of  the  Evidence  of  Sense,\ 
I shall  take  it  for  granted,  that  the  evidence  of  sense, 
when  the  proper  circumstances  concur,  is  good  evi- 
dence, and  a just  ground  of  belief.  My  intention  in 
this  place  is  only  to  compare  it  with  the  other  kinds 
that  have  been  mentioned,  that  we  may  judge  whether 


* On  the  purport  of  this  maxim  consult  Descartes’s  Principes  de  la 
Philosophies  Partie,  42-47;  Lettres  sur  les  Instances  de  Gassendis^o. 
10;  and  et  IV®™®  Meditations.  — Ed. 


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE. 


185 


it  be  reducible  to  any  of  them,  or  of  a nature  peculiar 
to  itself. 

1.  It  seems  to  be  quite  different  from  the  evidence  of 
reasoning.  All  good  evidence  is  commonly  called  rea- 
sonable evidence,  and  very  justly,  because  it  ought  to 
govern  our  belief  as  reasonable  creatures.  And,  ac- 
cording to  this  meaning,  I think  the  evidence  of  sense 
no  less  reasonable  than  that  of  demonstration.  If 
nature  give  us  information  of  things  that  concern  us 
by  other  means  than  by  reasoning,  reason  itself  will 
direct  us  to  receive  that  information  with  thankfulness, 
and  to  make  the  best  use  of  it.  But  when  we  speak 
of  the  evidence  of  reasoning  as  a particular  kind  of 
evidence,  it  means  the  evidence  of  propositions  that 
are  inferred  by  reasoning  from  propositions  already 
known  and  believed.  Thus  the  evidence  of  the  fifth 
proposition  of  the  first  book  of  Euclid’s  Elements  con- 
sists in  this, — that  it  is  shown  to  be  the  necessary  con- 
sequence of  the  axioms,  and  of  the  preceding  proposi- 
tions. In  all  reasoning,  there  must  be  one  or  more 
premises,  and  a conclusion  drawn  from  them.  And 
the  premises  are  called  the  reason  why  we  must  believe 
the  conclusion  which  we  see  to  follow  from  them. 

That  the  evidence  of  sense  is  of  a different  kind 
needs  little  proof.  No  man  seeks  a reason  for  believ- 
ing what  he  sees  or  feels  ; and  if  he  did,  it  would  be 
difficult  to  find  one.  But  though  he  can  give  no  reason 
for  believing  his  senses,  his  belief  remains  as  firm  as  if 
it  were  grounded  on  demonstration. 

Many  eminent  philosophers,  thinking  it  unreason- 
able to  believe  when  they  could  not  show  a reason, 
have  labored  to  furnish  us  with  reasons  for  believing 
our  senses ; but  their  reasons  are  very  insufficient,  and 
will  not  bear  examination.  Other  philosophers  have 
shown  very  clearly  the  fallacy  of  these  reasons,  and 
have,  as  they  imagine,  discovered  invincible  reasons 
against  this  belief;  but  they  have  never  been  able  either 
to  shake  it  in  themselves,  or  to  convince  others.  The 
statesman  continues  to  plod,  the  soldier  to  fight,  and 
the  merchant  to  export  and  import,  without  being  in 
16* 


186 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


the  least  moved  by  the  demonstrations  that  have  been 
offered  of  the  non-existence  of  those  things  about  which 
they  are  so  seriously  employed.  And  a man  may  as 
soon,  by  reasoning,  pull  the  moon  out  of  her  orbit,  as 
destroy  the  belief  of  the  objects  of  sense. 

2.  Shall  we  say,  then,  that  the  evidence  of  sense  is 
the  same  with  that  of  axioms^  or  self-evident  truths  ? I 
answer,  firsts  that  all  modern  philosophers  seem  to 
agree,  that  the  existence  of  the  objects  of  sense  is  not 
self-evident,  because  some  of  them  have  endeavoured 
to  prove  it  by  subtile  reasoning,  others  to  refute  it. 
Neither  of  these  can  consider  it  as  self-evident. 

Secondly^  I would  observe,  that  the  word  axiom  is 
taken  by  philosophers  in  such  a sense,  as  that  the  ex- 
istence of  the  objects  of  sense  cannot,  with  propriety, 
be  called  an  axiom.  They  give  the  name  of  axiom 
only  to  self-evident  truths  that  are  necessary^  and  are 
not  limited  to  time  and  place,  but  must  be  true  at  all 
times  and  in  all  places.  The  truths  attested  by  our 
senses  are  not  of  this  kind ; they  are  contingent^  and 
limited  to  time  and  place.  Thus,  that  one  is  the  half 
of  two,  is  an  axiom.  It  is  equally  true  at  all  times 
and  in  all  places.  We  perceive,  by  attending  to  the 
proposition  itself,  that  it  cannot  but  be  true ; and  there- 
fore it  is  called  an  eternal,  necessary,  and  immutable 
truth.  That  there  is  at  present  a chair  on  my  right 
hand,  and  another  on  my  left,  is  a truth  attested  by  my 
senses ; but  it  is  not  necessary,  nor  eternal,  nor  immu- 
table. It  may  not  be  true  next  minute ; and,  therefore, 
to  call  it  an  axiom  would,  I apprehend,  be  to  deviate 
from  the  common  use  of  the  word. 

Thirdly^  If  the  word  axiom  be  put  to  signify  every 
truth  which  is  knoivn  immediately^  without  being  de- 
duced from  any  antecedent  truth,  then  the  existence  of 
the  objects  of  sense  may  be  called  an  axiom.  For  my 
senses  give  me  as  immediate  conviction  of  what  they 
testify,  as  my  understanding  gives  me  of  what  is  com- 
monly called  an  axiom. 

3.  There  is,  no  doubt,  an  analogy  between  the  evi- 
dence of  sense  and  the  evidence  of  testimony.  Hence 


OF  THE  EVIDENCE  OF  SENSE. 


187 


we  find  in  all  languages  the  analogical  expressions  of 
the  testimony  of  sense^  of  giving  credit  to  our  senses, 
and  the  like.  But  there  is  a real  difference  between 
the  two,  as  well  as  a similitude.  In  believing  upon 
testimony,  we  rely  upon  the  authority  of  a person  who 
testifies : but  we  have  no  such  authority  for  believing 
our  senses. 

4.  Shall  we  say,  then,  that  this  belief  is  the  inspira- 
tion  of  the  Almighty  ? I think  this  may  be  said  in  a 
good  sense ; for  I take  it  to  be  the  immediate  effect  of 
our  constitution,  which  is  the  work  of  the  Almighty. 
But  if  inspiration  be  understood  to  imply  a persuasion 
of  its  coming  from  God,  our  belief  of  the  objects  of 
sense  is  not  inspiration ; for  a man  would  believe  his 
senses,  though  he  had  no  notion  of  a Deity.  He  who 
is  persuaded  that  he  is  the  workmanship  of  God,  and 
that  it  is  a part  of  his  constitution  to  believe  his  senses, 
may  think  that  a good  reason  to  confirm  his  belief : but 
he  had  the  belief  before  he  could  give  this  or  any  other 
reason  for  it. 

5.  If  we  compare  the  evidence  of  sense  with  that  of 
memory^  we  find  a great  resemblance,  but  still  some 
difference.  I remember  distinctly  to  have  dined  yester- 
day with  such  a company.  What  is  the  meaning  of 
this  ? It  is,  that  I have  a distinct  conception  and  firm 
belief  of  this  past  event ; not  by  reasoning,  not  by  tes- 
timony, but  immediately  from  my  constitution : and  I 
give  the  name  of  memory  to  that  part  of  my  constitu- 
tion by  which  I have  this  kind  of  conviction  of  past 
events.  I see  a chair  on  my  right  hand.  What  is  the 
meaning  of  this  ? It  is,  that  I have,  by  my  constitu- 
tion, a distinct  conception  and  firm  belief  of  the  present 
existence  of  the  chair  in  such  a place,  and  in  such  a 
position ; and  I give  the  name  of  seeing  to  that  part  of 
my  constitution  by  which  I have  this  immediate  con- 
viction. The  two  operations  agree  in  the  immediate 
conviction  which  they  give.  They  agree  in  this  also, 
that  the  things  believed  are  not  necessary,  but  contin- 
gent, and  limited  to  time  and  place.  But  they  differ  in 
two  respects : — Firsts  that  memory  has  something  for 


188 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


its  object  that  did  exist  in  time  past ; but  the  object  of 
sight,  and  of  all  the  senses,  must  be  something  which 
exists  at  present.  And,  secondly^  that  I see  by  my 
eyes,  and  only  when  they  are  directed  to  the  object, 
and  when  it  is  illuminated.  But  my  memory  is  not 
limited  by  any  bodily  organ  that  I know,  nor  by  light 
and  darkness,  though  it  has  its  limitations  of  another 
kind.^ 

6.  As  to  the  opinion,  that  evidence  consists  in  a per- 
ception of  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  ideas,  we 
may  have  occasion  to  consider  it  more  particularly  in 
another  place.  Here  I only  observe,  that,  when  taken 
in  the  most  favorable  sense,  it  may  be  applied  with 
propriety  to  the  evidence  of  reasoning,  and  to  the  evi- 
dence of  some  axioms.  But  I cannot  see  how,  in  any 
sense,  it  can  be  applied  to  the  evidence  of  consciousness^ 
to  the  evidence  of  memory^  or  to  that  of  the  senses. 

When  I compare  the  different  kinds  of  evidence 
above  mentioned,  I confess,  after  all,  that  the  evidence 
of  reasoning,  and  that  of  some  necessary  and  self- 
evident  truths,  seem  to  be  the  least  mysterious  and  the 
most  perfectly  comprehended ; and  therefore  I do  not 
think  it  strange  that  philosophers  should  have  endeav- 
oured to  reduce  all  kinds  of  evidence  to  these. 

When  I see  a proposition  to  be  self-evident  and 
necessary,  and  that  the  subject  is  plainly  included  in 
the  predicate,  there  seems  to  be  nothing  more  that  I 
caa  desire,  in  order  to  understand  why  1 believe  it. 
And  when  I see  a consequence  that  necessarily  follows 
from  one  or  more  self-evident  propositions,  I want  noth- 
ing more  with  regard  to  my  belief  of  that  consequence. 
The  light  of  truth  so  fills  my  mind  in  these  cases,  that 
I can  neither  conceive  nor  desire  any  thing  more  satis- 

fying- 

On  the  other  hand,  when  I remember  distinctly  a 


* There  is  a more  important  difference  than  these  omitted.  In  memory, 
we  cannot  possibly  be  conscious,  or  immediately  cognizant,  of  any  object 
beyond  the  modifications  of  the  ego  itself.  In  perception  if  an  immediate 
perception  be  allowed)  we  must  be  conscious,  or  immediately  cognizant,  of 
some  phenomenon  of  the  non-ego.  — H. 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 


189 


past  event,  or  see  an  object  before  my  eyes,  this  com- 
mands my  belief  no  less  than  an  axiom.  But  when, 
as  a philosopher,  I reflect  upon  this  belief,  and  want  to 
trace  it  to  its  origin,  I am  not  able  to  resolve  it  into 
necessary  and  self-evident  axioms,  or  conclusions  that 
are  necessarily  consequent  upon  them.  I seem  to  want 
that  evidence  which  I can  best  comprehend,  and  which 
gives  perfect  satisfaction  to  an  inquisitive  mind ; yet  it 
is  ridiculous  to  doubt,  and  I find  it  is  not  in  my  power."*" 

^ 


CHAPTER  XI. 

OF  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 

I.  In  what  Respects  our  Senses  are  and  are  not  Im^ 
provable,]  Our  senses  may  be  considered  in  two  views ; 
first.,  as  they  afford  us  agreeable  sensations,  or  subject 
us  to  such  as  are  disagreeable ; and,  secondly.,  as  they 
give  us  information  of  things  that  concern  us. 

In  the  first  view,  they  neither  require  nor  admit  of 
improvement.  Both  the  painful  and  the  agreeable  sen- 
sations of  our  external  senses  are  given  by  nature  for 
certain  ends ; and  they  are  given  in  that  degree  which 
is  the  most  proper  for  their  end.  By  diminishing  or 
increasing  them,  we  should  not  mend,  but  mar,  the 
work  of  nature. 

Bodily  pains  are  indications  of  some  disorder  or  hurt 


* If  an  immediate  knowledge  of  external  things  — that  is,  a conscious- 
ness of  the  qualities  of  the  non-ego  — be  admitted,  the  belief  of  their  ex- 
istence follows  of  course.  On  this  supposition,  therefore,  such  a belief 
would  not  be  unaccountable ; for  it  would  be  accounted  for  by  the  fact  of 
the  knowledge  in  which  it  would  necessarily  be  contained.  Our  belief,  in 
this  case,  of  the  existence  of  external  objects,  would  not  be  more  inexpli- 
cable than  our  belief  that  2 -f-  2 = 4.  In  both  cases  it  would  be  sufficient 
to  say.  We  believe  because  we  know ; for  belief  is  only  unaccountable  when  it 
is  not  the  consequent  or  concomitant  of  knowledge.  By  this,  however,  I 
do  not,  of  course,  mean  to  say  that  knowledge  is  not  in  itself  marvellous 
and  unaccountable.  — H. 


190 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


of  the  body,  and  admonitions  to  use  the  best  means  in 
our  power  to  prevent  or  remove  their  causes.  As  far  as 
this  can  be  done  by  temperance,  exercise,  regimen,  or 
the  skill  of  the  physician,  every  man  has  sufficient  in- 
ducement to  do  it. 

When  pain  cannot  be  prevented  or  removed,  it  is 
greatly  alleviated  by  patience  and  fortitude  of  mind. 
While  the  mind  is  superior  to  pain,  the  man  is  not  un- 
happy, though  he  may  be  exercised.  It  leaves  no  sting 
behind  it,  but  rather  matter  of  triumph  and  agreeable 
reflection,  when  borne  properly,  and  in  a good  cause. 
The  Canadians  have  taught  us,  that  even  savages  may 
acquire  a superiority  to  the  most  excruciating  pains  ; 
and,  in  every  region  of  the  earth,  instances  will  be 
found  where  a sense  of  duty,  of  honor,  or  even  of 
worldly  interest,  has  triumphed  over  it. 

It  is  evident,  that  nature  intended  for  man,  in  his 
present  state,  a life  of  labor  and  toil,  wherein  he  may 
be  occasionally  exposed  to  pain  and  danger : and  the 
happiest  man  is  not  he  who  has  felt  least  of  those  evils, 
but  he  whose  mind  is  fitted  to  bear  them  by  real  mag- 
nanimity. 

Our  active  and  perceptive  powers  are  improved  and 
perfected  by  use  and  exercise.  This  is  the  constitution 
of  nature.  But,  with  regard  to  the  agreeable  and  dis- 
agreeable sensations  we  have  by  our  senses,  the  very 
contrary  is  an  established  constitution  of  nature : the 
frequent  repetition  of  them  weakens  their  force.  Sen- 
sations at  first  very  disagreeable  by  use  become  tolera- 
ble, and  at  last  perfectly  indifferent.  And  those  that 
are  at  first  very  agreeable  by  frequent  repetition  become 
insipid,  and  at  last  perhaps  give  disgust.  Nature  has 
set  limits  to  the  pleasures  of  sense,  which  we  cannot 
pass ; and  all  studied  gratification  of  them,  as  it  is  mean 
and  unworthy  of  a man,  so  it  is  foolish  and  fruitless. 

The  man  who,  in  eating  and  drinking,  and  in  other 
gratifications  of  sense,  obeys  the  calls  of  nature,  with- 
out affecting  delicacies  and  refinements,  has  all  the  en- 
joyment that  the  senses  can  afford.  If  one  could,  by  a 
soft  and  luxurious  life,  acquire  a more  delicate  sensi- 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 


191 


bility  to  pleasure,  it  must  be  at  the  expense  of  a like 
sensibility  to  pain,  from  which  he  can  never  promise 
exemption  ; and  at  the  expense  of  cherishing  many 
diseases  which  produce  pain. 

The  improvement  of  our  external  senses,  as  they  are 
the  means  of  giving  us  information,  is  a subject  more 
worthy  of  our  attention  : for  although  they  are  not  the 
noblest  and  most  exalted  powers  of  our  nature,  yet 
they  are  not  the  least  useful.  All  that  we  know  or  can 
know  of  the  material  world  must  be  grounded  upon 
their  information ; and  the  philosopher,  as  well  as  the 
day-laborer,  must  be  indebted  to  them  for  the  largest 
part  of  his  knowledge. 

11.  Original  and  Acquired  Perceptions.]  Some  of  our 
perceptions  by  the  senses  may  be  called  original.^  be- 
cause they  require  no  previous  experience  or  learning; 
but  the  far  greater  part  are  acquired^  and  the  fruit  of 
experience. 

Three  of  our  senses  — to  wit,  smelly  taste.,  and  hear- 
ing— originally  give  us  only  certain  sensations,  and  a 
conviction  that  these  sensations  are  occasioned  by  some 
external  object.  We  give  a name  to  that  quality  of 
the  object  by  which  it  is  fitted  to  produce  such  a sen- 
sation, and  connect  that  quality  with  the  object  and 
with  its  other  qualities. 

Thus  we  learn,  that  a certain  sensation  of  smell  is 
produced  by  a rose ; and  that  quality  in  the  rose,  by 
which  it  is  fitted  to  produce  this  sensation,  we  call  the 
smell  of  the  rose.  Here  it  is  evident  that  the  sensation 
is  original.  The  perception,  that  the  rose  has  that 
quality  which  we  call  its  smell,  is  acquired.  In  like 
manner,  we  learn  all  those  qualities  in  bodies  which  we 
call  their  smell,  their  taste,  their  sound.  These  are  all 
secondary  qualities,  and  we  give  the  same  name  to 
them  which  we  give  to  the  sensations  they  produce ; 
not  from  any  similitude  between  the  sensation  and  the 
quality  of  the  same  name,  but  because  the  quality  is 
signified  to  us  by  the  sensation  as  its  sign,  and  because 
our  senses  give  us  no  other  knowledge  of  the  quality 
than  that  it  is  fit  to  produce  such  a sensation. 


192 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


By  the  other  two  senses,  we  have  much  more  ample 
information.  By  sights  we  learn  to  distinguish  objects 
by  their  color,  in  the  same  manner  as  by  their  sound, 
taste,  and  smell.  By  this  sense,  we  perceive  visible 
objects  to  have  extension  in  two  dimensions,  to  have 
visible  figure  and  magnitude,  and  a certain  angular  dis- 
tance from  one  another.  These,  I conceive,  are  the 
original  perceptions  of  sight.* 

By  touchy  we  not  only  perceive  the  temperature  of 
bodies  as  to  heat  and  cold,f  which  are  secondary  quali- 
ties, but  we  perceive  originally  their  three  dimensions, 
their  tangible  figure  and  magnitude,  their  linear  dis- 
tance from  one  another,  their  hardness,  softness,  or 
fluidity.  These  qualities  we  originally  perceive  by 
touch  only ; but,  by  experience,  we  learn  to  perceive  all 
or  most  of  them  by  sight. 

We  learn  to  perceive,  by  one  sense,  what  originally 
could  have  been  perceived  only  by  another,  by  finding 
a connection  between  the  objects  of  the  different  senses. 
Hence  the  original  perceptions,  or  the  sensations,  of 
one  sense,  become  signs  of  whatever  has  always  been 
found  connected  with  them;  and  from  the  sign  the 


* In  another  connection,  speaking  of  the  perceptions  of  sight,  Sir  W. 
Hamilton  has  said:  — “It  is  incorrect  to  say  that  ‘we  see  the  object,’ 
(meaning  the  thing  from  which  the  rays  come  by  emanation  or  reflection, 
hut  which  is  unknown  and  incognizable  lyy  sight,)  and  so  forth.  It  would  be 
more  correct  to  describe  vision,  — a perception,  by  which  we  take  imme- 
diate cognizance  of  light  in  relation  to  our  organ,  — that  is,  as  diffused 
and  figured  upon  the  retina,  under  various  modifications  of  degree  and 
kind,  (brightness  and  color,)  — and  likewise  as  falling  on  it  in  a particular 
direction.  The  image  on  the  retina  is  not  itself  an  object  of  visual  per- 
ception. It  is  only  to  be  regarded  as  the  complement  of  those  points,  or 
of  that  sensitive  surface,  on  which  the  rays  impinge,  and  with  which  they 
enter  into  relation.  The  total  object  of  visual  perception  is  thus  neither 
the  rays  in  themselves,  nor  the  organ  in  itself,  but  the  rays  and  the  living 
organ  in  reciprocity : this  organ  is  not,  however,  to  be  viewed  as  merely 
the  retina,  but  as  the  whole  tract  of  nervous  fibre  pertaining  to  the  sense. 
In  an  act  of  vision,  as  also  in  the  other  sensitive  acts,  I am  thus  conscious, 
(the  word  should  not  he  restricted  to  se^-consciousness,)  or  immediately 
cognizant,  not  only  of  the  affections  of  self,  but  of  the  phenomena  of 
something  different  from  self,  both,  however,  always  in  relation  to  each 
other.”  — Ed. 

t Whether  heat,  cold,  &c.,  be  objects  of  touch,  or  of  a different  sense, 
has  been  considered  in  a former  note.  — Ed. 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 


193 


mind  passes  immediately  to  the  conception  and  belief 
of  the  thing  signified:  and  although  the  connection  in 
the  mind  between  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified  by 
it  be  the  effect  of  custom,  this  custom  becomes  a 
second  nature,  and  it  is  difficult  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  original  power  of  perception. 

Thus,  if  a sphere  of  one  uniform  color  be  set  before 
me,  I perceive  evidently  by  my  eye  its  spherical  figure 
and  its  three  dimensions.  All  the  world  will  acknowl- 
edge, that  by  sight  Only,  without  touching  it,  I may  be 
certain  that  it  is  a sphere ; yet  it  is  no  less  certain,  that, 
by  the  original  power  of  sight,  I could  not  perceive  it 
to  be  a sphere,  and  to  have  three  dimensions.  The  eye 
originally  could  only  perceive  two  dimensions,  and 
a gradual  variation  of  color  on  the  different  sides  of 
the  object.  It  is  experience  that  teaches  me  that  the 
variation  of  color  is  an  effect  of  spherical  convexity, 
and  of  the  distribution  of  light  and  shade.  But  so 
rapid  is  the  progress  of  the  thought  frotn  the  effect  to 
the  cause,  that  we  attend  only  to  the  last,  and  can 
hardly  be  persuaded  that  we  do  not  immediately  see 
the  three  dimensions  of  the  sphere.  Nay,  it  may  be 
observed,  that,  in  this  case,  the  acquired  perception  in 
a manner  effaces  the  original  one;  for  the  sphere  is 
seen  to  be  of  one  uniform  color ^ though  originally  there 
would  have  appeared  a gradual  variation  of  color : but 
that  apparent  variation  we  learn  to  interpret  as  the 
effect  of  light  and  shade  falling  upon  a sphere  of  one 
uniform  color. 

A sphere  may  be  painted  upon  a plane,  so  exactly  as 
to  be  taken  for  a real  sphere,  when  the  eye  is  at  a 
proper  distance,  and  in  the  proper  point  of  view.  We 
say  in  this  case,  that  the  eye  is  deceived,  that  the  ap- 
pearance is  fallacious ; but  there  is  no  fallacy  in  the 
original  perception,  but  only  in  that  which  is  acquired 
by  custom.  The  variation  of  color  exhibited  to  the 
eye  by  the  painter’s  art  is  the  same  which  nature  ex- 
hibits by  the  different  degrees  of  light  falling  upon  the 
convex  surface  of  a sphere. 

In  perception,  whether  original  or  acquired,  there  is 

17 


194 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


something  which  may  be  called  the  sign,  and  something 
which  is  signified  to  us,  or  brought  to  our  knowledge, 
by  that  sign. 

In  original  perception,  the  signs  are  the  various  sen- 
sations which  are  produced  by  the  impressions  made 
upon  our  organs.  The  things  signified  are  the  objects 
perceived  in  consequence  of  those  sensations,  by  the 
original  constitution  of  our  nature.  Thus,  when  I grasp 
an  ivory  ball  in  my  hand,  I have  a certain  sensation  of 
touch.  Although  this  sensation  be  in  the  mind,  and 
have  no  similitude  to  any  thing  material,  yet,  by  the 
laws  of  my  constitution,  it  is  immediately  followed  by 
the  conception  and  belief,  that  there  is  in  my  hand  a 
hard,  smooth  body,  of  a spherical  figure,  and  about  an 
inch  and  a half  in  diameter.  This  belief  is  grounded 
neither  upon  reasoning  nor  upon  experience ; it  is  the 
immediate  effect  of  my  constitution,  and  this  I call 
original  perception. 

In  acquired  perception,  the  sign  may  be  either  a sen- 
sation, or  something  originally  perceived.  The  thing 
signified  is  something  which,  by  experience^  has  been 
found  connected  with  that  sign.  Thus,  when  the  ivory 
ball  is  placed  before  my  eye,  I perceive  by  sight  what 
I before  perceived  by  touch,  that  the  ball  is  smooth, 
spherical,  of  such  a diameter,  and  at  such  a distance 
from  the  eye ; and  to  this  is  added  the  perception  of  its 
color.  All  these  things  I perceive  by  sight  distinctly, 
and  with  certainty ; yet  it  is  certain,  from  principles  of 
philosophy,  that,  if  I had  not  been  accustomed  to  com- 
pare the  informations  of  sight  with  those  of  touch,  I 
should  not  have  perceived  these  things  by  sight.  I 
should  have  perceived  a circular  object,  having  its  color 
gradually  more  faint  towards  the  shaded  side.  But  I 
should  not  have  perceived  it  to  have  three  dimensions, 
to  be  spherical,  to  be  of  such  a linear  magnitude,  and 
at  such  a distance  from  the  eye.  That  these  last  men- 
tioned are  not  original  perceptions  of  sight,  but  ac- 
quired by  experience,  is  sufficiently  evident  from  the 
principles  of  optics,  and  from  the  art  of  painters,  in 
painting  objects  of  three  dimensions  upon  a plane  which 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 


195 


has  only  two.  And  it  has  been  put  beyond  all  doubt, 
by  observations  recorded  of  several  persons,  who,  hav- 
ing, by  cataracts  in  their  eyes,  been  deprived  of  sight 
from  their  infancy,  were  couched  and  made  to  see,  after 
they  came  to  years  of  understanding.* 


* The  reference  on  this  subject  is  commonly  to  Cheselden  ; though  it 
must  be  confessed  that  the  mode  in  which  the  case  of  the  young  man 
couched  by  that  distinguished  surgeon  is  reported  does  not  merit  all  the 
eulogia  that  have  been  lavished  on  it.  It  is  at  once  imperfect  and  indis- 
tinct. Thus,  on  the  point  in  question,  Cheselden  says  : — “ He  (the  pa- 
tient) knew  not  the  shape  of  any  thing,  nor  any  one  thing  from  another, 
however  different  in  shape  and  magnitude;  but,  upon  being  told  what 
things  they  were,  whose  form  he  before  knew  from  feeling,  he  would  care- 
fully observe,  that  he  might  know  them  again  ; but,  having  too  many  ob- 
jects to  learn  at  once,  he  forgot  many  of  them,  and  (as  he  said)  at  first  he 
learned  to  know,  and  again  forgot,  a thousand  things  in  a day.  One  par- 
ticular only,  though  it  may  appear  trifling,  I will  relate.  Having  often 
forgotten  which  was  the  cat  and  which  the  dog,  he  was  ashamed  to  ask ; 
but  catching  the  cat,  which  he  knew  by  feeling,  he  was  observed  to  look  at 
her  steadfastly,  and  then,  setting  her  down,  said,  ‘ So  puss  ! I shall  know 
you  another  time.’  ” 

Here,  when  Cheselden  says  that  his  patient,  when  recently  couched, 
“ knew'  not  the  shape  of  any  thing,  nor  any  one  thing  from  another,”  &c., 
this  cannot  mean  that  he  saw  no  difference  between  the  objects  of  different 
shapes  and  sizes ; for,  if  this  interpretation  were  adopted,  the  rest  of  the 
statement  becomes  nonsense.  If  he  had  been  altogether  incapable  of  appre- 
hending differences,  it  could  not  be  said  that,  “ being  told  what  things  they 
were,  w^hose  form  he  before  knew  from  feeling,  he  would  carefully  obseiwe, 
that  he  might  know  them  again  ” ; for  observation  supposes  the  power  of 
discrimination,  and,  in  particular,  the  anecdote  of  the  dog  and  cat  would 
be  inconceivable  on  that  hypothesis.  It  is  plain  that  Cheselden  only  meant 
to  say,  that  the  things  which  thev  patient  could  previously  distinguish  and 
denominate  by  touchy  he  could  not  now  identify  and  refer  to  their  appella- 
tions by  sight.  And  this  is  what  w'e  might,  a priori^  be  assured  of.  A 
sphere  and  a cube  would  certainly  make  different  impressions  on  him  : 
but  it  is  probable  that  he  could  not  assign  to  each  its  name,  though,  in  this 
particular  case,  there  is  good  ground  for  holding  that  the  slightest  consid- 
eration would  enable  a person,  previously  acquainted  with  these  figures, 
and  aware  that  one  was  a cube  and  the  other  a square,  to  connect  them 
with  his  anterior  experience,  and  to  discriminate  them  by  name.  See 
Philosophical  Transactions.,  1728,  No.  402.  — H. 

In  another  note,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  observes ; — “ Nothing  in  the  whole 
compass  of  inductive  reasoning  appears  more  satisfactory  than  Berkeley’s 
demonstration  of  the  necessity  and  manner  of  our  learning,  by  a slow 
process  of  observation  and  comparison  alone,  the  connection  between  the 
perceptions  of  vision  and  touch,  and,  in  general,  all  that  relates  to  the  dis- 
tance and  real  magnitude  of  external  things.  But,  although  the  same 
necessity  seems  in  theory  equally  incumbent  on  the  lower  animals  as  on 
man,  yet  this  theory  is  provokingly  — and  that  by  the  most  manifest  expe- 
rience — found  totally  at  fault  with  regard  to  them ; for  we  find  that  all 
the  animals  who  possess  at  birth  the  power  of  regulated  motion  (and 


196 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


Those  who  have  had  their  eyesight  from  infancy  ac- 
quire such  perceptions  so  early,  that  they  cannot  recol- 
lect the  time  when  they  had  them  not,  and  therefore 
make  no  distinction  between  them  and  their  original 
perceptions ; nor  can  they  be  easily  persuaded  that 
there  is  any  just  foundation  for  such  a distinction.  In 
all  languages,  men  speak  with  equal  assurance  of  their 
seeing'  objects  to  be  spherical  or  cubical,  as  of  their 
feeling  them  to  be  so  ; nor  do  they  ever  dream  that 
these  perceptions  of  sight  were  not  as  early  and  origi- 
nal as  the  perceptions  they  have  of  the  same  objects 
by  touch. 

From  what  has  been  said,  I think  it  appears  that  our 
original  powers  of  perceiving  objects  by  our  senses  re- 
ceive great  improvement  by  use  and  habit,  and,  with- 
out this  improvement,  would  be  altogether  insufficient 


these  are  those  only  through  whom  the  truth  of  the  theory  can  be  brought 
to  the  test  of  a decisive  experiment)  possess  also  from  birth  the  whole 
apprehension  of  distance,  &c.,  which  they  are  ever  known  to  exhibit.  The 
solution  of  this  difficulty  by  a resort  to  instinct  is  unsatisfactory ; for  in- 
stinct is,  in  fact,  an  occult  principle,  — a kind  of  natural  revelation,  — and 
the  hypothesis  of  instinct,  therefore,  only  a confession  of  our  ignorance ; 
and,  at  the  same  time,  if  instinct  be  allowed  in  the  lower  animals,  how 
can  we  determine  whether  and  how  far  instinct  may  not,  in  like  manner, 
operate  to  the  same  result  in  man  ? — I have  discovered,  and,  by  a wide 
induction,  established,  that  the  power  of  regulated  motion  at  birth  is,  in  all 
animals,  governed  by  the  development,  at  that  period,  of  the  cerebellum, 
in  proportion  to  the  brain  proper.  Is  this  law  to  be  extended  to  the  faculty 
of  determining  distances,  &c.,  by  sight?” 

Mr.  Bailey,  in  his  Review  f Berkeley's  Theory  of  Vision^  contests  strenu- 
ously the  common  doctrine  respecting  the  perception  of  magnitude,  figure, 
and  distance,  — maintaining  that  it  is  not  an  acquired^  but  an  original^  per- 
ception of  sight.  In  particular,  he  examines  all  the  accredited  reports  of 
persons  who  have  been  relieved  from  early  or  congenital  blindness  by  sur- 
gical operations ; — not  only  the  case  of  Cheselden’s  patient,  mentioned 
above,  but  that  of  a boy  seven  years  old  (Master  W.),  related  by  Mr.  Ware, 
Philos.  Trans..,  1801  ; those  of  John  Salter  and  William  Stiff,  related  by 
Sir  E.  Home,  Philos.  Trans..,  1807  ; and  two  cases  related  by  Mr.  Wardrop, 
that  of  James  Mitchell,  so  much  valued  by  Mr.  Stewart,  and  of  which  a 
separate  memoir'  was  published,  and  the  still  more  interesting  one  of  a 
lady,  recorded  in  the  Philos.  Trans.,  1826.  He  shows  that  the  evidence 
afforded  by  these  reports  is  by  no  means  so  decisive  in  favor  of  the  Berke- 
leian  theory  as  is  generally  supposed.  In  other  respects  his  argument  is 
not  so  successful.  For  an  answer  see  the  Westminster  Review  for  October, 
1842.  See  also  Adam  Smith’s  Essays  on  Philosophical  Subjects,  the  last 
essay.  Of  the  External  Senses  ; and  Young’s  Lectures  on  Intellectual  Philos- 
ophy, Lect.  XIII.  - XV.  — Ed. 


IMPROVEMENT  OF  THE  SENSES. 


197 


for  the  purposes  of  life.  The  daily  occurrences  of  life 
not  only  add  to  our  stock  of  knowledge,  but  give  ad- 
ditional perceptive  powers  to  our  senses;  thus  time 
gives  us  the  use  of  our  eyes  and  ears,  as  well  as  of  our 
hands  and  legs.  This  is  the  greatest  and  most  impor- 
tant improvement  of  our  external  senses.  It  is  to  be 
found  in  all  men  come  to  years  of  understanding,  but 
is  various  in  different  persons,  according  to  their  differ- 
ent occupations,  and  the  different  circumstances  in 
which  they  are  placed.  Every  artist  acquires  an  eye, 
as  well  as  a hand,  in  his  own  profession : his  eye  be- 
comes skilled  in  perceiving,  no  less  than  his  hand  in 
executing,  what  belongs  to  his  employment.  ^ 

III.  Artificial  Means  of  improving  the  External  Sen- 
ses,  and  of  extending  the  Information  obtained  thereby,] 
Besides  this  improvement  of  our  senses,  which  nature 
produces  without  our  intention,  there  are  various  ways 
in  which  they  may  be  improved,  or  their  defects  reme- 
died, by  art.  As,  firsts  by  a due  care  of  the  organs  of 
sense^  that  they  be  in  a sound  and  natural  state.  This 
belongs  to  the  department  of  the  medical  faculty. 

Secondly^  by  accurate  attention  to  the  objects  of  sense. 
The  effects  of  such  attention  in  improving  our  senses 
appear  in  every  art.  The  artist,  by  giving  more  atten- 
tion to  certain  objects  than  others  do,  by  that  means 
perceives  many  things  in  those  objects  which  others  do 
not.  Those  who  happen  -to  be  deprived  of  one  sense 
frequently  supply  that  defect,  in  a great  degree,  by  giv- 
ing more  accurate  attention  to  the  objects  of  the  senses 
they  have.  The  blind  have  often  been  known  to  ac- 
quire uncommon  acuteness  in  distinguishing  things  by 
feeling  and  hearing ; and  the  deaf  are  uncommonly 
quick  in  reading  men’s  thoughts  in  their  countenance. 

A third  way  in  which  our  senses  admit  of  improve- 
ment is  by  additional  organs  or  instruments  contrived  by 
art.  By  the  invention  of  optical  glasses,  and  the  grad- 
ual improvement  of  them,  the  natural  power  of  vision 
is  wonderfully  improved,  and  a vast  addition  made  to 
the  stock  of  knowledge  which  we  acquire  by  the  eye. 
17* 


198 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


By  speaking-trumpets  and  ear-trumpets,  some  improve- 
ment has  been  made  in  the  sense  of  hearing.  Whether 
by  similar  inventions  the  other  senses  may  be  improved, 
seems  uncertain. 

A fourth  method  by  which  the  information  got  by 
our  senses  may  be  improved  is  by  discovering  the  con- 
nection which  nature  has  established  between  the  sensible 
qualities  of  objects  and  their  more  latent  qualities. 

By  the  sensible  qualities  of  bodies,  I understand 
those  that  are  perceived  immediately  by  the  senses, 
such  as  their  color,  figure,  feeling,  sound,  taste,  smell. 
The  various  modifications  and  various  combinations  of 
these  are  innumerable ; so  that  there  are  hardly  two 
individual  bodies  in  nature  that  may  not  be  distin- 
guished by  their  sensible  qualities.  The  latent  quali- 
ties are  such  as  are  not  immediately  discovered  by  our 
senses,  but  discovered,  sometimes  by  accident,  some- 
times by  experiment  or" observation.  The  most  impor- 
tant part  of  our  knowledge  of  bodies  is  the  knowledge 
of  the  latent  qualities  of  the  several  species,  by  which 
they  are  adapted  to  certain  purposes,  either  for  food,  or 
medicine,  or  agriculture,  or  for  the  materials  or  utensils 
of  some  art  or  manufacture.  I am  taught  that  certain 
species  of  bodies  have  certain  latent  qualities ; but  how 
shall  I know  that  this  individual  is  of  such  a species  ? 
This  must  be  known  by  the  sensible  qualities  which 
characterize  the  species.  I must  know  that  this  is 
bread,  and  that  wine,  before, I eat  the  one  or  drink  the 
other.  I must  know  that  this  is  rhubarb,  and  that 
opium,  before  I use  the  one  or  the  other  for  medicine. 

It  is  one  branch  of  human  knowledge  to  know  the 
names  of  the  various  species  of  natural  and  artificial 
bodies,  and  to  know  the  sensible  qualities  by  which 
they  are  ascertained  to  be  of  such  a species,  and  by 
which  they  are  distinguished  from  one  another.  It  is 
another  branch  of  knowledge  to  know  the  latent  quali- 
ties of  the  several  species,  and  the  uses  to  which  they 
are  subservient.  The  man  who  possesses  both  these 
branches  is  informed  by  his  senses  of  innumerable 
things  of  real  moment,  which  are  hid  from  those  who 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


199 


possess  only  one,  or  neither.  This  is  an  improvement 
in  the  information  got  by  our  senses,  which  must  keep 
pace  with  the  improvements  made  in  natural  history, 
in  natural  philosophy,  and  in  the  arts. 

It  would  be  an  improvement  still  higher,  if  we  were 
able  to  discover  any  connection  betiveen  the  sensible  quali- 
ties of  bodies  and  their  latent  qualities^  ivithout  knowing' 
the  species^  or  what  may  have  been  discovered  with  regard 
to  it. 

Some  philosophers  of  the  first  rate  have  made  at- 
tempts towards  this  noble  improvement,  not  without 
promising  hopes  of  success.  Thus  the  celebrated  Lin- 
nsBUS  has  attempted  to  point  out  certain  sensible  quali- 
ties by  which  a plant  may  very  probably  be  concluded 
to  be  poisonous,  without  knowing  its  name  or  species. 
He  has  given  several  other  instances,  wherein  certain 
medical  and  economical  virtues  of  plants  are  indicated 
by  their  external  appearances.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  has 
attempted  to  show,  that  from  the  colors  of  bodies  we 
may  form  a probable  conjecture  of  the  size  of  their 
constituent  parts,  by  which  the  rays  of  light  are  re- 
flected. 

No  man  can  pretend  to  set  limits  to  the  discoveries 
that  may  be  made  by  human  genius  and  industry  of 
such  connections  between  the  latent  and  the  sensible 
qualities  of  bodies.  A wide  field  here  opens  to  our 
view,  whose  boundaries  no  man  can  ascertain,  of  im- 
provements that  may  hereafter  be  made  in  the  informa- 
tion conveyed  to  us  by  our  senses. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

OF  THE  ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 

I.  No  Foundation  for  the  common  Complaint  on  this 
Subject.]  Complaints  of  the  fallacy  of  the  senses  have 
been  very  common  in  ancient  and  in  modern  times, 


200 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


especially  among  the  philosophers.  If  we  should  take 
for  granted  all  they  have  said  on  this  subject,  the  natu- 
ral conclusion  from  it  might  seem  to  be,  that  the  senses 
are  given  to  us  by  some  malignant  demon  on  purpose 
to  delude  us,  rather  than  that  they  are  formed  by  the 
wise  and  beneficent  Author  of  nature,  to  give  us  true 
information  of  things  necessary  to  our  preservation  and 
happiness. 

This  complaint  they  have  supported  by  many  com- 
monplace instances  ; — such  as  the  crooked  appear- 
ance of  an  oar  in  water ; objects  being  magnified,  and 
their  distance  mistaken,  in  a fog ; the  sun  and  moon 
appearing  about  a foot  or  two  in  diameter,  while  they 
are  really  thousands  of  miles;  a square  tower  being 
taken  at  a distance  to  be  round.  These,  and  similar 
appearances,  many  among  the  ancient  philosophers 
thought  to  be  sufficiently  accounted  for  by  the  fallacy  of 
the  senses ; and  thus  the  fallacy  of  the  senses  was  used 
as  a decent  cover  to  conceal  their  ignorance  of  the  real 
causes  of  such  phenomena,  and  served  the  same  pur- 
pose as  their  occult  qualities  and  substantial  forms. 

Descartes  and  his  followers  joined  in  the  same  com- 
plaint. Antony  le  Grand,  a philosopher  of  that  sect, 
in  the  first  chapter  of  his  Logic,  expresses  the  senti- 
ments of  the  sect  as  follows  : — “ Since  all  our  senses 
are  fallacious,  and  we  are  frequently  deceived  by  them, 
common  reason  advises,  that  we  should  not  put  too 
much  trust  in  them,  nay,  that  we  should  suspect  false- 
hood in  every  thing  they  represent ; for  it  is  imprudence 
and  temerity  to  trust  to  those  who  have  once  deceived 
us ; and  if  they  err  at  any  time,  they  may  be  believed 
always  to  err.  They  are  given  by  nature  for  this  pur- 
pose only,  to  warn  us  of  what  is  useful  and  what  is 
hurtful  to  us.  The  order  of  nature  is  perverted  when 
we  put  them  to  any  other  use,  and  apply  them  for  the 
knowledge  of  truth.” 

When  we  consider  that  the  active  part  of  mankind, 
in  all  ages  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  have  rested 
their  most  important  concerns  upon  the  testimony  of 
sense,  it  will  be  very  difficult  to  reconcile  their  conduct 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


201 


with  the  speculative  opinion  so  generally  entertained 
of  the  fallaciousness  of  the  senses.  Also  it  seems  to 
be  a very  unfavorable  account  of  the  workmanship  of 
the  Supreme  Being,  to  think  that  he  has  given  us  one 
faculty  to  deceive  us,  — to  wit,  our  senses  ; and  another 
faculty  — to  wit,  our  reason  — to  detect  the  fallacy. 

It  deserves,  therefore,  to  be  considered,  whether  the 
alleged  fallaciousness  of  our  senses  be  not  a common 
error,  which  men  have  been  led  into  from  a desire  to 
conceal  their  ignorance,  or  to  apologize  for  their  mis- 
takes. 

There  are  two  powers  which  we  owe  to  our  external 
senses,  sensation^  and  the  perception  of  external  objects. 

It  is  impossible  that  there  can  be  any  fallacy  in  sen- 
sation ; for  we  are  conscious  of  all  our  sensations,  and 
they  can  neither  be  any  other  in  their  nature,  nor 
greater  or  less  in  their  degree,  than  we  feel  them.  It  is 
impossible  that  a man  should  be  in  pain,  when  he  does 
not  feel  pain  ; and  when  he  feels  pain,  it  is  impossible 
that  his  pain  should  not  be  real,  and  in  its  degree  what 
it  is  felt  to  be  ; and  the  same  thing  may  be  said  of 
every  sensation  whatsoever.  An  agreeable  or  an  un- 
easy sensation  may  be  forgotten  when  it  is  past,  but 
when  it  is  present,  it  can  be  nothing  but  what  we  feel. 

If,  therefore,  there  be  any  fallacy  in  our  senses,  it 
must  be  in  the  perception  of  external  objects^  which  we 
shall  next  consider. 

And  here  I grant  that  we  can  conceive  powers  of 
perceiving  external  objects  more  perfect  than  ours, 
which  possibly  beings  of  a higher  order  may  enjoy. 
We  can  perceive  external  objects  only  by  means  of 
bodily  organs ; and  these  are  liable  to  various  disorders, 
which  sometimes  affect  our  powers  of  perception.  So 
the  imagination,  the  memory,  the  judging  and  reason- 
ing powers,  are  all  liable  to  be  hurt,  or  even  destroyed, 
by  disorders  of  the  body,  as  well  as  our  powers  of  per- 
ception ; but  we  do  not  on  this  account  call  them  fal- 
lacious. 

Our  senses,  our  memory,  and  our  reason  are  all  lim- 
ited and  imperfect:  this  is  the  lot  of  humanity:  but 


202 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


they  are  such  as  the  Author  of  our  being  saw  to  be 
best  fitted  for  us  in  our  present  state.  Superior  natures 
may  have  intellectual  powers  which  we  have  not,  or 
such  as  we  have  in  a more  perfect  degree,  and  less 
liable  to  accidental  disorders : but  we  have  no  reason 
to  think  that  God  has  given  fallacious  powers  to  any 
of  his  creatures : this  would  be  to  think  dishonorably 
of  our  Maker,  and  would  lay  a foundation  for  universal 
skepticism. 

IL  Alleged  Fallacies  of  the  Senses  reducible  to  Four 
Classes.]  The  appearances  commonly  imputed  to  the 
fallacy  of  the  senses  are  many,  and  of  different  kinds ; 
but  I think  they  may  be  reduced  to  the  four  following 
classes. 

First.,  Many  things  called  deceptions  of  the  senses 
are  only  conclusions  rashly  drawn  from  the  testimony  of 
the  senses.  In  these  cases  the  testimony  of  the  senses 
is  true,  but  we  rashly  draw  a conclusion  from  it  which 
does  not  necessarily  follow.  We  are  disposed  to  im- 
pute our  errors  rather  to  false  information  than  to  in- 
conclusive reasoning,  and  to  blame  our  senses  for  the 
wrong  conclusions  we  draw  from  their  testimony. 

Thus,  when  a man  has  taken  a counterfeit  guinea 
for  a true  one,  he  says  his  senses  deceived  him ; but  he 
lays  the  blame  where  it  ought  not  to  be  laid : for  we 
may  ask  him,  Did  your  senses  give  a false  testimony  of 
the  color,  or  of  the  figure,  or  of  the  impression  ? No. 
But  this  is  all  that  they  testified,  and  this  they  testified 
truly : from  these  premises  you  concluded  that  it  was 
a true  guinea,  but  this  conclusion  does  not  follow;  you 
erred,  therefore,  not  in  relying  upon  the  testimony  of 
sense,  but  in  judging  rashly  from  its  testimony.  Not 
only  are  your  senses  innocent  of  this  error,  but  it  is 
only  by  their  information  that  it  can  be  discovered.  If 
you  consult  them  properly,  they  will  inform  you  that 
what  you  took  for  a guinea  is  base  metal,  or  is  deficient 
in  weight,  and  this  can  only  be  known  by  the  testi- 
mony of  sense. 

I remember  to  have  met  with  a man  who  thought 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


203 


the  argument  used  by  Protestants  against  the  Popish 
doctrine  of  transubstantiation,  from  the  testimony  of 
our  senses,  inconclusive  ; because,  said  he,  instances 
may  be  given  where  several  of  our  senses  may  deceive 
us.  How  do  we  know,  then,  that  there  may  not  be 
cases  wherein  they  all  deceive  us,  and  no  sense  is  left 
to  detect  the  fallacy  ? I begged  of  him  to  show  an  in- 
stance wherein  several  of  our  senses  deceive  us.  I 
take,”  said  he,  “ a piece  of  soft  turf,  I cut  it  into  the 
shape  of  an  apple ; with  the  essence  of  apples  I give  it 
the  smell  of  an  apple  ; and  with  paint,  I can  give  it  the 
skin  and  color  of  an  apple.  Here,  then,  is  a body, 
w^hich,  if  you  judge  by  your  eye,  by  your  touch,  or  by 
your  smell,  is  an  apple.” 

To  this  I would  answer,  that  no  one  of  our  senses 
deceives  us  in  this  case.  My  sight  and  touch  testify 
that  it  has  the  shape  and  color  of  an  apple : this  is  true. 
The  sense  of  smelling  testifies  that  it  has  the  smell  of 
an  apple : this  is  likewise  true,  and  is  no  deception. 
Where,  then,  lies  the  deception  ? It  is  evident  it  lies 
in  this,  that  because  this  body  has  some  qualities  be- 
longing to  an  apple,  I conclude  that  it  is  an  apple. 
This  is  a fallacy,  not  of  the  senses,  but  of  inconclusive 
reasoning. 

Many  false  judgments  that  are  accounted  deceptions 
of  sense  arise  from  our  mistaking  relative  motion  for 
real  or  absolute  motion.  These  can  be  no  deceptions 
of  sense,  because  by  our  senses  we  perceive  only  the 
relative  motions  of  bodies ; and  it  is  by  reasoning  that 
we  infer  the  real  from  the  relative  which  we  perceive. 
A little  reflection  may  satisfy  us  of  this. 

It  was  before  observed,  that  we  perceive  extension  to 
be  one  sensible  quality  of  bodies,  and  thence  are  neces- 
sarily led  to  conceive  space,  though  space  be  of  itself 
no  object  of  sense.  When  a body  is  removed  out  of 
its  place,  the  space  which  it  filled  remains  empty  till  it 
is  filled  by  some  other  body,  and  would  remain  if  it 
should  never  be  filled.  Before  any  body  existed,  the 
space  which  bodies  now  occupy  was  empty  space,  capa- 
ble of  receiving  bodies  ; for  no  body  can  exist  where 


204 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


there  is  no  space  to  contain  it.  There  is  space,  there- 
fore, wherever  bodies  exist,  or  can  exist.  Hence  it  is 
evident  that  space  can  have  no  limits.  It  is  no  less 
evident  that  it  is  immovable.  Bodies  placed  in  it  are 
movable,  but  the  place  where  they  were  cannot  be 
moved ; and  we  can  as  easily  conceive  a thing  to  be 
moved  from  itself,  as  one  part  of  space  brought  nearer 
to  or  removed  farther  from  another.  This  space,  there- 
fore, which  is  unlimited  and  immovable,  is  called  by 
philosophers  absolute  space.  Absolute  or  real  motion 
is  a change  of  place  in  absolute  space.  Our  senses  do 
not  testify  the  absolute  motion  or  absolute  rest  of  any 
body.  When  one  body  removes  from  another,  this 
may  be  discerned  by  the  senses ; but  whether  any  body 
keeps  the  same  part  of  absolute  space,  we  do  not  per- 
ceive by  our  senses.  When  one  body  seems  to  remove 
from  another,  we  can  infer  with  certainty  that  there  is 
absolute  motion ; but  whether  in  the  one  or  the  other, 
or  partly  in  both,  is  not  discerned  by  sense. 

Of  all  the  prejudices  which  philosophy  contradicts,  I 
believe  there  is  none  so  general  as  that  the  earth  keeps 
its  place  unmoved.  This  opinion  seems  to  be  uni- 
versal, till  it  is  corrected  by  instruction,  or  by  philo- 
sophical speculation.  Those  who  have  any  tincture  of 
education  are  not  now  in  danger  of  being  held  by  it, 
but  they  find  at  first  a reluctance  to  believe  that  there 
are  antipodes  ; that  the  earth  is  spherical,  and  turns 
round  its  axis  every  day,  and  round  the  sun  every  year : 
they  can  recollect  the  time  when  reason  struggled  with 
prejudice  upon  these  points,  and  prevailed  at  length, 
but  not  without  some  effort. 

The  cause  of  a prejudice  so  very  general  is  not  un- 
worthy of  investigation.  But  that  is  not  our  present 
business.  It  is  sufficient  to  observe,  that  it  cannot 
justly  be  called  a fallacy  of  sense ; because  our  senses 
testify  only  the  change  of  situation  of  one  body  in 
relation  to  other  bodies,  and  not  its  change  of  situation 
in  absolute  space.  It  is  only  the  relative  motion  of 
bodies  that  we  perceive,  and  that  we  perceive  truly. 
It  is  the  province  of  reason  and  philosophy,  from  the 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


205 


relative  motions  whioh  we  perceive,  to  collect  the  real 
and  absolute  motions  which  produce  them.  All  motion 
must  be*estimated  from  some  point  or  place  which  is 
supposed  to  be  at  rest.  We  perceive  not  the  points  of 
absolute  space,  from  which  real  and  absolute  motion 
must  be  reckoned;  and  there  are  obvious  reasons  that 
lead  mankind,  in  the  state  of  ignorance,  to  make  the 
earth  the  fixed  place  from  which  they  may  estimate  the 
various  motions  they  perceive.  The  custom  of  doing 
this  from  infancy,  and  of  using  constantly  a language 
which  supposes  the  earth  to  be  at  rest,  may  perhaps 
be  the  cause  of  the  general  prejudice  in  favor  of  this 
opinion. 

Thus  it  appears,  that,  if  we  distinguish  accurately 
between  what  our  senses  really  and  naturally  testify^  and 
the  conclusions  which  we  draw  from  their  testimony  by 
reasonin^^  we  shall  find  many  of  the  errors  called  falla- 
cies of  the  senses  to  be  no  fallacies  of  the  senses,  but 
rash  judgments,  which  are  not  to  be  imputed  to  our 
senses. 

Secondly^  Another  class  of  errors  imputed  to  the  fal- 
lacy of  the  senses  consists  of  those  to  which  we  are 
liable  in  our  acquired  perceptions.  Acquired  perception 
is  not  properly  the  testimony  of  those  senses  which 
God  has  given  us,  but  a conclusion  drawn  from  what 
the  senses  testify.  In  our  past  experience,  we  have 
found  certain  things  conjoined  with  what  our  senses 
testify.  We  are  led  by  our  constitution  to  expect  this 
conjunction  in  time  to  come ; and  when  we  have  often 
found  it  in  our  experience  to  happen,  we  acquire  a firm 
belief  that  the  things  which  we  have  found  thus  con- 
joined are  connected  in  nature,  and  that  one  is  a sign 
of  the  other.  The  appearance  of  the  sign  immediately 
produces  the  belief  of  its  usual  attendant,  and  we  think 
we  perceive  the  one  as  well  as  the  other. 

That  such  conclusions  are  formed  even  in  infancy, 
no  man  can  doubt ; nor  is  it  less  certain  that  they  are 
confounded  with  the  natural  and  immediate  percep- 
tions of  sense,  and  in  all  languages  are  called  by  the 
same  name.  We  are,  therefore,  authorized  by  language 


206 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


to  call  them  perceptions^  and  musi  often  do  so,  or  speak 
unintelligibly.  But  philosophy  teaches  us  in  this,  as  in 
many  other  instances,  to  distinguish  things  which  the 
vulgar  confound.  I have  therefore  given  the  name  of 
acquired  perceptions  to  such  conclusions,  to  distinguish 
them  from  what  is  naturally,  originally,  and  immediately 
testified  by  our  senses.  Whether  this  acquired  percep- 
tion is  to  be  resolved  into  process  of  reasonings  of 
which  we  have  lost  the  remembrance,  as  some  philoso- 
phers think,  or  whether  it  results  immediately  from  our 
constitutions  as  I rather  believe,  does  not  concern  the 
present  subject.  If  the  first  of  these  opinions  be  true, 
the  errors  of  acquired  perception  will  fall  under  the  first 
class  before  mentioned.  If  not,  it  makes  a distinct 
class  by  itself.  But  whether  the  one  or  the  other  be 
true,  it  must  be  observed,  that  the  errors  of  acquired 
perception  are  not  properly  fallacies  of  our  senses. 

Thus,  when  a globe  is  set  before  me,  I perceive  by 
my  eyes  that  it  has  three  dimensions  and  a spherical 
- figure.  To  say  that  this  is  not  perception,  would  be  to 
reject  the  authority  of  custom  in  the  use  of  words, 
which  no  wise  man  will  do : but  that  it  is  not  the  tes- 
timony of  my  sense  of  seeing,  every  philosopher  knows. 
I see  only  a circular  form,  having  the  light  and  color 
distributed  in  a certain  way  over  it.  But  being  accus- 
tomed to  observe  this  distribution  of  light  and  color 
only  in  a spherical  body,  I immediately,  from  what  I 
see,  believe  the  object  to  be  spherical,  and  say  that  I see 
or  perceive  it  to  be  spherical.  When  a painter,  by  an 
exact  imitation  of  that  distribution  of  light  and  color 
which  I have  been  accustomed  to  see  only  in  a real 
sphere,  deceives  me,  so  as  to  make  me  take  that  to  be 
a real  sphere  which  is  only  a painted  one,  the  testimony 
of  my  eye  is  true,  — the  color  and  visible  figure  of  the 
object  are  truly  what  I see  them  to  be : the  error  lies  in 
the  conclusion  drawn  from  what  I see,  — to  wit,  that 
the  object  has  three  dimensions  and  a spherical  figure. 
The  conclusion  is  false  in  this  case ; but  whatever  be 
the  origin  of  this  conclusion,  it  is  not  properly  the  testi- 
mony of  sense. 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


207 


To  this  class  we  must  refer  the  judgments  we  are 
apt  to  form  of  the  distance  and  magnitude  of  the 
heavenly  bodies,  and  of  terrestrial  objects  seen  on  high. 
The  mistakes  we  make  of  the  magnitude  and  distance 
of  objects  seen  through  optical  glasses,  or  through  an 
atmosphere  uncommonly  clear  or  uncommonly  foggy, 
belong  likewise  to  this  class. 

The  errors  we  are  led  into  in  acquired  perception  are 
very  rarely  hurtful  to  us  in  the  conduct  of  life ; they 
are  gradually  corrected  by  a more  enlarged  experience, 
and  a more  perfect  knowledge  of  the  laws  of  nature: 
and  the  general  laws  of  our  constitution,  by  which 
we  are  sometimes  led  into  them,  are  of  the  greatest 
utility. 

We  come  into  the  world  ignorant  of  every  thing, 
and  by  our  ignorance  exposed  to  many  dangers  and  to 
many  mistakes.  Were  we  sensible  of  our  condition 
in  that  period,  and  capable  of  reflecting  upon  it,  we 
should  be  like  ^ man  in  the  dark,  surrounded  with 
dangers,  where  every  step  he  takes  may  be  into  a pit. 
Reason  would  direct  him  to  sit  down,  and  wait  till  he 
could  see  about  him.  Nature  has  followed  another 
plan.  The  child,  unapprehensive  of  danger,  is  led  by 
instinct  to  exert  all  his  active  powers,  to  try  every  thing 
without  the  cautious  admonitions  of  reason,  and  to 
believe  every  thing  that  is  told  him.  Sometimes  he 
suffers  by  his  rashness  what  reason  would  have  pre- 
vented ; but  his  suffering  proves  a salutary  discipline, 
and  makes  him  for  the  future  avoid  the  cause  of  it. 
Sometimes  he  is  imposed  upon  by  his  credulity ; but 
it  is  of  infinite  benefit  to  him  upon  the  whole.  His 
activity  and  credulity  are  more  useful  qualities,  and 
better  instructors  than  reason  would  be ; they  teach  him 
more  in  a day  than  reason  would  do  in  a year ; they 
furnish  a stock  of  materials  for  reason  to  work  upon ; 
they  make  him  easy  and  happy  in  a period  of  his  ex- 
istence, when  reason  could  only  serve  to  suggest  a 
thousand  tormenting  anxieties  and  fears  : and  he  acts 
agreeably  to  the  constitution  and  intention  of  nature, 
even  when  he  does  and  believes  what  reason  would  not 


208 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


justify.  So  that  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Au- 
thor of  nature  are  no  less  conspicuous  in  withholding 
the  exercise  of  our  reason  in  this  period,  than  in  be- 
stowing it  when  we  are  ripe  for  it. 

A third  class  of  errors,  ascribed  to  the  fallacy  of  the 
senses,  proceeds  from  ignorance  of  the  laws  of  nature. 

The  laws  of  nature  (I  mean  not  moral  hut  physical 
laws)  are  learned  either  from  our  own  experience,  or 
the  experience  of  others,  who  have  had  occasion  to 
observe  the  course  of  nature.  Ignorance  of  those  laws, 
or  inattention  to  them,  is  apt  to  occasion  false  judg- 
ments with  regard  to  the  objects  of  sense,  especially 
those  of  hearing  and  of  sight;  which  false  judgments 
are  often,  without  good  reason,  called  fallacies  of  sense. 

Sounds  affect  the  ear  differently,  according  as  the 
sounding  body  is  before  or  behind  us,  on  the  right  hand 
or  on  the  left,  near  or  at  a great  distance.  We  learn, 
by  the  manner  in  which  the  sound  affects  the  ear,'  on 
what  hand  we  are  to  look  for  the  sounding  body ; and 
in  most  cases  we  judge  right.  But  we  are  sometimes 
deceived  by  echoes,  or  by  whispering-galleries,  or  speak- 
ing-trumpets, which  return  the  sound,  or  alter  its  direc- 
tion, or  convey  it  to  a distance  without  diminution. 
The  deception  is  still  greater,  because  more  uncommon, 
which  is  said  to  be  produced  by  ventriloquists,  — that 
is,  persons  who  have  acquired  the  art  of  modifying  their 
voice,  so  that  it  shall  affect  the  ear  of  the  hearers  as  if 
it  came  from  another  person,  or  from  the  clouds,  or  from 
under  the  earth.  Some  are  also  said  to  have  the  art  of 
imitating  the  voice  of  another  so  exactly,  that  in  the 
dark  they  might  be  taken  for  the  person  whose  voice 
they  imitate. 

It  is,  indeed,  a wonderful  instance  of  the  accuracy 
as  well  as  of  the  truth  of  our  senses  in  things  that  are 
of  real  use  in  life,  that  we  are  able  to  distinguish  all 
our  acquaintance  by  their  countenance,  by  their  voice, 
and  by  their  handwriting,  when  at  the  same  time  we 
are  often  unable  to  say  by  what  minute  difference  the 
distinction  is  made;  and  that  we  are  so  very  rarely 
deceived  in  matters  of  this  kind,  when  we  give  proper 


ALLEGED  FALLACY  OF  THE  SENSES. 


209 


attention  to  the  informations  of  sense.  However,  if 
any  case  should  happen  in  which  sounds  produced  by 
different  causes  are  not  distinguishable  by  the  ear,  this 
may  prove  that  our  senses  are  imperfect,  but  not  that 
they  are  fallacious.  The  ear  may  not  be  able  to  draw 
the  just  conclusion,  but  it  is  only  our  ignorance  of  the 
laws  of  sound  that  leads  us  to  a wrong  conclusion. 

Deceptions  of  sights  arising  from  ignorance  of  the 
laws  of  nature,  are  more  numerous  and  more  remarka- 
ble than  those  of  hearing. 

The  rays  of  light,  which  are  the  means  of  seeing, 
pass  in  right  lines  from  the  object  to  the  eye,  when 
they  meet  with  no  obstruction  ; and  we  are  by  nature 
led  to  conceive  the  visible  object  to  be  in  the  direction 
of  the  rays  that  come  to  the  eye.  But  the  rays  may 
be  reflected,  refracted,  or  inflected  in  their  passage  from 
the  object  to  the  eye,  according  to  certain  fixed  laws  of 
nature,  by  which  means  their  direction  may  be  changed, 
and  consequently  the  apparent  place,  figure,  or  magni- 
tude of  the  object.  Thus,  a child  seeing  himself  in  a 
mirror  thinks  he  sees  another  child  behind  the  mirror, 
that  imitates  all  his  motions.  But  even  a child  soon 
gets  the  better  of  this  deception,  and  knows  that  he 
sees  himself  only. 

All  the  deceptions  made  by  telescopes,  microscopes, 
camera  obscuras,  or  magic  lanterns,  are  of  the  same 
kind,  though  not  so  familiar  to  the  vulgar.  The  igno- 
rant may  be  deceived  by  them ; but  to  those  who  are 
acquainted  with  the  principles  of  optics,  they  give  just 
and  true  information,  and  the  laws  of  nature  by  which 
they  are  produced  are  of  infinite  benefit  to  mankind. 

There  remains  another  class  of  errors,  commonly 
called  deceptions  of  sense,  and  the  only  one,  as  I 
apprehend,  to  which  that  name  can  be  given  with 
propriety : I mean  such  as  proceed  from  some  disorder 
or  preternatural  state^  either  of  the  external  organ^  or  of 
the  nerves  and  brain^  which  are  internal  organs  of  per- 
ception. 

In  a delirium  or  in  madness,  perception,  memory,  im- 
agination, and  our  reasoning  powers  are  strangely  dis- 


210 


SENSATION  AND  PERCEPTION. 


ordered  and  confounded.  There  are  likewise  disorders 
which  affect  some  of  our  senses,  while  others  are  sound. 
Thus,  a man  may  feel  pain  in  his  toes  after  the  leg  is 
cut  oft’.  He  may  feel  a little  ball  double,  by  crossing 
his  fingers.  He  may  see  an  object  double,  by  not 
directing  both  eyes  properly  to  it.  By  pressing  the  ball 
of  his  eye,  he  may  see  colors  that  are  not  real.  By  the 
jaundice  in  his  eyes,  he  may  mistake  colors.  These 
are  more  properly  deceptions  of  sense  than  any  of  the 
classes  before  mentioned. 

We  must  acknowledge  it  to  be  the  lot  of  human 
nature,  that  all  the  human  faculties  are  liable,  by  acci- 
dental causes,  to  be  hurt  and  unfitted  for  their  natural 
functions,  either  wholly  or  in  part ; but  as  this  imper- 
fection is  common  to  them  aZZ,  it  gives  no  just  ground 
for  accounting  any  one  of  them  fallacious  more  than 
another. 

I add  only  one  observation  to  what  has  been  said 
upon  this  subject.  It  is,  that  there  seems  to  be  a con- 
tradiction between  what  philosophers  teach  concerning 
ideas,  and  their  doctrine  of  the  fallaciousness  of  the 
senses.  We  are  taught  that  the  office  of  the  senses  is 
only  to  give  us  the  ideas  of  external  objects.  If  this 
be,  so,  there  can  be  no  fallacy  in  the  senses.  Ideas  can 
neither  be  true  nor  false.  If  the  senses  testify  nothing, 
they  cannot  give  false  testimony.  If  they  are  not 
judging  faculties,  no  judgment  can  be  imputed  to 
them,  whether  false  or  true.  There  is,  therefore,  a con- 
tradiction between  the  common  doctrine  concerning 
ideas  and  that  of  the  fallaciousness  of  the  senses. 
Both  may  be  false,  as  I believe  they  are,  but  both  can- 
not be  true. 


ESSAY  III. 


OF  MEMORY. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS  OF  THIS  FACULTY. 

L Memory  distinguished  from  Sensation  and  Percep- 
tion.] In  the  gradual  progress  of  man  from -infancy  to 
maturity,  there  is  a certain  order  in  which  his  faculties 
are  unfolded,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  best  order  we 
can  follow  in  treating  of  them.  The  external  senses 
appear  first ; memory  soon  follows,  — which  we  are  now 
to  consider. 

It  is  by  memory  that  we  have  an  immediate  knowl- 
edge of  things  past.*  The  senses  give  us  information 
of  things  only  as  they  exist  in  the  present  moment; 
and  this  information,  if  it  were  not  preserved  by 
memor)^,  would  vanish  instantly,  and  leave  us  as  igno- 
rant as  if  it  had  never  been. 

Every  man  who  remembers  must  remember  some- 
thing, and  that  which  he  remembers  is  called  the  ob- 
ject-of  his  remembrance.  In  this,  me^mory  agrees  with 
perception,  but  differs  from  sensation,  which  has  no 
object  but  the  feeling  itself.  Every  man  can  distin- 
guish the  thing  remembered  from  the  remembrance  of 
it.  We  may  remember  any  thing  which  we  have  seen, 
or  heard,  or  known,  or  done,  or  suffered ; but  the  re- 


* An  immediate  knowledge  of  a past  thing  is  a contradiction.  For  we 
can  only  know  a thing  immediately,  if  we  know  it  in  itself,  or  as  existing  ; 
but  what  is  past  cannot  be  known  in  itself,  for  it  is  non-existent.  In  this 
respect  memory  differs  from  perception.  — H. 


212 


MEMORY. 


membrance  of  it  is  a particular  act  of  the  mind  which 
now  exists,  and  of  which  we  are  conscious.  To  con- 
found these  two  is  an  absurdity,  which  a thinking  man 
could  not  be  led  into,  but  by  some  false  hypothesis 
which  hinders  him  from  reflecting  upon  the  thing  which 
he  would  explain  by  it. 

In  memory  we  do  not  find  such  a train  of  operations 
connected  by  our  constitution  as  in  perception.  When 
we  perceive  an  object  by  our  senses,  there  is,  first,  some 
impression  made  by  the  object  upon  the  organ  of  sense, 
either  immediately  or  by  means  of  some  medium.  By 
this,  an  impression  is  made  upon  the  nerves  and  brain, 
in  consequence  of  which  we  feel  some  sensation,  and 
that  sensation  is  attended  by  that  conception  and  belief 
of  the  external  object  which  we  call  perception.  These 
operations  are  so  connected  in  our  constitution,  that  it 
is  difficult  to  disjoin  them  in  our  conceptions,  and  to 
attend  to  each  without  confounding  it  with  the  others. 
But  in  the  operations  of  memory  we  are  free  from  this 
embarrassment ; they  are  easily  distinguished  from  all 
other  acts  of  the  mind,  and  the  names  which  denote 
them  are  free  from  all  ambiguity.  Again,  the  object 
of  memory,  or  thing  remembered,  must  be  something 
that  is  past;  as  the  object  of  perception  and  of  con- 
sciousness must  be  something  which  is  present.  What 
now  is  cannot  be  an  object  of  memory;  neither  can 
that  which  is  past  and  gone  be  an  object  of  perception 
or  of  consciousness. 

Memory  is  always  accompanied  with  the  belief  of 
that  which  we  remember,  as  perception  is  accompanied 
with  the  belief  of  that  which  we  perceive,  and  con- 
sciousness with  the  belief  of  that  whereof  we  are  con- 
scious. Perhaps  in  infancy,  or  in  a disorder  of  mind, 
things  remembered  may  be  confounded  with  those 
which  are  merely  imagined;  but  in  mature  years,  and 
in  a sound  state  of  mind,  every  man  feels  that  he  must 
believe  what  he  distinctly  remembers,  though  he  can 
give  no  other  reason  of  his  belief,  but  that  he  remem- 
bers the  thing  distinctly ; whereas,  when  he  merely 
imagines  a thing  ever  so  distinctly,  he  has  no  belief  of 
it  upon  that  account. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


213 


This  belief,  which  we  have  from  distinct  memory,  we 
account  real  knowledge,  no  less  certain  than  if  it  was 
grounded  on  demonstration ; no  man  in  his  wits  calls 
it  in  question,  or  will  hear  any  argument  against  it. 
The  testimony  of  witnesses  in  causes  of  life  and  death 
depends  upon  it,  and  all  the  knowledge  of  mankind  of 
past  events  is  built  on  this  foundation.  There  are 
cases  in  which  a man’s  memory  is  less  distinct  and 
determinate,  and  where  he  is  ready  to  allow  that  it 
may  have  failed  him ; but  this  does  not  in  the  least 
weaken  its  credit,  when  it  is  perfectly  distinct. 

Things  remembered  must  be  things  formerly  per- 
ceived or  known.  I remember  the  transit  of  Venus 
over  the  sun  in  the  year  1769.  I must  therefore  have 
perceived  it  at  the  time  it  happened,  otherwise  I could 
not  now  remember  it.  Our  first  acquaintance  with 
any  object  of  thought  cannot  be  by  remembrance. 
Memory  can  only  produce  a continuance  or  renewal  of 
a former  acquaintance  with  the  thing  remembered. 
The  remembrance  of  a past  event  is  necessarily  accom- 
panied with  the  conviction  of  our  own  existence  at  the 
time  the  event  happened.  I cannot  remember  a thing 
that  happened  a year  ago,  without  a conviction  as 
strong  as  memory  can  give,  that  I,  the  same  identical 
person  who  now  remember  that  event,  did  then  exist.* 


* Mr.  James  Mill  thus  analyzes  a fact  of  memory : — “I  remember  to 
have  seen  and  heard  George  the  Third,  when  making  a speech  at  the  open- 
ing of  his  Parliament.  In  this  remembrance  there  is,  first  of  all,  the 
mere  idea,  or  simple  apprehension  — the  conception^  as  it  is  sometimes 
called  — of  the  objects.  There  is  combined  with  this,  to  make  it  memory^ 
my  idea  of  my  having  seen  and  heard  those  objects.  And  this  combina- 
tion is  so  close',  that  it  is  not  in  my  power  to  separate  them.  I cannot  have 
the  idea  of  George  the  Third,  — his  person  and  attitude,  the  paper  he  held, 
in  his  hand,  the  sound  of  his  voice  while  reading  it,  the  throne,  the  apart- 
ment, the  audience,  — without  having  the  other  idea  along  with  it,  that  of 
my  having  been  a witness  of  the  scene. 

“ Now  in  this  last-mentioned  part  of  the  compound,  it  is  easy  to  per- 
ceive two  important  elements  : the  idea  of  my  present  self  the  remembering 
self;  and  the  idea  of  my  past  self  the  remembered  or  witnessing  self. 
These  two  ideas  stand  at  the  two  ends  of  a portion  of  my  being ; that  is, 
of  a series  of  my  states  of  consciousness.  That  series  consists  of  the  suc- 
cessive states  of  my  consciousness  intervening  between  the  moment  of 
perception,  or  the  past  moment,  and  the  moment  of  memory,  or  the  pres- 
ent moment.  What  happens  at  the  moment  of  memory  1 The  mind 


214 


MEMORY. 


IL  Distinction  betiveen  Memory  and  Reminiscence  or 
Recollection.]  Here  it  is  proper  to  take  notice  of  a 
distinction  which  Aristotle  makes  between  memory  and 
reminiscence.^  because  the  distinction  has  a real  founda- 
tion in  nature,  though  in  our  language  I think  we  do 
not  distinguish  them  by  different  names. 

Memory  is  a kind  of  habit  which  is  not  always  in 
exercise  with  regard  to  things  we  remember,  but  is 
ready  to  suggest  them  when  there  is  occasion.  The 
most  perfect  degree  of  this  habit  is,  when  the  thing  pre- 
sents itself  to  our  remembrance  spontaneously and  without 
labor^  as  often  as  there  is  occasion.  A second  degree  is, 
when  the  thing  is  forgotten  for  a longer  or  shorter  time, 
even  when  there  is  occasion  to  remember  it,  yet  at  last 
some  incident  brings  it  to  mind  without  any  search.  A 
third  degree  is,  when  we  cast  about  and  search  for  what 
we  would  remember.^  and  so  at  last  find  it  out.  It  is  this 
last,  I think,  which  Aristotle  calls  reminiscence dis- 
tinguished from  memory. 

Reminiscence^  therefore,  includes  a will  to  recollect 
something  past,  and  a search  for  it.  But  here  a diffi- 
culty occurs.  It  may  be  said,  that  what  we  will  to 
remember  we  must  conceive,  as  there  can  be  no  will 
without  a conception  of  the  thing  willed.  A will  to 
remember  a thing,  therefore,  seems  to  imply  that  we 
remember  it  already,  and  have  no  occasion  to  search 
for  it.  But  this  difficulty  is  easily  removed.  When 
we  will  to  remember  a thing,  we  must  remember  some- 
thing relating  to  it^  which  gives  us  a relative  conception 
of  it ; but  we  may,  at  the  same  time,  have  no  concep- 
tion what  the  thing  is,  but  only  what  relation  it  bears 
to  something  else.  Thus,  I remember  that  a friend 
charged  me  with  a commission  to  be  executed  at  such 
a place ; but  I have  forgotten  what  the  commission 

runs  back  from  that  moment  to  the  moment  of  perception.  That  is  to 
say,  it  runs  over  the  intervening  states  of  consciousness,  called  up  by 
association.  But  to  run  over  a number  of  states  of  consciousness,  called 
up  by  association,  is  but  another  mode  of  saying  that  we  associate  them  ; 
and  in  this  case  we  associate  them  so  rapidly  and  closely,  that  they  run,  as 
it  were,  into  a single  point  of  consciousness,  to  which  the  name  of  memory 
is  assigned.”  Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind^  Chap.  X.  — Ed. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


215 


was.  By  applying  my  thought  to  what  I remember 
concerning  it,  that  it  was  given  by  such  a person,  upon 
such  an  occasion,  in  consequence  of  such  a conversa- 
tion, I am  led,  in  a train  of  thought,  to  the  very  thing 
I had  forgotten,  and  recollect  distinctly  what  the  com- 
mission was. 

Aristotle  says,  that  brutes  have  not  reminiscence,  and 
this  I think  is  probable ; but,  says  he,  they  have  mem- 
ory. It  cannot,  indeed,  be  doubted  but  they  have 
something  very  like  to  it,  and  in  some  instances  in  a 
very  great  degree.  A dog  knows  his  master  after  long 
absence.  A horse  will  trace  back  a road  he  has  once 
gone,  as  accurately  as  a man ; and  this  is  the  more 
strange,  that  the  train  of  thought  which  he  had  in 
going  must  be  reversed  in  his  return.  It  is  very  like  to 
some  prodigious  memories  we  read  of,  where  a person, 
upon  hearing  a hundred  names  or  unconnected  words 
pronounced,  can  begin  at  the  last,  and  go  backwards  to 
the  first,  without  losing  or  misplacing  one.  Brutes  cer- 
tainly may  learn  much  from  experience,  which  seems 
to  imply  memory. 

Yet  I see  no  reason  to  think  that  brutes  measure 
time  as  men  do,  by  days,  months,  or  years,  or  that  they 
have  any  distinct  knowledge  of  the  interval  between 
things  which  they  remember,  or  of  their  distance  from 
the  present  moment.  If  we  could  not  record  transac- 
tions according  to  their  dates,  human  memory  would 
be  something  very  different  from  what  it  is,  and  per- 
haps resemble  more  the  memory  of  brutes. 

III.  Memory  an  Original  and  Ultimate  Ground  of 
Belief]  Memory  is  an  original  faculty,  given  us  by 
the  Author  of  our  being,  of  which  we  can  give  no  ac- 
count, but  that  we  are  so  made.* 

The  knowledge  which  I have  of  things  past  by  my 


* From  this  most  modern  psychologists  dissent.  The  Hartleian  school 
resolve  memory  into  the  association  of  ideas.  Dr.  Brown,  Philosophy  of 
the  Human  Mind,  Lect.  XLI.,  into  “ a particular  suggestion  combined,  with 
a feeling  of  the  relation  of  priority.”  Even  Mr.  Stewart,  Elements,  Part  I. 
Chap.  VII.,  resolves  “the  memory  of  events'^'  into  a conception  and  a 
judgment  — Ed. 


216 


MEMORY. 


memory  seems  to  me  as  unaccountable  as  an  immedi- 
ate knowledge  would  be  of  things  to  come,*  and  I can 
give  no  reason  why  I should  have  the  one  and  not  the 
other,  but  that  such  is  the  will  of  my  Maker.  I find  in 
my  mind  a distinct  conception  and  a firm  belief  of  a 
series  of  past  events ; but  how  this  is  produced  I know 
not.  I call  it  memory,  but  this  is  only  giving  a name 
to  it ; it  is  not  an  account  of  its  cause.  I believe  most 
firmly  what  I distinctly  remember;  but  I can  give  no 
reason  of  this  belief.  It  is  the  inspiration  of  the  Al- 
mighty that  gives  me  this  understanding. 

When  I believe  the  truth  of  a mathematical  axiom, 
or  of  a mathematical  proposition,  I see  that  it  must  be 
so.  Every  man  who  has  the  same  conception  of  it 
sees  the  same.  There  is  a necessary  and  an  evident 
connection  between  the  subject  and  the  predicate  of 
the  proposition  ; and  I have  all  the  evidence  to  support 
my  belief  which  I can  possibly  conceive. 

When  I believe  that  I washed  my  hands  and  face 
this  morning,  there  appears  no  necessity  in  the  truth  of 
this  proposition.  It  might  be,  or  it  might  not  be.  A 
man  may  distinctly  conceive  it  without  believing  it  at 
all.  How,  then,  do  I come  to  believe  it  ? I remember 
it  distinctly.  This  is  all  I can  say.  This  remembrance 
is  an  act  of  my  mind.  Is  it  impossible  that  this  act 
should  be,  if  the  event  had  not  happened  ? I confess  I 
do  not  see  any  necessary  connection  between  the  one 
and  the  other.  If  any  man  can  show  such  a necessary 
connection,  then  I think  that  belief  which  we  have  of 
what  we  remember  will  be  fairly  accounted  for ; but  if 
this  cannot  be  done,  that  belief  is  unaccountable,  and 
we  can  say  no  more  than  that  it  is  the  result  of  our  con- 
stitution. 


* An  immediate  knowledge  of  things  to  come  is  equally  a contradiction 
with  an  immediate  knowledge  of  things  past.  See  note  on  p.  211.  But  if, 
as  Reid  himself  allows,  memory  depends  upon  certain  enduring  affections 
of  the  brain,  determined  by  cognition,  it  seems  a strange  assertion,  on  this 
as  on  other  accounts,  that  the  possibility  of  a knowledge  of  the  future  is 
not  more  inconceivable  than  of  a knowledge  of  the  past.  Maupertuis, 
however,  has  advanced  a similar  doctrine ; and  some,  also,  of  the  advo- 
cates of  animal  magnetism.  — H. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


217 


Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  that  the  experience  we  have 
had  of  the  fidelity  of  memory  is  a good  reason  for  rely- 
ing upon  its  testimony.  I deny  not  that  this  may  be  a 
reason  to  those  who  have  had  this  experience,  and  who 
reflect  upon  it.  But  I believe  there  are  few  who  ever 
thought  of  this  reason,  or  who  found  any  need  of  it. 
It  must  be  some  very  rare  occasion  that  leads  a man  to 
have  recourse  to  it;  and  in  those  who  have  done  so,  the 
testimony  of  memory  was  believed  before  the  experi- 
enee  of  its  fidelity,  and  that  belief  could  not  be  caused 
by  the  experience  which  came  after  it. 

We  know  some  abstract  truths,  by  comparing  the 
terms  of  the  proposition  which  expresses  them,  and 
perceiving  some  necessary  relation  or  agreement  be- 
tween them.  It  is  thus  I know  that  two  and  three 
make  five ; that  the  diameters  of  a circle  are  all  equal. 
Mr.  Locke,  having  discovered  this  source  of  knowledge, 
too  rashly  concluded  that  all  human  knowledge  might 
be  derived  from  it ; and  in  this  .he  has  been  followed 
very  generally,  — by  Mr.  Hume  in  particular.  But  I 
apprehend  that  our  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  things 
contingent  can  never  be  traced  to  this  source.  I know 
that  such  a thing  exists,  or  did  exist.  This  knowledge 
cannot  be  derived  from  the  perception  of  a necessary 
agreement  between  Existence  and  the  thing  that  exists, 
because  there  is  no  such  necessary  agreement ; and 
therefore  no  such  agreement  can  be  perceived  either 
immediately,  or  by  a chain  of  reasoning.  The  thing 
does  not  exist  necessarily,  but  by  the  will  and  power 
of  him  that  made  it ; and  there  is  no  contradiction  fol- 
lows from  supposing  it  not  to  exist.  Whence  I think 
it  follows,  that  our  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  our 
own  thoughts,  of  the  existence  of  all  the  material  ob- 
jects about  us,  and  of  all  past  contingencies,  must  be 
derived,  not  from  a perception  of  necessary  relations  or 
agreements,  but  from  some  other  source. 

Our  Maker  has  provided  other  means  for  giving  us 
the  knowledge  of  these  things,  — means  w^hich  per- 
fectly answer  their  end,  and  produce  the  effect  intended 
by  them.  But  in  what  manner  thev  do  this  is,  I fear, 
19 


218 


MEMORY. 


beyond  our  skill  to  explain.  We  know  our  own 
thoughts,  and  the  operations  of  our  minds,  by  a power 
which  we  call  consciousness : but  this  is  only  giving  a 
name  to  this  part  of  our  frame.  It  does  not  explain 
its  fabric,  nor  how  it  produces  in  us  an  irresistible  con- 
viction of  its  informations.  We  perceive  material 
objects  and  their  sensible  qualities  by  our  senses ; but 
how  they  give  us  this  information,  and  how  they 
produce  our  bebef  in  it,  we  know  not.  We  know 
many  past  events  by  memory;  but  how  it  gives  fhis 
information,  I believe,  is  inexplicable. 

IV.  Physiological  Theories  to  account  for  Memory.] 
The  theory  of  the  Peripatetics  is  expressed  by  Alexan- 
der Aphrodisiensis,  one  of  the  earliest  Greek  commenta- 
tors on  Aristotle,  in  these  words,  as  they  are  translated 
by  Mr.  Harris,  in  his  Hermes  :*  — Now  what  phansy 
or  imagination  is,  we  may  explain  as  follows: — We 
may  conceive  to  be  formed  within  us,  from  the  opera- 
tions of  our  senses  about  sensible  objects,  some  im- 
pression, as  it  were,  or  picture,  in  our  original  sensori- 
um,  being  a-  relic  of  that  motion  caused  within  us  by  the 
external  object;  a relic,  which,  when  the  external  ob- 
ject is  no  longer  present,  remains,  and  is  still  preserved, 
being  as  it  were  its  image,  and  which,  by  being  thus 
preserved,  becomes  the  cause  of  our  having  memory: 
now  such  a sort  of  relict,  and,  as  it  were,  impression, 
they  call  phansy  or  imagination.^^ 

Another  passage  from  Alcinous,  Of  the  Doctrines  of 
Plato.^  Chap.  IV.,  shows  the  agreement  of  the  ancient 
Platonists  and  Peripatetics  in  this  theory : — When 
the  form  or  type  of  things  is  imprinted  on  the  mind  by 
the  organs  of  the  senses,  and  so  imprinted  as  not  to  be 
deleted  by  time,  but  preserved  firm  and  lasting,  its  pres- 
ervation is  called  memory. 

Upon  this  principle  Aristotle  imputes  the  shortness 
of  memory  in  children  to  this  cause,  that  their  brain  is 
too  moist  and  soft  to  retain  impressions  made  upon  it ; 


Book  III.  Chap.  IV. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


219 


and  the  defect  of  memory  in  old  men  he  imputes,  on 
the  contrary,  to  the  hardness  and  rigidity  of  the  brain, 
which  hinders  its  receiving  any  durable  impression.* 
This  ancient  theory  of  the  cause  of  memory  is  de- 
fective in  two  respects: — firsts  if  the  cause  assigned  did 
really  exist,  it  by  no  means  accounts  for  the  phenome- 


* In  this  whole  statement  Reid  is  wrong.  In  the  first  place  Aristotle  did 
not  impute  the  defect  of  memory  in  children  and  old  persons  to  any  con- 
stitution of  the  brain ; for,  in  his  doctrine,  the  hearty  and  not  the  brain,  is 
the  primary  sensorium  in  which  the  impression  is  made.  In  the  second 
place,  the  term  impression  (ruTToy)  is  used  by  Aristotle  in  an  analogical,  not 
in  a literal,  signification.  See  Note  K.  — H. 

For  a full  account  of  Aristotle’s  doctrine  respecting  memory  and  rem- 
iniscence, see  Barth.  St.  Hilaire’s  translation  of  the  Parva  Naturalia^ 
making  the  second  volume  of  his  Psychologic  d'Aristote.  In  the  preface, 
the  translator,  after  reviewing  what  has  been  written  in  modern  times  on 
the  subject  of  memory,  comes  to  this  conclusion  : that  Aristotle  was  the. 
first  who  studied  the  faculty  scientifically,  and  that  his  treatise,  after  the 
lapse  of  twenty-two  centuries,  is  still  the  most  complete  and  the  most 
exact. 

At  the  same  time,  we  are  not  to  suppose  that  physiological  theories  to 
explain  and  account  for  memory  have  never  been  entertained  to  which  the 
strictures  in  the  text  apply.  As,  for  example,  to  “ the  decaying  sense  ” 
of  Hobbes,  Part  1.  Chap.  II.  Malebranche  pushes  his  invention 

still  farther. 

His  words  are : — “ For  the  explanation  of  memory  it  is  necessary  to  re- 
member what  has  been  repeated  so  many  times,  — that  all  our  different 
perceptions  depend  upon  the  changes  that  happen  to  those  fibres  that  are 
in  that  part  of  the  brain  in  which  the  soul  more  particularly  resides. 
This  being  supposed,  the  nature  of  memory  is  explained  ; for  even  as  the 
branches  of  a tree,  which  have  continued  some  time  bent  in  a certain  form, 
still  preserve  an  aptitude  to  be  bent  anew  after  the  same  manner,  so  the 
fibres  of  the  brain,  having  once  received  certain  impressions  by  the  course 
of  the  animal  spirits,  and  by  the  action  of  objects,  retain  a long  time  some 
facility  to  receive  these  same  dispositions.  Now  the  memory  consists  only 
in  this  faculty,  since  we  think  on  the  same  things  when  the  brain  receives 
the  same  impressions.” 

A little  farther  on,  he  thinks  to  explain  how  the  susceptibilities  of  the 
mind  in  this  respect  are  affected  by  age ; — “ The  most  considerable  dif- 
ferences that  are  found  in  a man’s  brain,  during  the  whole  course  of  his 
life,  are  in  infancy,  at  his  full  strength,  and  in  old  age.  The  fibres  of  the 
brain  in  children  are  soft,  flexible,  and  delicate ; a riper  age  dries,  hardens, 
and  strengthens  them ; but  in  old  age  they  become  wholly  inflexible,  gross, 
and  sometimes  mingled  with  superfluous  humors  that  the  feeble  heat  of 
this  age  cannot  dissipate.  For  as  we  see  the  fibres  which  compose  the  flesh 
harden  by  time,  and  that  the  flesh  of  a young  partridge  is  without  dis- 
pute more  tender  than  that  of  an  old  one,  so  the  fibres  of  the  brain  of  a 
child  or  youth  will  be  much  more  soft  and  delicate  than  those  of  persons 
more  advanced  in  years.”  Search  after  Truth,  Book  II.  Chap.  V.  and  VI.; 
where  there  is  more  to  the  same  purpose.  — Ed. 


220 


MEMORY. 


non ; and,  secondly^  there  is  no  evidence,  nor  even 
probability,  that  that  cause  exists. 

It  is  probable,  that  in  perception  some  impression  is 
made  upon  the  brain,  as  well  as  upon  the  organ  and 
nerves,  because  all  the  nerves  terminate  in  the  brain, 
and  because  disorders  and  hurts  of  the  brain  are  found 
to  affect  our  powers  of  perception  when  the  external 
organ  and  nerve  are  sound;  but  we  are  totally  ignorant 
of  the  nature  of  this  impression  upon  the  brain : it  can 
have  no  resemblance  to  the  object  perceived,  nor  does 
it  in  any  degree  account  for  that  sensation  and  percep- 
tion which  are  consequent  upon  it.  These  things  have 
been  argued  in  the  second  Essay,  and  shall  now  be 
taken  for  granted  to  prevent  repetition. 

If  the  impression  upon  the  brain  be  insufficient  to 
account  for  the  perception  of  objects  that  are  present, 
it  can  as  little  account  for  the  memory  of  those  that 
are  past.  So  that  if  it  were  certain  that  the  impres- 
sions made  on  the  brain  in  perception  remain  as  long 
as  there  is  any  memory  of  the  object,  all  that  could  be 
inferred  from  this  is,  that,  by  the  laws  of  nature,  there 
is  a connection  established  between  that  impression 
and  the  remembrance  of  that  object.  But  how  the 
impression  contributes  to  this  remembrance,  we  should 
be  quite  ignorant ; it  being  impossible  to  discover  how 
thought  of  any  kind  should  be  produced  by  an  impres- 
sion on  the  brain  or  upon  any  part  of  the  body. 

To  say  that  this  impression  is  memory  is  absurd,  if 
understood  literally.  If  it  is  only  meant  that  it  is  the 
cause  of  memory,  it  ought  to  be  shown  how  it  produces 
this  effect,  otherwise  memory  remains  as  unaccounta- 
ble as  before.  If  a philosopher  should  undertake  to 
account  for  the  force  of  gunpowder  in  the  discharge  of 
a musket,  and  then  tell  us  gravely  that  the  cause  of 
this  phenomenon  is  the  drawing  of  the  trigger,  we 
should  not  be  much  wiser  by  this  account.  As  little 
are  we  instructed  in  the  cause  of  memory,  by  being 
told  that  it  is  caused  by  a certain  impression  on  the 
brain.  For,  supposing  that  impression  on  the  brain 
were  as  necessary  to  memory  as  the  drawing  of  the 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


221 


trigger  is  to  the  discharge  of  the  musket,  we  are  still  as 
ignorant  as  we  were  how  memory  is  produced ; so  that 
if  the  cause  of  memory  assigned  by  this  theory  did 
really  exist,  it  does  not  in  any  degree  account  for 
memory. 

Another  defect  in  this  theory  is,  that  there  is  no  evi- 
dence nor  probability  that  the  cause  assigned  does 
exist;  that  is,  that  the  impression  made  upon  the 
brain  in  perception  remains  after  the  object  is  removed. 

That  impression,  whatever  be  its  nature,  is  caused 
by  the  impression  made  by  the  object  upon  the  organ 
of  sense  and  upon  the  nerve.  Philosophers  suppose, 
without  any  evidence,  that  when  the  object  is  removed, 
and  the  impression  upon  the  organ  and  nerve  ceases, 
the  impression  upon  the  brain  continues  and  is  perma- 
nent; that  is,  that  when  the  cause  is  removed,  the 
eflbct  continues.  The  brain  surely  does  not  appear 
more  fitted  to  retain  an  impression  than  the  organ  and 
nerve.  But  granting  that  the  impression  upon  the 
brain  continues  after  its  cause  is  removed,  its  effects 
ought  to  continue  while  it  continues  ; that  is,  the  sen- 
sation and  perception  should  be  as  permanent  as  the 
impression  upon  the  brain  which  is  supposed  to  be 
their  cause.  But  here  again  the  philosopher  makes  a 
second  supposition,  with  as  little  evidence,  but  of  a 
contrary  nature,  — to  wit,  that  ivhile  the  cause  remains,^ 
the  effect  ceases.  If  this  should  be  granted  also,  a third 
must  be  made,  — that  the  same  cause,,  which  at  first 
produced  sensation  and  perception,  does  afterwards 
produce  memory,  — an  operation  essentially  different 
both  from  sensation  and  perception.  Again,  a fourth 
supposition  must  be  made,  — that  this  cause,  though  it 
be  permanent,  does  not  produce  its  effect  at  all  times ; 
it  must  be  like  an  inscription  which  is  sometimes 
covered  with  rubbish,  and  on  other  occasions  made 
legible  : for  the  memory  of  things  is  often  interrupted 
for  a long  time,  and  circumstances  bring  to  our  recol- 
lection what  has  been  long  forgot.  After  all,  many 
things  are  remembered  which  were  never  perceived  by 
the  senses,,  being  no  objects  of  sense,  and,  therefore, 
19* 


222 


MEMORY. 


which  could  make  no  impression  upon  the  brain  by 
means  of  the  senses. 

Thus,  when  philosophers  have  piled  one  supposition 
upon  another,  as  the  giants  piled  the  mountains  in  ^ 
order  to  scale  the  heavens,  all  is  to  no  purpose,  mem- 
ory remains  unaccountable ; and  we  know  as  little  how 
we  remember  things  past  as  how  we  are  conscious  of 
the  present. 

But  here  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  'although  im- 
pressions upon  the  brain  give  no  aid  in  accounting  for 
memory,  yet  it  is  very  probable,  that,  in  the  human 
frame,  memory  is  dependent  on  some  proper  state  or 
temperament  of  the  brain. 

Although  the  furniture  of  our  memory  bears  no  re- 
semblance to  any  temperament  of  brain  whatsoever,  as, 
indeed,  it  is  impossible  it  should,  yet  nature  may  have 
subjected  us  to  this  law,  that  a certain  constitution  or 
state  of  the  brain  is  necessary  to  memory.  That  this 
is  really  the  case,  many  well-known  facts  lead  us  to 
conclude.  It  is  possible,  that,  by  accurate  observation, 
the  proper  means  may  be  discovered  of  preserving  that 
temperament  of  the  brain  which  is  favorable  to  mem- 
ory, and  of  remedying  the  disorders  of  that  tempera- 
ment. This  would  be  a very  noble  improvement  of  the 
medical  art.  But  if  it  should  ever  be  attained,  it  would 
give  no  aid  to  understand  how  one  state  of  the  brain 
assists  memory,  and  another  hurts  it. 

I know  certainly  that  the  impression  made  upon  my 
hand  by  the  prick  of  a pin  occasions  acute  pain.  But 
can  any  philosopher  show  how  this  cause  produces  the 
effect?  The  nature  of  the  impression  is  here  perfectly 
known ; but  it  gives  no  help  to  understand  how  that 
impression  affects  the  mind ; and  if  we  know  as  dis- 
tinctly that  state  of  the  brain  which  causes  memory, 
we  should  still  be  as  ignorant  as  before  how^  that  state 
contributes  to  memory.  We  might  have  been  so  con- 
stituted, for  any  thing  that  I know,  that  the  prick  of  a 
pin  in  the  hand,  instead  of  causing  pain,  should  cause 
remembrance ; nor  would  that  constitution  be  more 
unaccountable  than  the  present.  The  body  and  mind 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


223 


operate  on  each  other,  according  to  fixed  laws  of  nature ; 
and  it  is  the  business  of  a philosopher  to  discover  those 
laws  by  observation  and  experiment.  But  when  he 
' has  discovered  them,  he  must  rest  in  them  as  facts 
whose  cause  is  inscrutable  to  the  human  understand- 
ing.^ 


One  of  the  most  instructive  cases  of  the  influence  of  the  state  of  the 
body,  or  more  particularly  of  the  nervous  system,  on  the  memory,  is  re- 
lated by  Coleridge  in  his  Biographia  Literaria,  Chap.  VI.,  which  we  shall 
give  in  his  own  words  : — “A  case  of  this  kind  occurred  in  a Catholic 
town  in  Germany,  a year  or  two  before  my  arrival  at  Gottingen,  and  had 
not  then  ceased  to  be  a frequent  subject  of  conversation.  A young  woman 
of  four  or  five  and  twenty,  who  could  neither  read  nor  write,  was  seized 
with  a nervous  fever;  during  which,  according  to  the  asseverations  of  all 
the  priests  and  monks  of  the  neighbourhood,  she  became  possessed^  and,  as 
it  appeared,  by  a learned  devil.  She  continued  incessantly  talking  Latin, 
Greek,  and  Hebrew,  in  very  pompous  tones,  and  with  most  distinct  enun- 
ciation. This  possession  was  rendered  most  probable  by  the  known  fact 
that  she  was,  or  had  been,  a heretic.  Voltaire  humorously  advises  the 
Devil  to  decline  all  acquaintance  with  medical  men ; and  it  would  have 
been  more  to  his  reputation  if  he  had  taken  this  advice  in  the  present  in- 
stance. The  case  had  attracted  the  particular  attention  of  a young  phy- 
sician, and,  led  by  his  statement,  many  eminent  physiologists  and  psycholo- 
gists visited  the  town,  and  cross-examined  the  case  on  the  spot.  Sheets  full 
of  her  ravings  were  taken  down  from  her  own  mouth,  and  were  found  to 
consist  of  sentences  coherent  and  intelligible  each  for  itself,  but  with  little 
or  no  connection  with  each  other.  Of  the  Hebrew,  a small  portion  only 
could  be  traced  to  the  Bible ; the  remainder  seemed  to  be  in  the  rabbinical 
dialect.  All  trick  or  conspiracy  was  out  of  the  question.  Not  only  had 
the  young  woman  ever  been  a harmless  simple  creature,  but  she  was  evi- 
dently laboring  under  a nervous  fever.  In  the  town  in  which  she  had  been 
resident  for  many  years,  as  a servant  in  different  families,  no  solution  pre- 
sented itself.  The  young  physician,  however,  determined  to  trace  her  past 
life  step  by  step ; for  the  patient  herself  was  incapable  of  returning  a 
rational  answer.  He,  at  length,  succeeded  in  discovering  the  place  where 
her  parents  had  lived ; travelled  thither,  found  them  dead,  but  an  uncle 
surviving ; and  from  him  learnt  that  the  patient  had  been  charitably  taken 
by  an  old  Protestant  pastor  at  nine  years  old,  and  had  remained  with  him 
some  years,  even  till  the  old  man’s  death.  Of  this  pastor  the  uncle  knew 
nothing,  but  that  he  was  a very  good  man.  With  great  difficulty,  and 
after  much  search,  our  young  medical  philosopher  discovered  a niece  of 
the  pastor’s,  who  had  lived  with  him  as  his  housekeeper,  and  had  inherited 
his  effects.  She  remembered  the  girl;  related,  that  her  venerable  uncle 
had  been  too  indulgent,  and  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  girl  scolded ; that 
she  was  willing  to  have  kept  her,  but  that,  after  her  patron’s  death,  the  girl 
herself  refused  to  stay.  Anxious  inquiries  were  then,  of  course,  made  con- 
cerning the  pastor’s  habits,  and  the  solution  of  the  phenomenon  was  soon 
obtained.  For  it  appeared,  that  it  had  been  the  old  man’s  custom  for  years 
to  walk  up  and  down  a passage  of  his  house,  into  which  the  kitchen  door 
opened,  and  to  read  to  himself,  with  a loud  voice,  out  of  his  favorite  books. 
A considerable  number  of  these  were  still  in  the  niece’s  possession.  She 


224 


MEMORY. 


V.  Hunters  Viein  of  Memory.]  Mr.  Hume  saw  far- 
ther into  the  consequences  of  the  common  system  con- 
cerning ideas^  than  any  author  had  done  before  him. 
He  saw  the  absurdity  of  making  every  object  of  thought 
double,  and  splitting  it  into  a remote  object,  which  has 
a separate  and  permanent  existence,  and  an  immediate 
object,  called  an  idea.^  or  impression.^  which  is  an  image 
of  the  former,  and  has  no  existence  but  when  we  are 
conscious  of  it.  According  to  this  system,  we  have 
no  intercourse  with  the  external  world  but  by  means  of 
the  internal  world  of  ideas,  which  represents  the  other 
to  the  mind. 

He  saw  it  was  necessary  to  reject  one  of  these  worlds 
as  a fiction,  and  the  question  was,  which  should  be  re- 
jected;— whether  all  mankind,  learned  and  unlearned, 
had  feigned  the  existence  of  the  external  world  without 
good  reason,  or  whether  philosophers  had  feigned  the 
internal  world  of  ideas,  in  order  to  account  for  the  in- 
tercourse of  the  mind  with  the  external.  Mr.  Hume 
adopted  the  first  of  these  opinions,  and  employed  his 
reason  and  eloquence  in  support  of  it. 

According  to  his  system,  therefore,  impressions  and 


added  that  he  was  a very  learned  man,  and  a great  Hebraist.  Among  the 
books  were  found  a collection  of  rabbinical  writings,  together  with  several 
of  the  Greek  and  Latin  fathers  ; and  the  physician  succeeded  in  identify- 
ing so  many  passages  with  those  taken  down  at  the  young  woman’s  bed- 
side, that  no  doubt  could  remain  in  any  rational  mind  concerning  the  true 
origin  of  the  impressions  made  on  her  nervous  system.” 

From  the  foregoing  the  author  deduces  an  important  and  startling  infer- 
ence ; — “ This  authenticated  case  furnishes  both  proof  and  instance  that 
relics  of  sensation  may  exist,  for  an  indefinite  time,  in  a latent  state,  in  the 
very  same  order  in  which  they  were  originally  impressed ; and  as  we  can- 
not rationally  suppose  the  feverish  state  of  the  brain  to  act  in  any  other 
way  than  as  a stimulus,  this  fact  (and  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  adduce 
several  of  the  same  kind)  contributes  to  make  it  even  probable  that  all 
thoughts  are  in  themselves  imperishable  ; and  that  if  the  intelligent  faculty 
should  be  rendered  more  comprehensive,  it  would  require  only  a difterent 
and  apportioned  organization,  — the  body  celestial  instead  of  the  body  terres- 
trial,  — to  bring  before  every  human  soul  the  collective  experience  of  its  whole 
past  existence.  And  this,  — this,  perchance,  is  the  dread  book  of  judgment, 
in  whose  mysterious  hieroglyphics  every  idle  word  is  recorded  ! ” 

I would  add  that  Dr.  Abercrombie,  in  his  Inquiries  concerning  the  Intd- 
lectual  Powers,  is  naturally  led  by  his  professional  experience  to  dwell  more 
than  is  usual  with  psychologists  on  memory  as  affected  by  peculiar  states 
of  the  organization.  — Ed. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS. 


225 


ideas  in  his  own  mind  are  the  only  things  a man  can 
know,  or  can  conceive.  Nor  are  these  ideas  representa- 
tives^  as  they  were  in  the  old  system.  There  is  nothing 
else  in  nature,  or  at  least  within  the  reach  of  our  facul- 
ties, to  be  represented.  What  the  vulgar  call  the  per- 
ception of  an  external  object,  is  nothing  but  a strong 
impression  upon  the  mind.  What  we  call  the  remem- 
brance of  a past  event,  is  nothing  but  a present  impres- 
sion or  idea,  weaker  than  the  former.  And  what  we 
call  imagination  is  still  a present  idea,  but  weaker  than 
that  of  memory. 

That  I may  not  do  him  injustice,  these  are  his  words 
in  his  Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  Book  I.  Part  I.  Sect. 
III. : — We  find  by  experience,  that,  when  any  impres- 
sion has  been  present  with  the  mind,  it  again  makes  its 
appearance  there  as  an  idea ; and  this  it  may  do  after 
two  different  ways : either  when  in  its  new  appearance 
it  retains  a considerable  degree  of  its  first  vivacity,  and 
is  somewhat  intermediate  betwixt  an  impression  and 
an  idea ; or  when  it  entirely  loses  that  vivacity,  and  is 
a perfect  idea.  The  faculty  by  which  we  repeat  our 
impressions  in  the  first  manner  is  called  the  memory^ 
and  the  other  the  imagination^ 

Upon  this  account  of  memory  and  imagination,  1 
shall  make  some  remarks. 

Firsts  I wish  to  know  what  we  are  here  to  under- 
stand by  experience.  It  is  said,  we  find  all  this  by  ex- 
perience ; and  I conceive  nothing  can  be  meant  by  this 
experience  but  memory.  Not  that  memory  which  our 
author  defines,  but  memory  in  the  common  acceptation 
of  the  word.  He  maintains  that  memory  is  nothing 
but  a present  idea  or  impression.  But,  in  defining 
what  he  takes  memory  to  be,  he  takes  for  granted  that 
kind  of  memory  which  he  rejects.  For  can  we  find  by 
experience,  that  an  impression,  after  its  first  appearance 
to  the  mind,  makes  a second,  and  a third,  with  different 
degrees  of  strength  and  vivacity,  if  we  have  not  so 
distinct  a remembrance  of  its  first  appearance  as  en- 
ables us  to  know  it  upon  its  second  and  third,  notwith- 
standing that,  in  the  interval,  it  has  undergone  a very 


226 


MEMORY. 


considerable  change  ? All  experience  supposes  mem- 
ory ; and  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  experience, 
without  trusting  to  our  own  memory,  or  that  of  others  : 
so  that  it  appears  from  Mr.  Hume’s  account  of  this 
matter,  that  he  found  himself  to  have  that  kind  of 
memory  which  he  acknowledges  and  defines,  by  exer- 
cising that  kind  which  he  rejects. 

Secondly^  What  is  it  we  find  by  experience  or  mem- 
ory ? It  is,  that,  when  an  impression  has  been  present 
with  the  mind,  it  again  makes  its  appearance  there  as 
an  idea,  and  that  after  two  different  ways.” 

If  experience  informs  us  of  this,  it  certainly  deceives 
us  ; for  the  thing  is  impossible,  and  the  author  shows 
it  to  be  so.  Impressions  and  ideas  are  fleeting,  perish- 
able things,  which  have  no  existence  but  when  we  are 
conscious  of  them.  If  an  impression  could  make  a 
second  and  a third  appearance  to  the  mind,  it  must 
have  a continued  existence  during  the  interval  of  these 
appearances,  which  Mr.  Hume  acknowledges  to  be  a 
gross  absurdity.  It  seems,  then,  that  we  find,  by  ex- 
perience, a thing  which  is  impossible.  We  are  imposed 
upon  by  our  experience,  and  made  to  believe  contradic- 
tions. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  said,  that  these  different  appear- 
ances of  the  impression  are  not  to  be  understood  liter- 
ally, but  figuratively ; that  the  impression  is  personified, 
and  made  to  appear  at  different  times,  and  in  different 
habits,  when  no  more  is  meant  but  that  an  impression 
appears  at  one  time ; afterwards  a thing  of  a middle 
nature,  between  an  impression  and  an  idea,  which  we 
call  memory ; and  last  of  all  a perfect  idea,  which  we 
call  imagination  : that  this  figurative  meaning  agrees 
best  with  the  last  sentence  of  the  period,  where  we  are 
told  that  memory  and  imagination  are  faculties,  where- 
by we  repeat  our  impressions  in  a more  or  less  lively 
manner.  To  repeat  an  impression  is  a figurative  way 
of  speaking,  which  signifies  making  a new  impression 
similar  to  the  former. 

If,  to  avoid  the  absurdity  implied  in  the  literal  mean- 
ing, we  understand  the  philosopher  in  this  figurative 


ITS  NATURE  AND  FUNCTIONS.  227 

one,  then  his  definitions  of  memory  and  imagination, 
when  stripped  of  the  figurative  dress,  will  amount  to 
this,  — that  memory  is  the  faculty  of  making  a weak 
impression,  and  imagination  the  faculty  of  making  an 
impression  still  weaker,  after  a corresponding  strong 
one.  These  definitions  of  memory  and  imagination 
labor  under  two  defects : firsts  that  they  convey  no  no- 
tion of  the  thing  defined ; and,  secondly^  that  they  may 
be  applied  to  things  of  a quite  different  nature  from 
those  that  are  defined. 

When  we  are  said  to  have  a faculty  of  making  a 
weak  impression  after  a corresponding  strong  one,  it 
would  not  be  easy  to  conjecture  that  this  faculty  is 
memory.  Suppose  a man  strikes  his  head  smartly 
against  the  wall,  this  is  an  impression ; now  he  has  a 
faculty  by  which  he  can  repeat  this  impression  with  less 
force,  so  as  not  to  hurt  him ; this,  by  Mr.  Hume’s  ac- 
count, must  bq  memory.  He  has  a faculty  by  which 
he  can  just  touch  the  wall  with  his  head,  so  that  the 
impression  entirely  loses  its  vivacity.  This  surely  must 
be  imagination ; at  least  it  comes  as  near  to  the  defi- 
nition given  of  it  by  Mr.  Hume  as  any  thing  I can  con- 
ceive. 

Thirdly^  We  may  observe,  that,  when  we  are  told 
that  we  have  a faculty  of  repeating  our  impressions  in 
a more  or  less  lively  manner,  this  implies  that  ive  are 
the  efficient  causes  of  our  ideas  of  memory  and  imagi- 
nation ; but  this  contradicts  what  the  author  says  a 
little  before,  where  he  proves,  by  what  he  calls  a con- 
vincing argument,  that  impressions  are  the  cause  of 
their  corresponding  ideas.  The  argument  that  proves 
this  had  need,  indeed,  to  be  very  convincing,  whether 
we  make  the  idea  to  be  a second  appearance  of  the  im- 
pression, or  a new  impression  similar  to  the  former.  If 
the  first  be  true,  then  the  impression  is  the  cause  of 
itself.  If  the  second,  then  the  impression  after  it  has 
gone,  and  has  no  existence,  produces  the  idea.* 


* To  the  works  already  cited  as  treating  of  memory,  we  may  add  Wolf’s 
Psychologia  Empirica,  Part  I.  Sect.  II.  Chap.  V. ) Beattie’s  Dissertations 


228 


MEMORY. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  NATUEE  AND  OEIGIN  OF  OUR  NOTION  OF 
DURATION. 

I.  Our  Notions  of  Duration^  Extension^  and  Number.] 
From  the  principles  laid  down  in  the  preceding  chap- 
ter, I think  it  appears  that  our  notion  of  duration,  as 
well  as  our  belief  of  it,  is  got  by  the  faculty  of  mem- 
ory. It  is  essential  to  every  thing  remembered  that  it 
be  something  which  is  past ; and  we  cannot  conceive  a 
thing  to  be  past,  without  conceiving  some  duration, 
more  or  less,  between  it  and  the  present.  As  soon, 
therefore,  as  we  remember  any  thing,  we  must  have 
both  a notion  and  a belief  of  duration.  It  is  necessa- 
rily suggested  by  every  operation  of  our  memory ; and 
to  that  faculty  it  ought  to  be  ascribed.  This  is  there- 
fore a proper  place  to  consider  what  is  known  concern- 
ing it. 

Duration^  extension.,  and  number  are  the  measures  of 
all  things  subject  to  mensuration.  When  we  apply 
them  to  finite  things  which  are  measured  by  them,. they 
seem  of  all  things  to  be  the  most  distinctly  conceived, 
and  most  within  the  reach  of  human  understanding. 

Extension,  having  three  dimensions,  has  an  endless 
variety  of  modifications,  capable  of  being  accurately 
defined ; and  their  various  relations  furnish  the  human 
mind  with  its  most  ample  field  of  demonstrative  rea- 
soning. Duration,  having  only  one  dimension,  has 
fewer  modifications  ; but  these  are  clearly  understood  ; 
and  their  relations  admit  of  measure,  proportion,  and 
demonstrative  reasoning. 

Number  is  called  discrete  quantity,  because  it  is  com- 
pounded of  units,  which  are  all  equal  and  similar,  and 


Moral  and  Critical^  the  first  being  Of  Memory  and  Imagination ; Stewart’s 
Elements^  who  has  given  a long  chapter  to  this  subject ; and  Feinagle’s 
New  Art  of  Memory^  to  which  is  prefixed  some  account  of  the  principal 
systems  of  Artificial  Memory.  — Ed. 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


229 


it  can  only  be  divided  into  units.  This  is  true,  in  some 
sense,  even  of  fractions  of  unity,  to  which  we  now 
commonly  give  the  name  of  number.  For  in  every 
fractional  number  the  unit  is  supposed  to  be  subdivided 
into  a certain  number  of  equal  parts,  which  are  the 
units  of  that  denomination,  and  the  fractions  of  that 
denomination  are  only  divisible  into  units  of  the  same 
denomination.  Duration  and  extension  are  not  dis- 
crete, but  continued  quantity.  They  consist  of  parts 
perfectly  similar,  but  divisible  without  end. 

In  order  to  aid  our  conception  of  the  magnitude  and 
proportions  of  the  various  intervals  of  duration,  we 
find  it  necessary  to  give  a name  to  some  known  portion 
of  it,  such  as  an  hour,^  a day,,  a year.  These  we  con- 
sider as  units,  and  by  the  number  of  them  contained  in 
a larger  interval,  we  form  a distinct  conception  of  its 
magnitude.  A similar  expedient  we  find  necessary  to 
give  us  a distinct  conception  of  the  magnitudes  and 
proportions  of  things  extended.  Thus,  number  is  found 
necessary,  as  a common  measure  of  extension  and  du- 
ration. But  this,  perhaps,  is  owing  to  the  weakness  of 
our  understanding.  It  has  even  been  discovered  by  the 
sagacity  of  mathematicians,  that  this  expedient  does 
not  in  all  cases  answer  its  intention.  For  there  are 
proportions  of  continued  quantity,  which  cannot  be 
perfectly  expressed  by  numbers ; such  as  that  be- 
tween the  diagonal  and  side  of  a square,  and  many 
others. 

The  parts  of  duration  have  to  other  parts  of  it  the 
relations  of  prior  and  posterior,  and  to  the  present  they 
have  the  relations  of  past  and  future.  The  notion  of 
past  is  immediately  suggested  by  memory,  as  has  been 
before  observed.  And  when  we  have  got  the  notions 
of  present  and  past,  and  of  prior  and  posterior,  we  can 
from  these  frame  a notion  of  the  future  ; for  the  future 
is  that  which  is  posterior  to  the  present.  Nearness  and 
distance  are  relations  equally  applicable  to  time  and  to 
place.  Distance  in  time,  and  distance  in  place,  are 
things  so  different  in  their  nature,  and  so  like  in  their 
relation,  that  it  is  difficult  to  determine  whether  the 
20 


230 


MEMORY. 


name  of  distance  is  applied  to  both  in  the  same  or  an 
analogical  sense. 

The  extension  of  bodies,  which  we  perceive  by  our 
senses,  leads  us  necessarily  to  the  conception  and  belief 
of  a space  which  remains  immovable  when  the  body 
is  removed.  And  the  duration  of  events  which  we  re- 
member leads  us  necessarily  to  the  conception  and  be- 
lief of  a duration,  which  would  have  gone  on  uniformly, 
though  the  event  had  never  happened.*  Without  space 
there  can  be  nothing  that  is  extended.  And  without 
time  there  can  be  nothing  that  has  duration.  This  I 
think  undeniable.  And  yet  we  find  that  extension  and 
duration  are  not  more  clear  and  intelligible  than  space 
and  time  are  dark  and  difficult  objects  of  contempla- 
tion. 

As  there  must  be  space  wherever  any  thing  extended 
does  or  can  exist,  and  time  when  there  is  or  can  be  any 
thing  that  has  duration,  we  can  set  no  bounds  to  either, 
even  in  our  imagination.  They  defy  all  limitation. 
The  one  swells  in  our  conception  to  immensity^  the 
other  eternity. 


* If  space  and  time  be  necessary  generalizations  from  experience,  this  is 
contrary  to  Reid’s  own  doctrine,  that  experience  can  give  us  no  necessary 
knowledge.  If,  again,  they  be  necessary  and  original  notions,  the  account  of 
their  origin  here  given  is  incorrect.  It  should  have  been  said  that  experi- 
ence is  not  the  source  of  their  existence,  but  only  the  occasion  of  their  man- 
ifestation. On  this  subject,  see,  instar  omnium,  Cousin  on  Locke,  in  his 
Coiirs  de  Philosophic,  Tome  II.  Lemons  XVII.,  XYIII.  This  admirable 
work  has  been  well  translated  into  English  by  an  American  philosopher, 
Mr.  Henry ; but  the  eloquence  and  precision  of  the  author  can  only  be 
properly  appreciated  by  those  who  study  the  work  in  the  original  language. 
The  reader  may,  however,  consult  likewise  Stewart’s  Philosophical  Essays, 
Essay  II.  Chap.  II. ; and  Royer-Collard’s  Fragments,  IX.  and  X.  These 
authors,  from  their  more  limited  acquaintance  with  the  speculations  of  the 
German  philosophers,  are,  however,  less  on  a level  with  the  problem.  — H. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Reid  held  space  and  time  to  be  necessary 
and  original  notions.”  His  language  may  sometimes  be  inexact;  but  we 
are  not  aware  that  he  ever  makes  experience  “ the  source  ” of  our  notion 
of  time ; when  he  speaks  of  experience  as  necessary  to  our  having  this 
notion,  he  has  in  view  the  chronological,  and  not  the  logical,  order  of  our 
knowledge.  Farther  on  he  says  more  explicitly,  — “I  know  of  no  ideas 
or  notions  that  have  a better  claim  to  be  accounted  simple  and  original,  than 
those  of  space  and  fme.”  And,  again,  he  says  of  time,  — “ As  it  is  one  of 
the  simplest  objects  of  thought,  the  conception  of  it  must  be  purely  the  effect 
of  our  constitution,  and  given  us  by  some  original  power  of  the  mind.”  — Ed. 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


231 


An  eternity  past  is  an  object  which  we  cannot  com- 
prehend; but  a beginning  of  time,  unless  w’^e  take  it  in 
a figurative  sense,  is  a contradiction.  By  a common 
figure  of  speech,  we  give  the  name  of  time  to  those 
motions  and  revolutions  by  which  we  measure  it,  such 
as  days  and  years.  We  can  conceive  a beginning  of 
these  sensible  measures  of  time,  and  say  that  there  was 
a time  when  they  were  not,  a time  undistinguished  by 
any  motion  or  change ; but  to  say  that  there  was  a 
time  before  all  time  is  a contradiction. 

All  limited  duration  is  comprehended  in  time,  and 
all  limited  extension  in  space.  These,  in  their  capa- 
cious womb,  contain  all  finite  existences,  but  are  con- 
tained by  none.  Created  things  have  their  particular 
place  in  space,  and  their  particular  place  in  time  ; but 
time  is  everywhere^  and  space  at  all  times.  They  em- 
brace each  the  other,  and  have  that  mysterious  union 
which  the  schoolmen  conceive  between  soul  and  body. 
The  whole  of  each  is  in  every  part  of  the  other. 

We  are  at  a loss  to  what  category.^  or  class  of  things, 
we  ought  to  refer  them.  They  are  not  beings,  but 
rather  the  receptacles  of  every  created  being,  without 
which  it  could  not  have  had  the  possibility  of  existence. 
Philosophers  have  endeavoured  to  reduce  all  the  ob- 
jects of  human  thought  to  these  three  classes,  sub- 
stances^ modes^  and  relations.  To  which  of  them  shall 
we  refer  time,  space,  and  number,  the  most  common 
objects  of  thought  ? 

Sir  Isaac  Newton  thought  that  the  Deity,  by  existing 
everywhere,  and  at  all  times,  constitutes  time  and  space, 
immensity  and  eternity.  This  probably  suggested  to 
his  great  friend.  Dr.  Clarke,  what  he  calls  the  argument 
a priori  for  the  existence  of  an  immense  and  eternal 
Being.  Space  and  time,  he  thought,  are  only  abstract 
or  partial  conceptions  of  an  immensity  and  eternity 
which  force  themselves  upon  our  belief.  And  as  im- 
mensity and  eternity  are  not  substances,  they  must  be 
the  attributes  of  a Being  who  is  necessarily  immense 
and  eternal.  These  are  the  speculations  of  men  of 
superior  genius.  But  whether  they  be  as  solid  as  they 


232 


MEMORY. 


are  sublime,  or  whether  they  be  the  wanderings  of  im- 
agination in  a region  beyond  the  limits  of  human 
understanding,  I am  unable  to  determine. 

The  schoolmen  made  eternity  to  be  a nunc  stans^  — 
that  is,  a moment  of  time  that  stands  still.  This  was 
to  put  a spoke  into  the  wheel  of  time,  and  might  give 
satisfaction  to  those  who  are  to  be  satisfied  by  words 
without  meaning.  But  I can  as  easily  believe  a circle 
to  be  a square,  as  time  to  stand  still. 

Such  paradoxes  and  riddles,  if  I may  so  call  them, 
men  are  involuntarily  led  into  when  they  reason  about 
time  and  space,  and  attempt  to  comprehend  their  na- 
ture. They  are  probably  things  of  which  the  human 
faculties  give  an  imperfect  and  inadequate  conception. 
Hence  difficulties  arise  which  we  in  vain  attempt  to 
overcome,  and  doubts  which  we  are  unable  to  resolve. 
Perhaps  some  faculty  which  we  possess  not  is  necessa- 
ry to  remove  the  darkness  which  hangs  over  them,  and 
makes  us  so  apt  to  bewilder  ourselves  when  we  reason 
about  them. 

II.  Lockers  Account  of  the  Origin  of  Ideas.]  It  was 
a very  laudable  attempt  of  Mr.  Locke  “ to  inquire  into 
the  original  of  those  ideas,  notions,  or  whatever  else 
you  please  to  call  them,  which  a man  observes,  and  is 
conscious  to  himself  he  has  in  his  mind,  and  the  ways 
whereby  the  understanding  comes  to  be  furnished  with 
them.”  No  man  was  better  qualified  for  this  investiga- 
tion ; and  I believe  no  man  ever  engaged  in  it  with  a 
more  sincere  love  of  truth.  His  success,  though  great, 
would,  I apprehend,  have  been  greater,  if  he  had  not 
too  early  formed  a system  or  hypothesis  upon  this  sub- 
ject, without  aU  the  caution  and  patient  induction 
which  are  necessary  in  drawing  general  conclusions 
from  facts. 

The  sum  of  his  doctrine  I take  to  be  this : — That 
all  our  ideas  or  notions  may  be  reduced  to  two  classes, 
the  simple  and  the  complex  ; that  the  simple  are  purely 
the  work  of  nature,  the  understanding  being  merely 
passive  in  receiving  them,  that  they  are  all  suggested  by 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


233 


two  powers  of  the  mind,  — to  wit,  sensation  and  reflec- 
tion^— and  that  they  are  the  materials  of  all  our  knowl- 
edge; that  the  other  class,  consisting  of  complex  ideas, 
are  formed  by  the  understanding  itself,  which,  being 
once  stored  with  simple  ideas  of  sensation  and  reflec- 
tion, has  the  power  to  repeat,  to  compare,  and  to  com- 
bine them  even  to  an  almost  infinite  variety,  and  so 
can  make  at  pleasure  new  complex  ideas ; but  that  it 
is  not  in  the  power  of  the  most  exalted  wit,  or  enlarged 
understanding,  by  any  quickness  or  variety  of  thought, 
to  invent  or  frame  one  new  simple  idea  in  the  mind, 
not  taken  in  by  the  two  ways  before  mentioned.  As 
our  power  over  the  material  world  reaches  only  to  the 
compounding,  dividing,  and  putting  together,  in  vari- 
ous forms,  the  matter  which  God  has  made,  but  reach- 
es not  to  the  production  or  annihilation  of  a single 
atom,  so  we  may  compound,  compare,  and  abstract  the 
original  and  simple  ideas  which  nature  has  given  us, 
but  are  unable  to  fashion  in  our  understanding  any 
simple  idea,  not  received  in  by  our  senses  from  exter- 
nal objects,  or  by  reflection  from  the  operations  of  our 
own  mind  about  them. 

Mr.  Locke  says,  that  by  reflection  he  would  be  un- 
derstood to  mean  ‘‘  the  notice  which  the  mind  takes  of 
its  own  operations,  and  the  manner  of  them.”  This, 
I think,  we  commonly  call  consciousness ; from  which, 
indeed,  we  derive  all  the  notions  we  have  of  the  opera- 
tions of  our  own  minds  ; and  he  often  speaks  of  the 
operations  of  our  own  minds  as  the  only  objects  of 
reflection.  When  reflection  is  taken  in  this  confined 
sense,  to  say  that  all  our  ideas  are  ideas  either  of  sen- 
sation or  reflection  is  to  say  that  every  thing  we  can 
conceive  is  either  some  object  of  sense,  or  some  opera- 
tion of  our  own  minds ; which  is  far  from  being  true. 

But  the  word  reflection  is  commonly  used  in  a much 
more  extensive  sense ; it  is  applied  to  many  operations 
of  the  mind  with  more  propriety  than  to  that  of  con- 
sciousness. We  reflect,  when  we  remember  or  call  to 
mind  what  is  past,  and  survey  it  with  attention.  We 
reflect,  when  we  define,  when  we  distinguish,  when 
20^ 


234 


MEMORY. 


we  judge,  when  we  reason,  whether  about  things  ma- 
terial or  intellectual.  When  reflection  is  taken  in  this 
sense,  which  is  more  common,  and  therefore  more 
proper,*  than  the  sense  which  Mr.  Locke  has  put  upon 
it,  it  may  be  justly  said  to  be  the  only  source  of  all  our 
distinct  and  accurate  notions  of  things.  For,  although 
our  first  notions  of  material  things  are  got  by  the  ex- 
ternal senses,  and  our  first  notions  of  the  operations 
of  our  own  minds  by  consciousness,  these  first  notions 
are  neither  simple  nor  clear.  Our  senses  and  our  con- 
sciousness are  continually  shifting  from  one  object  to 
another ; their  operations  are  transient  and  momentary, 
and  leave  no  distinct  notion  of  their  objects,  until  they 
are  recalled  by  memory,  examined  with  attention,  and 
compared  with  other  things. 

This  reflection  is  not  one  power  of  the  mind ; it  com- 
prehends many ; such  as  recollection,  attention,  distin- 
guishing, comparing,  judging.  By  these  powers  our 
minds  are  furnished,  not  only  with  many  simple  and 
original  notions,  but  with  all  our  notions  which  are 
accurate  and  well  defined,  and  which  alone  are  the 
proper  materials  of  reasoning.  Many  of  these  are 
neither  notions  of  the  objects  of  sense,  nor  of  the 
operations  of  our  own  minds,  and  therefore  neither 
ideas  of  sensation  nor  of  reflection,  in  the  sense  that 
Mr.  Locke  gives  to  reflection.  But  if  any  one  chooses 
to  call  them  ideas  of  reflection,  taking  the  word  in 
the  more  common  and  proper  sense,  I have  no  objec- 
tion. 

Mr.  Locke  seems  to  me  to  have  used  the  word  re- 
flection  sometimes  in  that  limited  sense  which  he  has 
given  to  it  in  the  definition  before  mentioned,  and 
sometimes  to  have  fallen  unawares  into  the  common 
sense  of  the  word  ; and  by  this  ambiguity  his  account 
of  the  origin  of  om*  ideas  is  darkened  and  perplexed. 


* This  is  not  correct ; and  the  employment  of  reflection  in  another  mean- 
ing than  that  of  €TU(TTpo(f>r)  npos  eavro,  — the  reflex  knowledge  or  con- 
sciousness which  the  mind  has  of  its  own  affections, — is  wholly  a secon- 
dary and  less  proper  signification.  See  Note  I.  — H. 

On  the  use  of  the  term  reflection^  see  page  25  of  this  volume.  — Ed. 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


235 


III.  Strictures  on  Locke’^s  Theory  of  the  Origin  of 
the  Idea  of  Duration,^  Having  premised  these  things 
in  general  of  Mr.  Locke’s  theory  of  the  origin  of  our 
ideas  or  notions,  I proceed  to  some  observations  on  his 
account  of  the  idea  of  duration. 

“ Reflection,”  he  says,  “ upon  the  train  of  ideas,  which 
appear  one  after  another  in  our  minds,  is  that  which 
furnishes  us  with  the  idea  of  succession : and  the  dis- 
tance between  any  two  parts  of  that  succession  is  tliat 
we  call  duration^ 

If  it  be  meant  that  the  idea  of  succession  is  prior  to 
that  of  duration,  either  in  time  or  in  the  order  of 
nature,  this,  I think,  is  impossible,  because  succession, 
as  Dr.  Price  justly  observes,  presupposes  duration,  and 
can  in  no  sense  be  prior  to  it ; and  therefore  it  would 
be  more  proper  to  derive  the  idea  of  succession  from 
that  of  duration. 

But  how  do  we  get  the  idea  of  succession  ? It  is, 
says  he,  by  reflecting  “ upon  the  train  of  ideas,  which 
appear  one  after  another  in  our  minds.”  Reflecting 
upon  the  train  of  ideas  can  be  nothing  but  remember- 
ing  it,  and  giving  attention  to  what  our  memory  testi- 
fies concerning  it ; for  if  we  did  not  remember  it,  we 
could  not  have  a thought  about  it.  So  that  it  is  evi- 
dent that  this  reflection  includes  remembrance^  without 
which  there  could  be  no  reflection  on  what  is  past,  and 
consequently  no  idea  of  succession. 

It  may  also  be  observed,  that,  if  we  speak  strictly  and 
philosophically,  no  kind  of  succession  can  be  an  object 
either  of  the  senses  or  of  consciousness  ; because  the 
operations  of  both  are  confined  to  the  present  point  of 
time,  and  there  can  be  no  succession  in  a point  of  time  ; 
and  on  that  account  the  motion  of  a body,  which  is  a 
successive  change  of  place,  could  not  be  observed  by 
the  senses  alone  without  the  aid  of  memory. 

As  this  observation  seems  to  contradict  the  common 
sense  and  common  language  of  mankind,  when  they 
affirm  that  they  see  a body  move,  and  hold  motion  to 
be  an  object  of  the  senses,  it  is  proper  to  take  notice, 
that  this  contradiction  between  the  philosopher  and  the 


236 


MEMORY. 


vulgar  is  apparent  only,  and  not  real.  It  arises  from 
this,  that  philosophers  and  the  vulgar  differ  in  the 
meaning  they  put  upon  what  is  called  the  present  time^ 
and  are  thereby  led  to  make  a different  limit  between 
sense  and  memory. 

Philosophers  give  the  name  of  present  to  that  indi- 
visible point  of  time  which  divides  the  future  from  the 
past : but  the  vulgar  find  it  more  convenient,  in  the 
affairs  of  life,  to  give  the  name  of  present  to  a portion 
of  time  which  extends  more  or  less,  according  to  cir- 
cumstances, into  the  past  or  the  future.  Hence  we  say, 
the  present  hour,  the  present  year,  the  present  century, 
though  one  point  only  of  these  periods  can  be  present 
in  the  philosophical  sense. 

It  has  been  observed  by  grammarians,  that  the  pres- 
ent tense  in  verbs  is  not  confined  to  an  indivisible  point 
of  time,  but  is  so  far  extended  as  to  have  a beginning, 
a middle,  and  an  end  ; and  that,  in  the  most  copious 
and  accurate  languages,  these  different  parts  of  the 
present  are  distinguished  by  different  forms  of  the 
verb. 

As  the  purposes  of  conversation  make  it  convenient 
to  extend  what  is  called  the  present,  the  same  reason 
leads  men  to  extend  the  province  of  sense,  and  to  carry 
its  limit  as  far  back  as  they  carry  the  present.  Thus  a 
man  may  say,  I saw  such  a person  just  now.  It  would 
be  ridiculous  to  find  fault  with  this  way  of  speaking, 
because  it  is  authorized  by  custom,  and  has  a distinct 
meaning : but  if  we  speak  philosophically,  the  senses 
do  not  testify  what  we  saw^  but  only  what  we  see; 
what  I saw  last  moment  I consider  as  the  testimony  of 
sense,  though  it  is  now  only  the  testimony  of  memory. 
There  is  no  necessity  in  common  life  of  dividing  accu- 
rately the  provinces  of  sense  and  of  memory ; and 
therefore  we  assign  to  sense,  not  an  indivisible  point 
of  time,  but  that  small  portion  of  time  which  we  call 
the  present,  which  has  a beginning,  a middle,  and  an 
end. 

Hence  it  is  easy  to  see,  that,  though  in  common  lan- 
guage we  speak  with  perfect  propriety  and  truth  when 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


237 


we  say  that  we  see  a body  move,  and  that  motion 
is  an  object  of  sense,  yet  when  as  philosophers  we  dis- 
tinguish accurately  the  province  of  sense  from  that  of 
memory,  we  can  no  more  see  what  is  past,  though  but 
a moment  ago,  than  we  can  remember  what  is  present; 
so  that,  speaking  philosophically,  it  is  only  by  the  aid 
of  memory  that  we  discern  motion,  or  any  succession 
whatsoever.  We  see  the  present  place  of  the  body ; 
we  remember  the  successive  advance  it  made  to  that 
place  : the  first  can,  then,  only  give  us  a conception  of 
motion,  when  joined  to  the  last. 

Having  considered  the  account  given  by  Mr.  Locke 
of  the  idea  of  succession^  we  shall  next  consider  how, 
from  the  idea  of  succession,  he  derives  the  idea  of  dura- 
tion. 

“ The  distance,’’  he  says,  “ between  any  two  parts  of 
that  succession,  or  between  the  appearance  of  any  two 
ideas  in  our  minds,  is  that  we  call  duration.” 

To  conceive  this  the  more  distinctly,  let  us  call  the 
distance  between  an  idea  and  that  which  immediately 
succeeds  it,  one  element  of  duration ; the  distance  be- 
tween an  idea  and  the  second  that  succeeds  it,  two 
elements,  and  so  on:  if  ten  such  elements  make  dura- 
tion, then  one  must  make  duration,  otherwise  duration 
must  be  made  up  of  parts  that  have  no  duration,  which 
is  impossible.  For,  suppose  a succession  of  as  many 
ideas  as  you  please,  if  none  of  these  ideas  have  dura- 
tion, nor  any  interval  of  duration  be  between  one  and 
another,  then  it  is  perfectly  evident  there  can  be  no  in- 
terval of  duration  between  the  first  and  the  last,  how 
great  soever  their  number  be.  I conclude,  therefore, 
that  there  must  be  duration  in  every  single  interval  or 
element  of  which  the  whole  duration  is  made  up. 
Nothing,  indeed,  is  more  certain,  than  that  every  ele- 
mentary part  of  duration  must  have  duration,  as  every 
elementary  part  of  extension  must  have  extension. 

Now  it  must  be  observed,  that  in  these  elements  of 
duration,  or  single  intervals  of  successive  ideas,  there 
is  no  succession  of  ideas  ; yet  we  must  conceive  them 
to  have  duration : whence  we  may  conclude  with  cer- 


238 


MEMORY. 


tainty,  that  there  is  a conception  of  duration  where 
there  is  no  succession  of  ideas  in  the  mind. 

We  may  measure  duration  by  the  succession  of 
thoughts  in  the  mind,  as  we  measure  length  by  inches 
or  feet:  but  the  notion  or  idea  of  duration  must  be 
antecedent  to  the  mensuration  of  it,  as  the  notion  of 
length  is  antecedent  to  its  being  measured. 

Mr.  Locke  draws  some  conclusions  from  his  account 
of  the  idea  of  duration,  which  may  serve  as  a touch- 
stone to  discover  how  far  it  is  genuine. 

One  is,  that  if  it  were  possible  for  a waking  man  to 
keep  only  one  idea  in  his  mind  without  variation,  or 
the  succession  of  others,  he  would  have  no  perception 
of  duration  at  all ; and  the  moment  he  began  to  have 
this  idea  would  seem  to  have  no  distance  from  the 
moment  he  ceased  to  have  it.  Now,  that  one  idea 
should  seem  to  have  no  duration,  and  that  a multiplica- 
tion of  that  no  duration  should  seem  to  have  duration, 
appears  to  me  as  impossible,  as  that  the  multiplication 
of  nothing  should  produce  something. 

Another  conclusion  which  the  author  draws  from 
this  theory  is,  that  the  same  period  of  duration  appears 
long  to  us,  when  the  succession  of  ideas  in  our  mind 
is  quick,  and  short  when  the  succession  is  slow. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  same  length  of  dura- 
tion appears  in  some  circumstances  much  longer  than 
in  others.  The  time  appears  long  when  a man  is  im- 
patient under  any  pain  or  distress,  or  when  he  is  eager 
in  the  expectation  of  some  happiness : on  the  other  hand, 
when  he  is  pleased  and  happy  in  agreeable  conversa- 
tion, or  delighted  with  a variety  of  agreeable  objects 
that  strike  his  senses  or  his  imagination,  time  flies 
away,  and  appears  short.  According  to  Mr.  Locke’s 
theory,  in  the  first  of  these  cases  the  succession  of  ideas 
is  very  quick,  and  in  the  last  very  slow.  I am  rather 
inclined  to  think  that  the  very  contrary  is  the  truth. 
When  a man  is  racked  with  pain,  or  with  expectation, 
he  can  hardly  think  of  any  thing  but  his  distress;  and 
the  more  his  mind  is  occupied  by  that  sole  object,  the 
longer  the  time  appears.  On  the  other  hand,  when  he 


THE  IDEA  OF  DURATION. 


239 


is  entertained  with  cheerful  music,  with  lively  conver- 
sation, and  brisk  sallies  of  wit,  there  seems  to  be  the 
quickest  succession  of  ideas,  but  the  time  appears  short- 
est I have  heard  a military  officer,  a man  of  candor 
and  observation,  say,  that  the  time  he  was  engaged  in 
hot  action  always  appeared  to  him  much  shorter  than 
it  really  was.  Yet  I think  it  cannot  be  supposed,  that 
the  succession  of  ideas  was  then  slower  than  usual.* 

If  the  idea  of  duration  were  got  merely  by  the  suc- 
cession of  ideas  in  our  minds,  that  succession  must  to 
ourselves  appear  equally  quick  at  all  times,  because  the 
only  measure  of  duration  would  be  the  number  of  suc- 
ceeding ideas ; but  I believe  every  man  capable  of  re- 
flection will  be  sensible,  that  at  one  time  his  thoughts 
come  slowly  and  heavily,  and  at  another  time  have  a 
much  quicker  and  livelier  motion. 

I know  of  no  ideas  or  notions  that  have  a better 
claim  to  be  accounted  simple  and  original^  than  those 
of  space  and  time.  It  is  essential  both  to  space  and 
time  to  be  made  up  of  parts,  but  every  part  is  similar 
to  the  whole,  and  of  the  same  nature.  Different  parts 
of  space,  as  it  has  three  dimensions,  may  differ  both  in 
figure  and  in  magnitude;  but  time  having  only  one 
dimension,  its  parts  can  differ  only  in  magnitude ; and 
as  it  is  one  of  the  simplest  objects  of  thought,  the  con- 
ception of  it  must  be  purely  the  effect  of  our  consti- 
tution, and  given  us  by  some  original  power  of  the 
mind. 

The  sense  of  seeing,  by  itself,  gives  us  the  conception 
and  belief  of  only  two  dimensions  of  extension,  but  the 
sense  of  touch  discovers  three;  and  reason,  from  the 
contemplation  of  finite  extended  things,  leads  us  neces- 
sarily to  the  belief  of  an  immensity  that  contains  them. 
In  like  manner,  memory  gives  us  the  conception  and 
belief  of  finite  intervals  of  duration.  From  the  con- 
templation of  these,  reason  leads  us  necessarily  to  the 
belief  of  an  eternity,  which  comprehends  all  things 


* In  travelling,  the  time  seems  very  short  while  passing ; very  long  in 
retrospect.  The  cause  is  obvious.  — H. 


240 


MEMORY. 


that  have  a beginning  and  end.  Our  conceptions,  both 
of  space  and  time,  are  probably  partial  and  inade- 
quate,* and  therefore  we  are  apt  to  lose  ourselves,  and 
to  be  embarrassed  in  our  reasonings  about  them.f 


* They  are  not  probably^  but  necessarily^  partial  and  inadequate.  For  we 
are  unable  positively  to  conceive  time  or  space  either  as  infinite  (i.  e.  with- 
out limits)  or  as  not  infinite  (i.  e.  as  limited).  — H. 

t Cousin’s  account  of  the  origin  of  the  idea  of  time  is  precise  and 
luminous.  “ Here,  again,”  he  tells  us,  “ we  are  to  distinguish  the  order  of 
the  acquisition  of  our  ideas  from  their  logical  order.  In  the  logical  order  of 
ideas,  the  idea  of  any  succession  of  events  presupposes  that  of  time. 
There  could  not  be  any  succession  but  upon  condition  of  a continuous 
duration,  to  the  different  points  of  which  the  several  members  of  the  suc- 
cession may  be  attached.  Take  away  the  continuity  of  time,  and  you 
take  away  the  possibility  of  the  succession  of  the  events ; just  as,  the  con- 
tinuity of  space  being  taken  away,  the  possibility  of  the  juxtaposition  and 
coexistence  of  bodies  is  destroyed. 

“ But  in  the  chronological  order,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  the  idea  of  a suc- 
cession of  events  which  precedes  the  idea  of  time  as  including  them.  I 
do  not  mean  to  say  in  regard  to  time,  any  more  than  in  regard  to  space, 
that  we  have  a clear,  distinct,  and  complete  idea  of  a succession,  and  that 
then  the  idea  of  time,  as  including  this  series  or  succession,  springs  up. 
I merely  say,  it  is  clearly  necessary  that  we  should  have  a perception  of 
some  events,  in  order  to  conceive  that  these  events  are  in  time,  [and  in 
order  along  with,  and  by  occasion  of,  those  events  to  have  the  idea  of  time 
awakened  in  the  mind].  Time  is  the  place  of  events,  just  as  space  is  the 
place  of  bodies  ; whoever  had  no  idea  of  any  event  [no  perception  or  con- 
sciousness of  any  succession]  would  have  no  idea  of  time.  If,  then,  the 
logical  condition  of  the  idea  of  succession  lies  in  the  idea  of  time,  the 
chronological  condition  of  the  idea  of  time  is  the  idea  of  succession. 

“ Now  every  idea  of  succession  is  undeniably  an  acquisition  of  experi- 
ence. It  remains  to  ascertain  of  what  experience.  Is  it  inward  or  out- 
ward experience  ? The  first  idea  of  succession,  — is  it  given  in  the  spec- 
tacle of  outward  events,  or  in  the  consciousness  of  the  events  that  pass 
within  us  ? 

“ Take  a succession  of  outward  events.  In  order  that  these  events  may 
be  successive,  it  is  necessary  that  there  should  be  a first  event,  a second,  a 
third,  &c.  But  if,  when  you  see  the  second  event,  you  do  not  remember 
the  first,  it  would  not  be  the  second  ; there  could  be  for  you  no  succession. 
You  would  always  remain  fixed  at  the  first  event,  which  would  not  even 
have  the  character  of  first  to  you,  because  there  would  be  no  second.  The 
intervention  of  memory  is  necessary,  then,  in  order  to  conceive  of  any  suc- 
cession whatever.  Now  memory  has  for  its  objects  nothing  external ; it 
relates  not  to  things,  but  to  ourselves ; we  have  no  memory  but  of  our- 
selves. When  we  say,  we  remember  such  a person,  we  remember  such  a 
place,  — it  means  nothing  more  than  that  we  remember  to  have  been  see- 
ing such  a place,  or  we  remember  to  have  been  hearing  or  seeing  such  a 
person.  There  is  no  memory  but  of  ourselves,  because  there  is  no  mem- 
ory but  where  there  is  consciousness.  If  consciousness,  then,  is  the  con- 
dition of  memory,  and  memory  the  condition  of  time,  it  follows  that  the 
first  succession  is  given  us  in  ourselves,  in  consciousness,  in  the  proper 


OP  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


241 


CHAPTER  III. 

OF  THE  NATURE  AND  ORIGIN  OF  OUR  NOTION  OF 
PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 

I.  Of  Identity  in  General]  The  conviction  which 
every  man  has  of  his  identity,  as  far  back  as  his  mem- 
ory reaches,  needs  no  aid  of  philosophy  to  strengthen 
it ; and  no  philosophy  can  weaken  it,  without  first  pro- 
ducing some  degree  of  insanity. 

The  philosopher,  however,  may  very  properly  con- 
sider this  conviction  as  a phenomenon  of  human  nature 
worthy  of  his  attention.  If  he  can  discover  its  cause, 
an  addition  is  made  to  his  stock  of  knowledge ; if  not, 
it  must  be  held  as  a part  of  our  original  constitution, 
or  an  effect  of  that  constitution  produced  in  a manner 
unknown  to  us. 

That  we  may  form  as  distinct  a notion  as  we  are 
able  of  this  phenomenon  of  the  human  mind,  it  is 
proper  to  consider  what  is  meant  by  identity  in  gen- 
eral, what  by  our  own  personal  identity,  and  how  we 
are  led  into  that  invincible  belief  and  conviction  which 
every  man  has  of  his  own  personal  identity,  as  far  as 
his  memory  reaches. 

Identity  in  general  I take  to  be  a relation  between  a 
thing  which  is  known  to  exist  at  one  time,  and  a thing 
which  is  known  to  have  existed  at  another  time.* *  If 
^ you  ask  whether  they  are  one  and  the  same,  or  two 
different  things,  every  man  of  common  sense  under- 


objects and  phenomena  of  consciousness,  — in  our  thoughts,  in  our  ideas.” 
— Elements  o f Psychology^  Chap.  III. 

Compare  Kant,  Critic  of  Pure  Reason,  Transcendental  ..Esthetic,  Part  I. 
Sect.  II. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  Part  I.  Book  II. 
Chap.  VI. -IX.;  Ballantyne’s  Examination  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  1. 
Sect.  II. ; Mill’s  Analysis  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  XIV.  Sect.  V.  — Ed. 

* Identity  is  a relation  between  our  cognitions  of  a thing,  and  not  be- 
tween things  themselves.  It  would,  therefore,  have  been  better  in  this 
sentence  to  have  said,  “ a relation  between  a thing  as  known  to  exist  at  one 
time,  and  a thing  as  known  to  exist  at  another  time.”  — H. 

21 


242 


MEMORY. 


stands  the  meaning  of  your  question  perfectly.  Whence 
we  may  infer  with  certainty,  that  every  man  of  com- 
mon «ense  has  a clear  and  distinct  notion  of  identity. 

If  you  ask  a definition  of  identity,  I confess  I can 
give  none ; it  is  too  simple  a notion  to  admit  of  logical 
definition : I can  say  it  is  a relation,  but  I cannot  find 
words  to  express  the  specific  difference  between  this 
and  other  relations,  though  I am  in  no  danger  of  con- 
founding it  with  any  other.  I can  say  that  diversity  is 
a contrary  relation,  and  that  similitude  and  dissimili- 
tude are  another  couple  of  contrary  relations,  which 
every  man  easily  distinguishes  in  his  conception  from 
identity  and  diversity. 

I see  evidently  that  identity  supposes  an  uninterrupted 
continuance  of  existence.  That  which  has  ceased  to 
exist  cannot  be  the  same  with  that  which  afterwards 
begins  to  exist ; for  this  would  be  to  suppose  a being 
to  exist  after  it  ceased  to  exist,  and  to  have  had  ex- 
istence before  it  was  produced,  which  are  manifest 
contradictions.  Continued  uninterrupted  existence  is 
therefore  necessarily  implied  in  identity.  Hence  we 
may  infer,  that  identity  cannot,  in  its  proper  sense,  be 
applied  to  our  pains,  our  pleasures,  our  thoughts,  or 
any  operation  of  our  minds.  The  pain  felt  this  day  is 
not  the  same  individual  pain  which  I felt  yesterday, 
though  they  may  be  similar  in  kind  and  degree,  and 
have  the  same  cause.  The  same  may  be  said  of  every 
feeling,  and  of  every  operation  of  mind.  They  are  all 
successive  in  their  nature,  like  time  itself,  no  two  mo- 
ments of  which  can  be  the  same  moment.  It  is  other- 
wise with  the  parts  of  absolute  space.  They  always 
are,  and  were,  and  will  be  the  same.  So  far,  I think, 
we  proceed  upon  clear  ground  in  fixing  the  notion  of 
identity  in  general. 

II.  Nature  and  Origin  of  our  Idea  of  Personal  Iden- 
tity.] It  is  perhaps  more  difficult  to  ascertain  with  pre- 
cision the  meaning  of  personality ; but  it  is  not  neces- 
sary in  the  present  subject : it  is  sufficient  for  our 
purpose  to  observe,  that  all  mankind  place  their  person- 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


243 


ality  in  something  that  cannot  be  divided^  or  consist  of 
parts.  A part  of  a person  is  a manifest  absurdity. 
When  a man  loses  his  estate,  his  health,  his  strength, 
he  is  still  the  same  person,  and  has  lost  nothing  of  his 
personality.  If  he  has  a leg  or  an  arm  cut  off,  he  is 
the  same  person  he  was  before.  The  amputated  mem- 
ber is  no  part  of  his  person,  otherwise  it  would  have  a 
right  to  a part  of  his  estate,  and  be  liable  for  a part  of 
his  engagements.  It  would  be  entitled  to  a share  of 
his  merit  and  demerit,  which  is  manifestly  absurd.  A 
person  is  something  indivisible,  and  is  what  Leibnitz 
calls  a monad. 

My  personal  identity,  therefore,  implies  the  continued 
existence  of  that  indivisible  thing  which  I call  myself 
Whatever  this  self  may  be,  it  is  something  which  thinks, 
and  deliberates,  and  resolves,  and  acts,  and  suffers.  I 
am  not  thought,  I am  not  action,  I am  not  feeling ; I 
am  something  that  thinks,  and  acts,  and  suffers.  My 
thoughts,  and  actions,  and  feelings,  change  every  mo- 
ment ; they  have  no  continued,  but  a successive,  exist- 
ence ; but  that  self  or  J,  to  which  they  belong,  is  per- 
manent, and  has  the  same  relation  to  all  the  succeeding 
thoughts,  actions,  and  feelings  which  I call  mine. 

Such  are  the  notions  that  I have  of  my  personal 
identity.  But  perhaps  it  may  be  said,  this  may  all  be 
fancy  without  reality.  How  do  you  know,  — what  evi- 
dence have  you,  — that  there  is  such  a permanent  self 
which  has  a claim  to  all  the  thoughts,  actions,  and  feel- 
ings which  you  call  yours  ? 

To  this  I answer,  that  the  proper  evidence  I have  of 
all  this  is  remembrance.  I remember  that  twenty  years 
ago  I conversed  with  such  a person ; I remember  sev- 
eral things  that  passed  in  that  conversation  : my  mem- 
ory testifies,  not  only  that  this  was  done,  but  that  it 
was  done  by  me  who  now  remember  it.  If  it  was  done 
by  me,  I must  have  existed  at  that  time,  and  continued 
to  exist  from  that  time  to  the  present : if  the  identical 
person  whom  I call  myself  had  not  a part  in  that  con- 
versation, my  memory  is  fallacious ; it  gives  a distinct 
and  positive  testimony  of  what  is  not  true.  Every 


244 


MEMORY. 


man  in  his  senses  believes  what  he  distinctly  remem- 
bers, and  every  thing  he  remembers  convinces  him  that 
he  existed  at  the  time  remembered. 

Although  memory  gives  the  most  irresistible  evidence 
of  my  being  the  identical  person  that  did  such  a thing, 
at  such  a time,  I may  have  other  good  evidence  of 
things  which  befell  me,  and  which  I do  not  remember : 
I know  who  bare  me,  and  suckled  me,  but  I do  not 
remember  these  events. 

It  may  here  be  observed,  (though  the  observation 
would  have  been  unnecessary,  if  some  great  philoso- 
phers had  not  contradicted  it,)  that  it  is  not  my  remem- 
bering any  action  of  mine  that  makes  me  to  be  the 
person  who  did  it.  This  remembrance  makes  me  to 
know  assuredly  that  I did  it ; but  I might  have  done  it^ 
though  I did  not  remember  it.  That  relation  to  me,  which 
is  expressed  by  saying  that  I did  it^  would  be  the  same, 
though  I had  not  the  least  remembrance  of  it.  To  say 
that  my  remembering  that  I did  such  a thing,  or,  as 
some  choose  to  express  it,  my  being  conscious  that  I 
did  it,  makes  me  to  have  done  it,  appears  to  me  as 
great  an  absurdity  as  it  would  be  to  say,  that  my  belief 
that  the  world  was  created  made  it  to  be  created. 

When  we  pass  judgment  on  the  identity  of  other  per- 
sons than  ourselves,  we  proceed  upon  other  grounds, 
and  determine  from  a variety  of  circumstances,  which 
sometimes  produce  the  firmest  assurance,  and  some- 
times leave  room  for  doubt.  The  identity  of  persons 
has  often  furnished  matter  of  serious  litigation  before 
tribunals  of  justice.  But  no  man  of  a sound  mind 
ever  doubted  of  his  own  identity,  as  far  as  he  distinctly 
remembered. 

The  identity  of  a person  is  a perfect  identity:  wher- 
ever it  is  real,  it  admits  of  no  degrees ; and  it  is  impos- 
sible that  a person  should  be  in  part  the  same,  and  in 
part  different ; because  a person  is  a monad^  and  is  not 
divisible  into  parts.  The  evidence  of  identity  in  other 
persons  than  ourselves  does  indeed  admit  of  all  de- 
grees, from  what  we  account  certainty,  to  the  least 
degree  of  probability.  But  still  it  is  true,  that  the  same 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


245 


person  is  perfectly  the  same,  and  cannot  be  so  in  part, 
or  in  some  degree  only. 

For  this  cause,  I have  first  considered  personal  iden- 
tity, as  that  which  is  perfect  in  its  kind,  and  the  natu- 
ral measure  of  that  which  is  imperfect. 

We  probably  at  first  derive  our  notion  of  identity 
from  that  natural  conviction  which  every  man  has  from 
the  dawn  of  reason  of  his  own  identity  and  continued 
existence.  The  operations  of  our  minds  are  all  suc- 
cessive, and  have  no  continued  existence.  But  the 
thinking  being  has  a continued  existence,  and  we  have 
an  invincible  belief,  that  it  remains  the  same  when  all 
its  thoughts  and  operations  change. 

Our  judgments  of  the  identity  of  objects  of  sense 
seem  to  be  formed  much  upon  the  same  grounds  as 
our  judgments  of  the  identity  of  other  persons  than 
ourselves.  Wherever  we  observe  great  similarity^  we 
are  apt  to  presume  identity,  if  no  reason  appears  to 
the  contrary.  Two  objects  ever  so  like,  when  they  are 
perceived  at  the  same  time,  cannot  be  the  same  ; but  if 
they  are  presented  to  our  senses  at  different  times,  we 
are  apt  to  think  them  the  same,  merely  from  their  simi- 
larity. 

Whether  this  be  a natural  prejudice,  or  from  what- 
ever cause  it  proceeds,  it  certainly  appears  in  children 
from  infancy;  and  when  we  grow  up,  it  is  confirmed  in 
most  instances  by  experience : for  we  rarely  find  two 
individuals  of  the  same  species  that  are  not  distinguish- 
able by  obvious  differences.  A man  challenges  a thief 
whom  he  finds  in  possession  of  his  horse  or  his  watch, 
only  on  similarity.  When  the  watchmaker  swears  that 
he  sold  this  watch  to  such  a person,  his  testimony  is 
grounded  on  similarity.  The  testimony  of  witnesses 
to  the  identity  of  a person  is  commonly  grounded  on 
no  other  evidence. 

Thus  it  appears,  that  the  evidence  we  have  of  our 
own  identity,  as  far  back  as  we  remember,  is  totally  of 
a different  kind  from  the  evidence  we  have  of  the  iden- 
tity of  other  persons,  or  of  objects  of  sense.  The  first 
is  grounded  on  memory^  and  gives  undoubted  certainty. 
2V 


246 


MEMORY. 


The  last  is  grounded  on  similarity^  and  on  other  circum- 
stances, which  in  many  cases  are  not  so  decisive  as  to 
leave  no  room  for  doubt. 

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  the  identity  of 
objects  of  sense  is  never  perfect.  All  bodies,  as  they 
consist  of  innumerable  parts  that  may  be  disjoined 
from  them  by  a great  variety  of  causes,  are  subject  to 
continual  changes  of  their  substance,  increasing,  dimin- 
ishing, changing  insensibly.  When  such  alterations 
are  gradual,  because  language  could  not  afford  a differ- 
ent name  for  every  different  state  of  such  a changeable 
being,  it  retains  the  same  name,  and  is  considered  as 
the  same  thing.  Thus  we  say  of  an  old  regiment,  that 
it  did  such  a thing  a century  ago,  though  there  now  is 
not  a man  alive  who  then  belonged  to  it.  We  say 
a tree  is  the  same  in  the  seed-bed  and  in  the  forest. 
A ship  of  war,  which  has  successively  changed  her  an- 
chors, her  tackle,  her  sails,  her  masts,  her  planks,  and  her 
timbers,  while  she  keeps  the  same  name,  is  the  same. 

The  identity,  therefore,  which  we  ascribe  to  bodies, 
whether  natural  or  artificial,  is  not  perfect  identity ; it 
is  rather  something  which,  for  the  conveniency  of 
speech,  we  call  identity.  It  admits  of  a great  change 
of  the  subject,  providing  the  change  be  gradual;  some- 
times, even  of  a total  change.  And  the  changes  which 
in  common  language  are  made  consistent  with  identity 
differ  from  those  that  are  thought  to  destroy  it,  not  in 
kind^  but  in  number  and  degree.  It  has  no  fixed  nature 
when  applied  to  bodies  ; and  questions  about  the  iden- 
tity of  a body  are  very  often  questions  about  words. 
But  identity,  when  applied  to  persons,  has  no  ambi- 
guity, and  admits  not  of  degrees,  or  of  more  and  less. 
It  is  the  foundation  of  all  rights  and  obligations,  and 
of  all  accountableness ; and  the  notion  of  it  is  fixed 
and  precise. 

III.  Strictures  on  Lockers  Account  of  Personal  Iden- 
tity.] In  a long  chapter.  Of  Identity  and  Diversity Mr. 
Locke  has  made  many  ingenious  and  just  observations, 
and  some  which  I think  cannot  be  defended.  I shall 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


247 


only  take  notice  of  the  account  he  gives  of  our  own 
personal  identity.  His  doctrine  upon  this  subject  has 
been  censured  by  Bishop  Butler,  in  a short  essay  sub- 
joined to  his  Analogy^  with  whose  sentiments  I per- 
fectly agree. 

Identity,  as  has  been  observed,  supposes  the  contin- 
ued existence  of  the  being  of  which  it  is  affirmed,  and 
therefore  can  be  applied  only  to  things  which  have  a 
continued  existence.  While  any  being  continues  to 
exist,  it  is  the  same  being;  but  two  beings  which  have 
a different  beginning  or  a different  ending  of  their  ex- 
istence cannot  possibly  be  the  same.  To  this,  I think, 
Mr.  Locke  agrees. 

He  observes,  very  justly,  that,  to  know  what  is  meant 
by  the  same  person,  we  must  consider  what  the  word 
person  stands  for ; and  he  defines  a person  to  be  an 
intelligent  being,  endowed  with  reason  and  with  con- 
sciousness, which  last  he  thinks  inseparable  from 
thought.  From  this  definition  of  a person,  it  must 
necessarily  follow,  that,  while  the  intelligent  being  con- 
tinues to  exist  and  to  be  intelligent,  it  must  be  the 
same  person.  To  say  that  the  intelligent  being  is  the 
person,  and  yet  that  the  person  ceases  to  exist  while 
the  intelligent  being  continues,  or  that  the  person  con- 
tinues while  the  intelligent  being  ceases  to  exist,  is  to 
my  apprehension  a manifest  contradiction. 

One  would  think  that  the  definition  of  a person 
should  perfectly  ascertain  the  nature  of  personal  iden- 
tity, or  wherein  it  consists,  though  it  might  still  be  a 
question  how  we  come  to  know  and  be  assured  of  our 
personal  identity. 

Mr.  Locke  tells  us,  however,  “ that  personal  identity, 
that  is,  the  sameness  of  a rational  being,  consists  in  con- 
sciousness alone^  and,  as  far  as  this  consciousness  can 
be  extended  backwards  to  any  past  action  or  thought, 
so  far  reaches  the  identity  of  that  person.  So  that 
whatever  has  the  consciousness  of  present  and  past 
actions  is  the  same  person  to  whom  they  belong.”  * 


See  Essay^  Book  II.  Chap.  XXVII.  - XXIX.  The  passage  given  as 


248 


MEMORY. 


This  doctrine  has  some  strange  consequences,  which 
the  author  was  aware  of.  (1.)  Such  as,  that  if  the 
same  consciousness  can  be  transferred  from  one  intelli- 
gent being  to  another,  which  he  thinks  we  cannot  show 
to  be  impossible,  then  two  or  twenty  intelligent  beings 
may  be  the  same  person,  (2.)  And  if  the  intelligent 
being  may  lose  the  consciousness  of  the  actions  done 
by  him,  which  surely  is  possible,  then  he  is  not  the  per- 
son that  did  those  actions ; so  that  one  intelligent  being 
may  be  two  or  twenty  different  persons^  if  he  shall  so 
often  lose  the  consciousness  of  his  former  actions. 

(3.)  There  is  another  consequence  of  this  doctrine, 
which  follows  no  less  necessarily,  though  Mr.  Locke 
probably  did  not  see  it.  It  is,  that  a man  may  be^  and 
at  the  same  time  not  be^  the  person  that  did  a particular 
action.  Suppose  a brave  officer  to  have  been  flogged 
when  a boy  at  school  for  robbing  an  orchard,  to  have 
taken  a standard  from  the  enemy  in  his  first  campaign, 
and  to  have  been  made  a general  in  advanced  life ; 


a quotation  in  the  text  is  the  sum  of  Locke’s  doctrine,  hut  not  exactly  in 
his  words.  Long  before  Butler,  to  whom  the  merit  is  usually  ascribed, 
Locke’s  doctrine  of  personal  identity  had  been  attacked  and  refuted.  This 
was  done  even  by  his  earliest  critic,  John  Sergeant,  whose  words,  as  he  is 
an  author  wholly  unknown  to  all  historians  of  philosophy,  and  his  works 
of  the  rarest,  I shall  quote.  He  thus  argues;  — “But  to  speak  to  the 
point.  Consciousness  of  any  action  or  other  accident  we  have  now,  or 
have  had,  is  nothing  but  our  knowledge  that  it  belonged  to  us ; and  since 
we  both  agree  that  we  have  no  innate  knowledges,  it  follows  that  all  both 
aetual  and  habitual  knowledge^  which  we  have  are  acquired  or  accidental 
to  the  subject  or  knower.  Wherefore  the  man,  or  that  thing  which  is  to  be 
the  knower,  must  have  had  individuality  or  personality  from  other  princi- 
ples to  this  knowledge  called  consciousness;  and  consequently, 

he  will  retain  his  identity,  or  continue  the  same  man,  or  (which  is  equiva- 
lent) the  same  person^  as  long  as  he  has  those  individuating  principles. 
What  those  individuating  principles  are  which  constitute  the  man^  or  this 
knowing  individuum,  I have  shown  above.  It  being,  then,  most  evident, 
that  a man  must  he  the  same,  ere  he  can  know  or  he  conscious  that  he  is  the 
same,  all  his  (Loeke’s)  laborious  descants  and  extravagant  consequences, 
which  are  built  on  this  supposition  that  consciousness  mdividuates  the  per- 
son, can  need  no  farther  reflection.”  — Solid  Philosophy  Asserted^  Reflec- 
tion XIV.  § 14. 

The  same  objection  was  also  made  by  Leibnitz  in  his  strictures  on 
Locke’s  Essay.  See  Nouveaux  Essais^  Liv.  II.  Chap.  XXVII.  Lor  the 
best  criticism  of  Locke’s  doctrine  of  personal  identity,  I may  refer  the 
reader  to  M.  Cousin’s  Cours  de  Philosophic^  Tome  II  Le9on  XVIII.  [Ele- 
ments of  Psychology.,  Chap.  III.]  — H. 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


249 


suppose,  also,  which  must  be  admitted  to  be  possible, 
that,  when  he  took  the  standard,  he  was  conscious  of 
his  having  been  flogged  at  school,  and  that,  when  made 
a general,  he  was  conscious  of  his  taking  the  standard, 
but  had  absolutely  lost  the  consciousness  of  his  flog- 
ging. These  things  being  supposed,  it  follows,  from 
Mr.  Locke’s  doctrine,  that  he  who  was  flogged  at  school 
is  the  same  person  who  took  the  standard,  and  that  he 
who  took  the  standard  is  the  same  person  who  was 
made  a general.  Whence  it  follows,  if  there  be  any 
truth  in  logic,  that  the  general  is  the  same  person  with 
him  who  was  flogged  at  school.  But  the  general’s  con- 
sciousness does  not  reach  so  far  back  as  his  flogging; 
therefore,  according  to  Mr.  Locke’s  doctrine,  he  is  not 
the  person  who  was  flogged.  Therefore  the  general  is, 
and  at  the  same  time  is  not,  the  same  person  with  him 
who  was  flogged  at  school.* 

Leaving  the  consequences  of  this  doctrine  to  those 
who  have  leisure  to  trace  them,  we  may  observe,  with 
regard  to  the  doctrine  itself, — 

Firsts  that  Mr.  Locke  attributes  to  consciousness  the 
conviction  we  have  of  our  past  actions,  as  if  a man 
may  now  be  conscious  of  what  he  did  twenty  years 
ago.  It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  meaning  of 
this,  unless  by  consciousness  be  meant  memory^  the  only 
faculty  by  which  we  have  an  immediate  knowledge  of 
our  past  actions.! 

Sometimes,  in  popular  discourse,  a man  says  he  is 
conscious  that  he  did  such  a thing,  meaning  that  he 
distinctly  remembers  that  he  did  it.  It  is  unnecessary, 
in  common  discourse,  to  fix  accurately  the  limits  be- 
tween consciousness  and  memory.  This  was  formerly 
shown  to  be  the  case  with  regard  to  sense  and  mem- 
ory : and  therefore  distinct  remembrance  is  sometimes 
called  sense,  sometimes  consciousness,  without  any  in- 


* Compare  Buffier’s  Traiti  des  Premitres  Vtrites^  § 505,  who  makes  a 
similar  criticism.  — H. 

t Locke,  it  will  be  remembered,  does  not,  like  Keid,  view  consciousness 
as  a coordinate  faculty  with  memory ; but  under  consciousness  he  properly 
comprehends  the  various  faculties  as  so  many  special  modifications.  — H. 


250 


MEMORY. 


convenience.  But  this  ought  to  be  avoided  in  philoso- 
phy, otherwise  we  confound  the  different  powers  of  the 
mind,  and  ascribe  to  one  what  really  belongs  to  another. 
If  a man  can  be  conscious  of  what  he  did  twenty 
years  or  twenty  minutes  ago,  there  is  no  use  for  mem- 
ory, nor  ought  we  to  allow  that  there  is  any  such  fac- 
ulty. The  faculties  of  consciousness  and  memory  are 
chiefly  distinguished  by  this,  that  the  first  is  an  imme- 
diate knowledge  of  the  present,  the  second  an  immedi- 
ate knowledge  of  the  past.* 

When,  therefore,  Mr.  Locke’s  notion  of  personal 
identity  is  properly  expressed,  it  is,  that  personal  iden- 
tity consists  in  distinct  remembrance ; for,  even  in  the 
popular  sense,  to  say  that  I am  conscious  of  a past 
action  means  nothing  else  than  that  I distinctly  remem- 
ber that  I did  it. 

Secondly^  it  may  be  observed,  that,  in  this  doctrine, 
not  only  is  consciousness  confounded  with  memory, 
but,  which  is  still  more  strange,  personal  identity  is  con- 
founded with  the  evidence  which  ive  have  of  our  per- 
sonal  identity. 

It  is  very  true,  that  my  remembrance  that  I did  such 
a thing  is  the  evidence  I have  that  I am  the  identical 
person  who  did  it.  And  this,  I am  apt  to  think,  Mr. 
Locke  meant.  But  to  say  that  my  remembrance  that 


* As  already  stated,  all  immediate  knowledge  of  the  past  is  contradictory. 
This  observation  I cannot  again  repeat.  See  Note  B.  — H. 

We  copy  a passage  from  the  Note  referred  to,  though  it  is  little  more 
than  a repetition  of  what  was  said  before  : — “As  not  now  present  in  time^ 
an  immediate  knowledge  of  the  past  is  impossible.  The  past  is  only  me- 
diately cognizable  in  and  through  a present  modification  relative  to,  and 
representative  of,  it,  as  having  been.  To  speak  of  an  immediate  knowl- 
edge of  the  past  involves  a contradiction  in  adjecto.  For  to  know  the  past 
immediately,  it  must  be  known  in  itself;  — and  to  be  known  in  itself,  it 
must  be  known  as  7i0io  existing.  But  the  past  is  just  a negation  of  the 
now  existent : its  very  notion,  therefore,  excludes  the  possibility  of  its 
being  immediately  known.”  It  is  probable  that,  by  an  immediate  knowl- 
edge of  the  past,  Reid  meant  “ a knowledge  effected  not  through  the  sup- 
posed intervention  of  a vicarious  object,  numerically  different  from  the  object 
existing  and  the  mind  Tcnowing.,  but  through  a representation  of  the  past  or 
real  object,  in  and  by  the  mind ; in  other  words,  that  by  mediate  knowledge 
in  this  connection  he  denoted  a non-egoistical,  by  immediate  knowledge  an 
egoistical  representation.”  — Ed. 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


251 


I did  such  a thing,  or  my  consciousness,  makes  me  the 
person  who  did  it,  is,  in  my  apprehension,  an  absurdity 
too  gross  to  be  entertained  by  any  man  who  attends  to 
the  meaning  of  it;  for  it  is  to  attribute  to  memory  or 
consciousness  a strange  magical  power  of  producing  its 
object,  though  that  object  must  have  existed  before  the 
memory  or  consciousness  which  produced  it.  Con- 
sciousness is  the  testimony  of  one  faculty ; memory  is 
the  testimony  of  another  faculty ; and  to  say  that  the 
testimony  is  the  cause  of  the  thing  testified,  this  surely 
is  absurd,  if  any  thing  be,  and  could  not  have  been  said 
by  Mr.  Locke,  if  he  had  not  confounded  the  testimony 
with  the  thing  testified. 

When  a horse  that  was  stolen  is  found  and  claimed 
by  the  owner,  the  only  evidence  he  can  have,  or  that  a 
judge  or  witnesses  can  have,  that  this  is  the  very  iden- 
tical horse  which  was  his  property,  is  similitude.  But 
would  it  not  be  ridiculous  from  this  to  infer  that  the 
identity  of  a horse  consists  in  similitude  only  ? The 
only  evidence  I have  that  I am  the  identical  person 
who  did  such  actions  is,  that  I remember  distinctly  I ' 
did  them  ; or,  as  Mr.  Locke  expresses  it,  I am  conscious 
I did  them.  To  infer  from  this,  that  personal  identity 
consists  in  consciousness,  is  an  argument  which,  if  it 
had  any  force,  would  prove  the  identity  of  a stolen 
horse  to  consist  solely  in  similitude. 

Thirdhj^  is  it  not  strange  that  the  sameness  or  identity 
of  a person  should  consist  in  a thing  ivhich  is  continu- 
ally  changings  and  is  not  any  two  minutes  the  same  ? 

Our  consciousness,  our  memory,  and  every  operation 
of  the  mind,  are  still  flowing  like  the  water  of  a river, 
or  like  time  itself.  The  consciousness  I have  this  mo- 
ment can  no  more  be  the  same  consciousness  I had  last 
moment,  than  this  moment^  can  be  the  last  moment. 
Identity  can  only  be  affirmed  of  things  which  have  a 
continued  existence.  Consciousness,  and  every  kind  of 
thought,  are  transient  and  momentary,  and  have  no 
continued  existence ; and,  therefore,  if  personal  identity 
consisted  in  consciousness,  it  would  certainly  follow, 
that  no  wan  is  the  same  person  any  two  moments  of  his 


252 


MEMORY. 


life ; and  as  the  right  and  justice  of  reward  and  pun- 
ishment are  founded  on  personal  identity,  no  man  could 
be  responsible  for  his  actions. 

But  though  I take  this  to  be  the  unavoidable  conse- 
quence of  Mr.  Locke’s  doctrine  concerning  personal 
identity,  and  though  some  persons  may  have  liked  the 
doctrine  the  better  on  this  account,  I am  far  from  im- 
puting any  thing  of  this  kind  to  Mr.  Locke.  He  was 
too  good  a man  not  to  have  rejected  with  abhorrence  a 
doctrine  which  he  believed  to  draw  this  consequence 
after  it. 

Fourthly^  there  are  many  expressions  used  by  Mr. 
Locke,  in  speaking  of  personal  identity,  which  to  me 
are  altogether  unintelligible,  unless  we  suppose  that  he 
confounded  that  sameness  or  identity  which  we  ascribe 
to  an  individual  with  the  identity  which,  in  common 
discourse,  is  often  ascribed  to  many  individuals  of  the 
same  species. 

When  we  say  that  pain  and  pleasure,  consciousness 
and  memory,  are  the  same  in  all  men,  this  sameness 
can  only  mean  similarity,  or  sameness  of  kind.  That 
the  pain  of  one  man  can  be  the  same  individual  pain 
with  that  of  another  man  is  no  less  impossible,  than 
that  one  man  should  be  another  man : the  pain  felt  by 
me  yesterday  can  no  more  be  the  pain  I feel  to-day, 
than  yesterday  can  be  this  day ; and  the  same  thing 
may  be  said  of  every  passion  and  of  every  operation  of 
the  mind.  The  same  kind  or  species  of  operation  may 
be  in  different  men,  or  in  the  same  man  at  different 
times;  but  it  is  impossible  that  the  same  individual 
operation  should  be  in  different  men,  or  in  the  same 
man  at  different  times. 

When  Mr.  Locke,  therefore,  speaks  of  “ the  same 
consciousness  being  continued  through  a succession  of 
different  substances  ” ; when  he  speaks  of  “ repeating 
the  idea  of  a past  action,  with  the  same  consciousness 
we  had  of  it  at  the  first,”  and  of  “ the  same  conscious- 
ness extending  to  actions  past  and  to  come  ” ; these 
expressions  are  to  me  unintelligible,  unless  he  means 
not  the  same  individual  consciousness,  but  a conscious- 


OF  PERSONAL  IDENTITY. 


253 


ness  that  is  similar,  or  of  the  same  kind.  If  our  per- 
sonal identity  consists  in  consciousness,  as  this  con- 
sciousness cannot  be  the  same  individually  any  two 
moments,  but  only  of  the  same  kiad^  it  would  follow, 
that  we  are  not  for  any  two  moments  the  same  indi- 
vidual persons,  but  the  same  kind  of  persons.  As  our 
consciousness  sometimes  ceases  to  exist,  as  in  sound 
sleep,  our  personal  identity  jnust  cease  with  it.  Mr. 
Locke  allows,  that  the  same  thing  cannot  have  two 
beginnings  of  existence,  so  that  our  identity  would  be 
irrecoverably  gone  every  time  we  ceased  to  think,  if  it 
was  but  for  a moment* 


* In  addition  to  the  works  already  cited  or  referred  to  on  the  subjects  of 
personality  and  personal  identity,  consult  Bouchitte,  Persistance  de  la  Per- 
sonnalite  aprts  la  Mort^  published  in  the  Memoires  of  the  Moral  Section  of 
the  French  Academy,  Recueil  des  Savants  Etrangers^  Tome  II. ; Broussais, 
De  Vlrritation^  Part  I.  Chap.  V.  Sect.  IV. ; Mill’s  Analysis^  Chap.  XIV. 
Sect.  VII. ; Young’s  Intellectual  Philosophy  Leroux, 

De  V Humanitt^  Introduction.  — Ed. 


22 


ESSAY  IV 


OF  CONCEPTION. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION  IN 
GENERAL. 

I.  Definition  of  the  Term^  with  its  Synonymes,]  Con- 
ceivings imaginings*  apprehendings  understandings  hav- 
ing a notion  of  a things  are  common  words  used  to 
express  that  operation  of  the  understanding  which  the 
logicians  call  simple  apprehension.  The  having  an  idea 
of  a thing  is,  in  common  language,  used  in  the  same 
sense,  chiefly  I think  since  Mr.  Locke’s  time.f 

Logicians  define  simple  apprehension  to  be  the  bare 
conception  of  a thing  without  any  judgment  or  belief 
about  it.  If  this  were  intended  for  a strictly  logical 


* Imagining  should  not  be  confounded  with  conceiving^  &c. ; though  some 
philosophers,  as  Gassendi,  have  not  attended  to  the  distinction.  The  words 
conception^  concept^  notion,  shoujd  be  limited  to  the  thought  of  what  cannot 
be  represented  in  the  imagination,  — as  the  thought  suggested  by  a gen- 
eral term.  The  Leibnitzians  call  this  symbolical,  in  contrast  to  intuitive 
knowledge.  This  is  the  sense  in  which  conceptio  and  conceptus  have  been 
usually  and  correctly  employed.  Mr.  Stewart,  on  the  other  hand,  arbitra- 
rily limits  conception  to  the  reproduction,  in  imagination,  of  an  object  of 
sense  as  actually  perceived.  See  Elements,  Part  I.  Chap.  III.  The  dis- 
crimination in  question  is  best  made  in  the  German  language  of  philoso- 
phy, where  the  term  Begriffe  (conceptions)  is  strongly  contrasted  with 
Anschauungen  (intuitions),  Bilden  (images),  &c.  — H. 

t In  this  country  should  have  been  added.  Locke  only  introduced  into 
English  philosophy  the  term  idea  in  its  Cartesian  universality.  Prior  to 
him,  the  word  was  only  used  with  us  in  its  Platonic  signification.  Before 
Descartes,  David  Buchanan,  a Scotch  philosopher,  who  sojourned  in 
France,  had,  however,  employed  idea  in  an  equal  latitude.  See  Note  G. 
— H. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


255 


definition,  it  might  be  a just  objection  to  it,  that  con- 
ception and  apprehension  are  only  synonymous  words; 
and  that  we  may  as  well  define  conception  by  ap- 
prehension, as  apprehension  by  conception  ; but  it 
ought  to  be  remembered,  that  the  most  simple  opera- 
tions of  the  mind  cannot  be  logically  defined.  To  have 
a distinct  notion  of  them,  we  must  attend  to  them  as 
we  feel  them  in  our  own  minds.  He  that  would  have 
a distinct  notion  of  a scarlet  color  will  never  attain  it 
by  a definition ; he  must  set  it  before  his  eye,  attend  to 
it,  compare  it  with  the  colors  that  come  nearest  to  it, 
and  observe  the  specific  difference,  which  he  will  in 
vain  attempt  to  express. 

Every  man  is  conscious  that  he  can  conceive  a thou- 
sand things,  of  which  he  believes  nothing  at  all ; as  a 
horse  with  wings,  a mountain  of  gold;  but  although 
conception  may  be  without  any  degree  of  belief,  even 
the  weakest  belief  cannot  be  without  conception.  He 
that  believes  must  have  some  conception  of  what  he 
believes. 

Without  attempting  a definition  of  this  operation  of 
the  mind,  I shall  endeavour  to  explain  some  of  its  prop- 
erties ; consider  the  theories  about  it ; and  take  notice 
of  some  mistakes  of  philosophers  concerning  it. 

H.  Characteristic  Properties  of  Conception-]  1.  It 
may  be  observed,  that  conception  enters  as  an  ingredi- 
ent in  every  operation  of  the  mind.  Our  senses  cannot 
give  us  the  belief  of  any  object,  without  giving  some 
conception  of  it  at  the  same  time.  No  man  can  either 
remember  or  reason  about  things  of  which  he  has  no 
conception.  When  we  will  to  exert  any  of  oar  active 
powers,  there  must  be  some  conception  of  what  we  Avill 
to  do.  There  can  be  no  desire  nor  aversion,  love  nor 
hatred,  without  some  conception  of  the  object.  We 
cannot  feel  pain  without  conceiving  it,  though  we  can 
conceive  it  without  feeling  it.  These  things  are  self- 
evident. 

In  every  operation  of  the  mind,  therefore,  in  every 
thing  we  call  thought,  there  must  be  conception. 


256  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

When  we  analyze  the  various  operations  either  of  the 
understanding  or  of  the  will,  we  shall  always  find  this 
at  the  bottom,  like  the  caput  mortuum  of  the  chemists, 
or  the  materia  prima  of  the  Peripatetics ; but  though 
there  is  no  operation  of  mind  without  conception,  yet 
it  may  be  found  naked,  detached  from  all  others,  and 
then  it  is  called  simple  apprehension^  or  the  bare  con- 
ception of  a thing. 

As  all  the  operations  of  our  mind  are  expressed  by 
language,  every  one  knows  that  it  is  one  thing  to  under- 
stand what  is  said,  to  conceive  or  apprehend  its  mean- 
ing, whether  it  be  a word,  a sentence,  or  a discourse ; 
it  is  another  thing  to  judge  of  it,  to  assent  or  dissent, 
to  be  persuaded  or  moved.  The  first  is  simple  appre- 
hension, and  may  be  without  the  last,  but  the  last  can- 
not be  without  the  first. 

2.  In  bare  conception  there  can  neither  be  truth  nor 
falsehood^  because  it  neither  affirms  nor  denies.  Every 
judgment,  and  every  proposition  by  which  judgment  is 
expressed,  must  be  true  or  false ; and  the  qualities  of 
true  and  false,  in  their  proper  sense,  can  belong  to 
nothing  but  to  judgments,  or  to  propositions  which 
express  judgment.  In  the  bare  conception  of  a thing 
there  is  no  judgment,  opinion,  or  belief  included,  and 
therefore  it  cannot  be  either  true  or  false. 

But  it  may  be  said.  Is  there  any  thing  more  certain 
than  that  men  may  have  true  or  false  conceptions,  true 
or  false  apprehensions,  of  things  ? I answer,  that  such 
ways  of  speaking  are  indeed  so  common,  and  so  well 
authorized  by  custom,  the  arbiter  of  language,  that  it 
would  be  presumption  to  censure  them.  It  is  hardly 
possible  to  avoid  using  them.  But  we  ought  to  be 
upon  our  guard  that  we  be  not  misled  by  them  to  con- 
found things  which,  though  often  expressed  by  the 
same  words,  are  really  different.  We  must  therefore 
remember,  that  all  the  words  by  which  we  signify  the 
bare  conception  of  a thing  are  likewise  used  to  signify 
our  opinions  when  we  wish  to  express  them  with  mod- 
esty and  diffidence.  Thus,  instead  of  saying,  “ This  is 
my  opinion,’’  or  “ This  is  my  judgment,”  which  has  the 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


257 


air  of  dogmaticalness,  we  say,  “ I conceive  it  to  be 
thus,”  which  is  understood  as  a modest  declaration  of 
our  judgment.  In  like  manner,  when  any  thing  is  said 
which  we  take  to  be  impossible,  we  say,  “We  cannot 
conceive  it,”  meaning  that  we  cannot  believe  it.  And 
we  shall  always  find,  that,  when  we  speak  of  true  or 
false  conceptions,  we  mean  true  or  false  opinions.  An 
opinion,  though  ever  so  wavering,  or  ever  so  modestly 
expressed,  must  be  either  true  or  false ; but  a bare  con- 
ception, which  expresses  no  opinion  or  judgment,  can 
be  neither. 

If  we  analyze  those  speeches  in  which  men  attrib- 
ute truth  or  falsehood  to  our  conceptions  of  things,  we 
shall  find,  in  every  case,  that  there  is  some  opinion  or 
judgment  implied  in  what  they  call  conception.  A 
child  conceives  the  moon  to  be  flat,  and  a foot  or  two 
broad  ; that  is,  this  is  his  opinion  : and  when  we  say  it 
is  a false  notion,  or  a false  conception,  we  mean  that  it 
is  a false  opinion.  He  conceives  the  city  of  London 
to  be  like  his  country  village ; that  is,  he  believes  it  to 
be  so  till  he  is  better  instructed.  He  conceives  a lion 
to  have  horns;  that  is,  he  believes  that  the  animal 
which  men  call  a lion  has  horns.  Such  opinions  lan- 
guage authorizes  us  to  call  conceptions ; and  they  may 
be  true  or  false.  But  bare  conception,  or  what  the 
logicians  call  simple  apprehension^  implies  no  opinion, 
however  slight,  and  therefore  can  neither  be  true  nor 
false. 

3.  Of  all  the  analogies  between  the  operations  of  body 
and  those  of  the  mind^  there  is  none  so  strong  and  so 
obvious  to  all  mankind  as  that  which  there  is  between 
paintings  or  other  plastic  arts^  and  the  power  of  conceiv- 
ing objects  in  the  mind.  Hence,  in  all  languages,  the 
words  by  which  this  power  of  the  mind  and  its  various 
modifications  are  expressed  are  analogical,  and  bor- 
rowed from  those  arts.  We  consider  this  power  of  the 
mind  as  a plastic  power,  by  which  we  form  to  ourselves 
images  of  the  objects  of  thought. 

In  vain  should  we  attempt  to  avoid  this  analogical 
language,  for  we  have  no  other  language  upon  the  sub- 
22^ 


258  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

ject;  yet  it  is  dangerous,  and  apt  to  mislead.  All  ana- 
logical and  figurative  words  have  a double  meaning  ; 
and,  if  we  are  not  very  much  upon  our  guard,  we  slide 
insensibly  from  the  borrowed  and  figurative  meaning 
into  the  primitive.  We  are  prone  to  carry  the  parallel 
between  the  things  compared  farther  than  it  will  hold, 
and  thus  very  naturally  to  fall  into  error. 

To  avoid  this  as  far  as  possible  in  the  present  sub- 
ject, it  is  proper  to  attend  to  the  dissimilitude  between 
conceiving  a thing  in  the  mind,  and  painting  it  to  the 
eye,  as  well  as  to  their  similitude.  The  similitude 
strikes  and  gives  pleasure.  The  dissimilitude  we  are 
less  disposed  to  observe.  But  the  philosopher  ought  to 
attend  to  it,  and  to  carry  it  always  in  mind,  in  his  rea- 
sonings on  this  subject,  as  a monitor,  to  warn  him 
against  the  errors  into  which  the  analogical  language 
is  apt  to  draw  him. 

When  a man  paints^  there  is  some  work  done,  which 
remains  when  his  hand  is  taken  off,  and  continues  to 
exist  though  he  should  think  no  more  of  it.  Every 
stroke  of  his  pencil  produces  an  effect,  and  this  effect 
is  different  from  his  action  in  making  it ; for  it  remains 
and  continues  to  exist  when  the  action  ceases.  The 
action  of  painting  is  one  thing,  the  picture  produced  is 
another  thing.  The  first  is  the  cause,  the  second  is  the 
effect.  Let  us  next  consider  what  is  done  when  he  only 
conceives  this  picture.  He  must  have  conceived  it  be- 
fore he  painted  it : for  this  is  a maxim  universally  ad- 
mitted, that  every  work  of  art  must  first  be  conceived 
in  the  mind  of  the  operator.  What  is  this  conception  ? 
It  is  an  act  of  the  mind,  a kind  of  thought.  This  can- 
not be  denied.  But  does  it  produce  any  effect  besides 
the  act  itself?  Surely  common  sense  answers  this 
question  in  the  negative  : for  every  one  knows  that  it  is 
one  thing  to  conceive,  another  thing  to  bring  forth  into 
effect.  It  is  one  thing  to  project,  another  to  execute. 
A man  may  think  for  a long  time  what  he  is  to  do,  and 
after  all  do  nothing.  Conceiving,  as  well  as  projecting 
or  resolving,  is  what  the  schoolmen  call  an  immanent 
act  of  the  mind,  which  produces  nothing  beyond  itself. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


259 


But  painting  is  a transitive  act,  which  produces  an 
effect  distinct  from  the  operation,  and  this  effect  is  the 
picture.  Let  this,  therefore,  be  always  remembered, 
that  what  is  commonly  called  the  image  of  a thing  in 
the  mind  is  no  more  than  the  act  or  operation  of  the 
mind  in  conceiving  it. 

That  this  is  the  common  sense  of  men  who  are  un- 
tutored by  philosophy,  appears  from  their  language.  If 
one  ignorant  of  the  language  should  ask.  What  is 
meant  by  conceiving  a thing  ? we  should  very  naturally 
answer,  that  it  is  having  an  image  of  it  in  the  mind; 
and  perhaps  we  could  not  explain  the  word  better. 
This  shows  that  conception, /and  the  image  of  a thing 
in  the  mind,  are  synonymous  expressions.  The  image 
in  the  mind,  therefore,  is  not  the  object  of  conception, 
nor  is  it  any  effect  produced  by  conception  as  a cause. 
It  is  the  conception  itself.  That  very  mode  of  thinking 
which  we  call  conception  is  by  another  name  called  an 
image  in  the  mind.* 

Nothing  more  readily  gives  the  conception  of  a thing 
than  the  seeing  an  image  of  it.  Hence,  by  a figure 
common  in  language,  conception  is  called  an  image  of 
the  thing  conceived.  But  to  show  that  it  is  not  a real 
but  a metaphorical  image,  it  is  called  an  image  in  the 
mind.  We  know  nothing  that  is  properly  in  the  mind 
but  thought ; and  when  any  thing  else  is  said  to  be  in 
the  mind,  the  expression  must  be  figurative,  and  signify 
some  kind  of  thought. 

4.  Taking  along  with  us  what  is  said  in  the  last 
article,  to  guard  us  against  the  seduction  of  the  analog- 
ical language  used  on  this  subject,  we  may  observe  a 
very  strong  analogy^  not  only  between  conceiving  and 
painting  in  general,,  but  between  the  different  kinds  of 
our  conceptions,,  and  the  different  works  of  the  painter. 
He  either  makes  fancy  pictures,  or  he  copies  from  the 


* We  ought,  however,  to  distinguish  imagination  and  image^  conception 
and  concept.  Imagination  and  conception  ought  to  be  employed  in  speaking 
of  the  mental  modification,  one  and  indivisible,  considered  as  an  act ; 
image  and  concept^  in  speaking  of  it  considered  as  a product  or  immediate 
object.  — II. 


260  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

painting  of  others,  or  he  paints  from  the  life,  that  is, 
from  real  objects  of  art  or  nature  which  he  has  seen. 
I think  our  conceptions  admit  of  a division  very  similar. 

Firsts  there  are  conceptions  which  may  be  called 
fancy  pictures.  They  are  commonly  called  creatures 
of  fancy,  or  of  imagination.  They  are  not  the  copies 
of  any  original  that  exists,  but  are  originals  themselves. 
Such  was  the  conception  which  Swift  formed  of  the 
island  of  Laputa  and  of  the  country  of  the  Lillipu- 
tians ; Cervantes,  of  Don  Quixote  and  his  Squire ; Har- 
rington, of  the  Government  of  Oceana  ; and  Sir  Thom- 
as More,  of  that  of  Utopia.  We  can  give  names  to  such 
creatures  of  imagination,  conceive  them  distinctly,  and 
reason  consequentially  concerning  them,  though  they 
never  had  an  existence.  They  were  conceived  by  their 
creators,  and  may  be  conceived  by  others,  but  they  never 
existed.  We  do  not  ascribe  the  qualities  of  true  or 
false  to  them,  because  they  are  not  accompanied  with 
any  belief,  nor  do  they  imply  any  affirmation  or  nega- 
tion. 

Setting  aside  those  creatures  of  imagination,  there 
are  other  conceptions,  which  may  be  called  copies^  be- 
cause they  have  an  original  or  archetype  to  which  they 
refer,  and  with  which  they  are  believed  to  agree ; and 
we  call  them  true  or  false  conceptions,  according  as 
they  agree  or  disagree  with  the  standard  to  which  they 
are  referred.  These  are  of  two  kinds,  which  have  dif- 
ferent standards  or  originals. 

The  first  kind  is  analogous  to  pictures  taken  from 
the  life.  We  have  conceptions  of  individual  things  that 
really  exist,  such  as  the  city  of  London,  or  the  govern- 
ment of  Venice.  Here  the  things  conceived  are  the 
originals ; and  our  conceptions  are  called  true  when 
they  agree  with  the  thing  conceived.  Thus,  my  con- 
ception of  the  city  of  London  is  true  when  I conceive 
it  to  be  what  it  really  is. 

Individual  things  which  really  exist  being  the  crea- 
tures of  God  (though  some  of  them  may  receive  their 
outward  form  from  man),  he  only  who  made  them 
knows  their  whole  nature;  we  know  them  but  in  part. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


261 


and  therefore  our  conceptions  of  them  must  in  all  cases 
be  imperfect  and  inadequate  ; yet  they  may  be  true  and 
just,  as  far  as  they  reach. 

The  second  kind  is  analogous  to  the  copies  which 
the  painter  makes  from  pictures  done  before.  Such,  I 
think,  are  the  conceptions  we  have  of  what  the  ancients 
called  universals ; that  is,  of  things  which  belong  or 
may  belong  to  many  individuals.  These  are  kinds  and 
species  of  things  ; — such  as  man,  or  elephant,  which 
are  species  of  substances  ; wisdom,  or  courage,  which 
are  species  of  qualities ; equality,  or  similitude,  which 
are  species  of  relations.* 

It  may  be  asked.  From  what  original  are  these  con- 
ceptions formed  ? and  When  are  they  said  to  be  true 
or  false  ? 

It  appears  to  me  that  the  original  from  which^they 
are  copied,  that  is,  the  thing  conceived,  is  the  concep- 
tion or  meaning  which  other  men  who  understand  the 
language  affix  to  the  same  words.  Things  are  par- 
celled into  kinds  and  sorts^  not  by  nature,  but  by  men. 
The  individual  things  we  are  connected  with  are  so 
many,  that  to  give  a proper  name  to  every  individual 
would  be  impossible.  We  could  never  attain  the 
knowledge  of  them  that  is  necessary,  nor  converse  and 
reason  about  them,  without  sorting  them  according  to 
their  different  attributes.  Those  that  agree  in  certain 
attributes  are  thrown  into  one  parcel,  and  have  a gen- 
eral name  given  them,  which  belongs  equally  to  every 
individual  in  that  parcel.  This  common  name  must, 
therefore,  signify  those  attributes  which  have  been  ob- 
served to  be  common  to  every  individual  in  that  parcel, 
and  nothing  else. 

That  such  general  words  may  answer  their  intention, 
all  that  is  necessary  is  that  those  who  use  them  should 
affix  the  same  meaning  or  notion,  that  is,  the  same 
conception,  to  them.  The  common  meaning  is  the  stand- 


* Of  all  such  we  can  have  no  adequate  imagination.  A universal^  when 
represented  in  imagination,  is  no  longer  adequate,  no  longer  a universal. 
We  cannot  have  an  image  of  “horse,”  but  only  of  some  individual  of  that 
species.  We  may^  however.^  have  a notion  or  conception  of  it.  — H. 


262  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

arc!  by  which  such  conceptions  are  formed,  and  they 
are  said  to  be  true  or  false ^ according  as  they  agree  or 
disagree  with  it.  Thus,  my  conception  of  felony  is 
true  and  just  when  it  agrees  with  the  meaning  of  that 
word  in  the  laws  relating  to  it,  and  in  authors  who  un- 
derstand the  law.  The  meaning  of  the  word  is  the 
thing  conceived;  and  that  meaning  is  the  conception 
affixed  to  it  by  those  who  best  understand  the  lan- 
guage. 

If  all  the  general  words  of  a language  had  a precise 
meaning,  and  were  perfectly  understood,  as  mathemati- 
cal terms  are,  all  verbal  disputes  would  be  at  an  end, 
and  men  would  never  seem  to  differ  in  opinion  but 
when  they  differed  in  reality  ; but  this  is  far  from  being 
the  case.  The  meaning  of  most  general  words  is  not 
learned  like  that  of  mathematical  terms,  by  an  accurate 
definition,  but  by  the  experience  we  happen  to  have, 
by  hearing  them  used  in  conversation.  From  such  ex- 
perience we  collect  their  meaning  by  a kind  of  induc- 
tion ; and  as  this  induction  is  for  the  most  part  lame 
and  imperfect,  it  happens  that  different  persons  join 
different  conceptions  to  the  same  general  word;  and 
though  we  intend  to  give  them  the  meaning  which  use, 
the  arbiter  of  language,  has  put  upon  them,  this  is  dif- 
ficult to  find,  and  apt  to  be  mistaken,  even  by  the 
candid  and  attentive.  Hence,  in  innumerable  disputes, 
men  do  not  really  differ  in  their  judgments,  but  in  the 
way  of  expressing  them. 

5.  Our  conception  of  things  may  he  strong  and  lively^ 
or  it  may  be  faint  and  languid  in  all  degrees.  These 
are  qualities  which  properly  belong  to  our  conceptions, 
though  we  have  no  names  for  them  but  such  as  are 
analogical.  Every  man  is  conscious  of  such  a differ- 
ence in  his  conceptions,  and  finds  his  lively  conceptions 
most  agreeable,  when  the  object  is  not  of  such  a nature 
as  to  give  pain. 

It  seems  easier  to  form  a lively  conception  of  objects 
that  are  familiar,  than  of  those  that  are  not.  Our  con- 
ceptions of  visible  objects  are  commonly  the  most  lively, 
when  other  circumstances  are  equal : hence  poets  not 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


263 


only  delight  in  the  description  of  visible  objects,  but 
find  means,  by  metaphor,  analogy,  and  allusion,  to 
clothe  every  object  they  describe  with  visible  qualities. 
The  lively  conception  of  these  makes  the  object  appear, 
as  it  were,  before  our  eyes.  Lord  Karnes,  in  his  Ele- 
ments of  Criticism^  has  shown  of  what  importance  it  is 
in  works  of  taste  to  give  to  objects  described  what  he 
calls  ideal  presence.  To  produce  this  in  the  mind  is 
indeed  the  capital  aim  of  poetical  and  rhetorical  de- 
scription. It  carries  the  man,  as  it  were,  out  of  him- 
self, and  makes  him  a spectator  of  the  scene  described. 
This  ideal  presence  seems  to  me  to  be  nothing  else  but 
a lively  conception  of  the  appearance  which  the  object 
would  make  if  really  present  to  tjie  eye.  It  may  also 
be  observed,  that  our  conceptions  of  visible  objects 
become  more  lively  by  giving  them  motion,  and  more 
still  by  giving  them  life  and  intellectual  qualities. 
Hence,  in  poetry,  the  whole  creation  is  animated  and 
endowed  with  sense  and  reflection. 

Abstract  and  general  conceptions  are  never  lively^ 
though  they  may  be  distinct ; and  therefore,  however 
necessary  in  philosophy,  seldom  enter  into  poetical 
description  without  being  particularized  or  clothed  in 
some  visible  dress.* 

6.  Our  conceptions  of  things  may  be  clear ^ distinct,^ 
and  steady ; or  they  may  be  obscure^  indistinct,  and  wa- 
vering, The  liveliness  of  our  conceptions  gives  pleas- 
ure, but  it  is  their  distinctness  and  steadiness  that  ena- 
ble us  to  judge  right,  and  to  express  our  sentiments  with 
perspicuity. 

If  we  inquire  into  the  cause  why,  among  persons 
speaking  or  writing  on  the  same  subject,  we  find  in  one 
so  much  darkness,  in  another  so  much  perspicuity,  I 
believe  the  chief  cause  will  be  found  to  be,  that  one 
had  a distinct  and  steady  conception  of  what  he  said 


* They  thus  cease  to  be  aught  abstract  and  general^  and  become  merely 
individual  representations.  In  precise  language,  they  are  no  longer 
vogjiara^  but  <|)ai/raor/Adra ; no  longer  Begriffe,  but  Anschauungen ; no 
longer  notions  or  concepts^  but  images.  The  word  '‘'"particularized  ” ought  to 
have  been  individualized.  — H. 


264  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

or  wrote,  and  the  other  had  not : men  generally  find 
means  to  express  distinctly  what  they  have  conceived 
distinctly*  Horace  observes,  that  proper  words  spon- 
taneously follow  distinct  conceptions,  — Verbaque  pro- 
visam  rem  non  invita  sequuntur. 

Some  persons  find  it  difficult  to  enter  into  a mathe- 
matical demonstration.  I believe  we  shall  always  find 
the  reason  to  be,  that  they  do  not  distinctly  apprehend  it. 
A man  cannot  be  convinced  by  what  he  does  not  un- 
derstand. On  the  other  hand,  I think  a man  cannot 
understand  a demonstration  without  seeing  the  force 
of  it.  I speak  of  such  demonstrations  as  those  of 
Euclid,  where  every  step  is  set  down,  and  nothing  left 
to  be  supplied  by  the  reader.  Sometimes  one'who  has 
got  through  the  first  four  books  of  Euclid’s  Elements^ 
and  sees  the  force  of  the  demonstrations,  finds  diffi- 
culty in  the  fifth.  What  is  the  reason  of  this  ? You 
may  find,  by  a little  conversation  with  him,  that  he  has 
not  a clear  and  steady  conception  of  ratios  and  of  the 
terms  relating  to  them.  When  the  terms  used  in  the 
fifth  book  have  become  familiar,  and  readily  excite  in 
his  mind  a clear  and  steady  conception  of  their  mean- 
ing, you  may  venture  to  affirm  that  he  will  be  able  to 
understand  the  demonstrations  of  that  book,  and  to 
see  the  force  of  them. 

If  this  be  really  the  case,  as  it  seems  to  be,  it  leads 
us  to  think  that  men  are  very  much  upon  a level  with 
regard  to  mere  judgment,  when  we  take  that  faculty 
apart  from  the  apprehension  or  conception  of  the  things 
about  which  we  judge ; so  that  a sound  judgment 
seems  to  be  the  inseparable  companion  of  a clear  and 
steady  apprehension  : and  we  ought  not  to  consider 
these  two  as  talents,  of  which  the  one  may  fall  to  the 
lot  of  one  man,  and  the  other  to  the  lot  of  another,  but 
as  talents  which  always  go  together. 

It  may,  however,  be  observed,  that  some  of  our  con- 
ceptions may  be  more  subservient  to  reasoning  than 


* For  several  just  and  discriminating  remarks  on  this  subject,  see  Stew- 
art’s Elements^  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  — Ed. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


265 


others  which  are  equally  clear  and  distinct.  It  was  be- 
fore observed,  that  some  of  our  conceptions  are  of  indi- 
vidual  things,  others  of  things  general  and  abstract  It 
may  happen,  that  a man  who  has  very  clear  concep- 
tions of  things  individual  is  not  so  happy  in  those  of 
things  general  and  abstract.  And  this  I take  to  be  the 
reason  why  we  find  men  who  have  good  judgment  in 
matters  of  common  life,  and  perhaps  good  talents  for 
poetical  or  rhetorical  composition,  who  find  it  very  dif- 
ficult to  enter  into  abstract  reasoning. 

7.  It  has  been  observed  by  many  authors,  that,  when 
we  barely  conceive  any  object,  the  ingredients  of  that 
conception  must  either  be  things  with  ivhich  we  were 
before  acquainted  by  some  other  original  power  of  the 
mind^  or  they  must  be  parts  or  attributes  of  such  things. 
Thus,  a man  cannot  conceive  colors,  if  he  never  saw, 
nor  sounds,  if  he  never  heard.  If  a man  had  not  a 
conscience,  he  could  not  conceive  what  is  meant  by 
moral  obligation,  or  by  right  and  wrong  in  conduct. 

Fancy  may  combine  things  that  never  were  com- 
bined in  reality.  It  may  enlarge  or  diminish,  multiply 
or  divide,  compound  and  fashion  the  objects  which 
nature  presents  ; but  it  cannot,  by  the  utmost  effort  of 
that  creative  power  which  we  ascribe  to  it,  bring  any 
one  simple  ingredient  into  its  productions  which  nature 
has  not  framed,  and  brought  to  our  knowledge  by  some 
other  faculty.  This  Mr.  Locke  has  expressed  as  beau- 
tifully as  justly.  “ The  dominion  of  man,  in  this  little 
world  of  his  own  understanding,  is  much  the  same  as 
ill  the  great  world  of  visible  things  ; wherein  his  power, 
however  managed  by  art  and  skill,  reaches  no  farther 
than  to  compound  and  divide  the  materials  that  are 
made  to  his  hand,  but  can  do  nothing  towards  making 
the  least  particle  of  matter,  or  destroying  one  atom  that 
is  already  in  being.  The  same  inability  will  every  one 
find  in  himself  to  fashion  in  his  understanding  any 
simple  idea  not  received  by  the  powers  which  God  has 
given  him.” 

I think  all  philosophers  agree  in  this  sentiment.  Mr. 
Hume,  indeed,  after  acknowledging  the  truth  of  the 
23 


266  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

principle  in  general,  mentions  what  he  thinks  a single 
exception  to  it ; — that  a man,  who  had  seen  all  the 
shades  of  a particular  color  except  one,  might  frame  in 
his  mind  a conception  of  that  shade  which  he  never 
saw.  I think  this  is  not  an  exception  ; because  a par- 
ticular shade  of  a color  differs  not  specifically^  but  only 
in  degree^  from  other  shades  of  the  same  color. 

It  is  proper  to  observe,  that  our  most  simple  concep- 
tions are  not  those  which  nature  immediately  presents 
to  us.  When  we  come  to  years  of  understanding,  we 
have  the  power  of  analyzing  the  objects  of  nature,  of 
distinguishing  their  several  attributes  and  relations,  of 
conceiving  them  one  by  one,  and  of  giving  a name  to 
each,  whose  meaning  extends  only  to  that  single  attri- 
bute or  relation  : and  thus  our  most  simple  conceptions 
are  not  those  of  any  object  in  nature,  but  of  some  sin- 
gle attribute  or  relation  of  such  objects.  Thus  nature 
presents  to  our  senses  bodies  that  are  extended  in  three 
dimensions,  and  solid.  By  analyzing  the  notion  we 
have  of  body  from  our  senses,  we  form  to  ourselves  the 
conceptions  of  extension,  solidity,  space,  a point,  a line, 
a surface  ; all  which  are  more  simple  conceptions  than 
that  of  a body.  But  they  are  the  elements,  as  it  were, 
of  which  our  conception  of  a body  is  made  up,  and 
into  which  it  may  be  analyzed. 

8.  Though  our  conceptions  must  be  confined  to  the 
ingredients  mentioned  in  the  last  article,  ive  are  uncon- 
fined with  regard  to  the  arrangement  of  those  ingredients. 
Here  we  may  pick  and  choose,  and  form  an  endless 
variety  of  combinations  and  compositions,  which  we  call 
creatures  of  the  imagination.  These  may  be  clearly 
conceived,  though  they  never  existed  : and,  indeed, 
every  thing  that  is  made  must  have  been  conceived 
before  it  was  made.  Every  work  of  human  art,  and 
every  plan  of  conduct,  whether  in  public  or  in  private 
life,  must  have  been  conceived  before  it  is  brought  to 
execution.  And  we  cannot  avoid  thinking,  that  the 
Almighty,  before  he  created  the  universe  by  his  power, 
had  a distinct  conception  of  the  whole  and  of  every  part, 
and  saw  it  to  be  good,  and  agreeable  to  his  intention. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


267 


It  is  the  business  of  man,  as  a rational  creature,  to 
employ  this  unlimited  power  of  conception  for  planning 
his  conduct  and  enlarging  his  knowledge.  It  seems  to 
be  peculiar  to  beings  endowed  with  reason  to  act  by  a 
preconceived  plan.  Brute  animals  seem  either  to  want 
this  power,  or  to  have  it  in  a very  low  degree.  They 
are  moved  by  instinct,  habit,  appetite,  or  natural  affec- 
tion, according  as  these  principles  are  stirred  by  the 
present  occasion.  But  I see  no  reason  to  think  that 
they  can  propose  to  themselves  a connected  plan  of  life, 
or  form  general  rules  of  conduct.  Indeed,  we  see  that 
many  of  the  human  species,  to  whom  God  has  given 
this  power,  make  little  use  of  it.  They  act  without  a 
plan,  as  the  passion  or  appetite  which  is  strongest  at 
the  time  leads  them. 

9.  The  last  property  I shall  mention  of  this  faculty 
is  that  which  essentially  distinguishes  it  from  every 
other  power  of  the  mind ; and  it  is,  that  it  is  not  em- 
ployed solely  about  things  which  have  existence,  I can 
conceive  a winged  horse  or  a centaur,  as  easily  and  as 
distinctly  as  I can  conceive  a man  whom  I have  seen. 
Nor  does  this  distinct  conception  incline  my  judgment 
in^the  least  to  the  belief,  that  a winged  horse  or  a cen- 
taur ever  existed. 

It  is  not  so  with  the  other  operations  of  our  minds. 
They  are  employed  about  real  existences,  and  carry 
with  them  the  belief  of  their  objects.  When  I feel 
pain,  I am  compelled  to  believe  that  the  pain  that  I 
feel  has  a real  existence.  When  I perceive  any  exter- 
nal object,  my  belief  of  the  real  existence  of  the  object 
is  irresistible.  When  I distinctly  remember  any  event, 
though  that  event  may  not  now  exist,  I can  have  no 
doubt  but  it  did  exist.  That  consciousness  which  we 
have  of  the  operations  of  our  own  minds  implies  a be- 
lief of  the  real  existence  of  those  operations. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  powers  of  sensation,  of  percep- 
tion, of  memory,  and  of  consciousness  are  all  employed 
solely  about  objects  that  do  exist,  or  have  existed.  But 
conception  is  often  employed  about  objects  that  neither 
do,  nor  did,  nor  will  exist.  This  is  the  very  nature  of 


268  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

this  faculty,  that  its  object,  though  distinctly  conceived, 
may  have  no  existence.  Such  an  object  we  call  a 
creature  of  imagination  ; but  this  creature  never  was 
created. 

That  we  may  not  impose  upon  ourselves  in  this  mat- 
ter, we  must  distinguish  between  that  act  or  operation 
of  the  mind  which  we  call  conceiving  an  object,  and 
the  object  which  we  conceive.  When  we  conceive  any 
thing,  there  is  a real  act  or  operation  of  the  mind ; of 
this  we  are  conscious,  and  can  have  no  doubt  of  its  ex- 
istence : but  every  such  act  must  have  an  object ; for 
he  that  conceives  must  conceive  something.  Suppose 
he  conceives  a centaur,  he  may  have  a distinct  concep- 
tion of  this  object,  though  no  centaur  ever  existed. 

The  philosopher  will  say,  I cannot  conceive  a cen- 
taur without  having  an  idea  of  it  in  my  mind.  But  I 
am  at  a loss  to  understand  what  he  means.  He  surely 
does  not  mean  that  I cannot  conceive  it  without  con- 
ceiving it.  This  would  make  me  no  wiser.  What 
then  is  this  idea  ? Is  it  an  animal,  half  horse  and  half 
man  ? No.  Then  I am  certain  it  is  not  the  thing  I 
conceive.  Perhaps  he  will  say,  that  the  idea  is  an 
image  of  the  animal,  and  is  the  immediate  object  of 
my  conception,  and  that  the  animal  is  the  mediate  or 
remote  object. 

To  this  I answer : — First.^  I am  certain  there  are  not 
two  objects  of  this  conception,  but  one  only ; which  is 
as  immediate  an  object  of  my  conception  as  any  can 
be.  Secondly^  this  one  object  which  I conceive  is  not 
the  image  of  an  animal,  it  is  an  animal.  I know  what 
it  is  to  conceive  an  image  of  an  animal,  and  what  it  is 
to  conceive  an  animal ; and  I can  distinguish  the  one 
of  these  from  the  other  without  any  danger  of  mistake. 
The  thing  I conceive  is  a body  of  a certain  figure  and 
color,  having  life  and  spontaneous  motion.  The  phi- 
losopher says  that  the  idea  is  an  image  of  the  animal, 
but  that  it  has  neither  body,  nor  color,  nor  life,  nor 
spontaneous  motion.  This  I am  not  able  to  compre- 
hend. Thirdly^  I wish  to  know  how  this  idea  comes  to 
be  an  object  of  my  thought,  when  I cannot  even  con- 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


269 


ceive  what  it  means ; and  if  I did  conceive  it,  this 
would  be  no  evidence  of  its  existence,  any  more  than 
my  conception  of  a centaur  is  of  its  existence.* 

But  may  not  a man  who  conceives  a centaur  say, 
that  he  has  a distinct  image  of  it  in  his  mind  ? I think 
he  may.  And  if  he  means  by  this  way  of  speaking 
what  the  vulgar  mean,  who  never  heard  of  the  philo- 
sophical theory  of  ideas,  I find  no  fault  with  it.  By  a 
distinct  image  in  the  mind,  the  vulgar  mean  a distinct 
conception  : and  it  is  natural  to  call  it  so,  on  account 
of  the  analogy  between  an  image  of  a thing  and  the 
conception  of  it.  On  account  of  this  analogy,  obvious 
to  all  mankind,  this  operation  is  called  imagination^ 
and  “ an  image  in  the  mind  ” is  only  a periphrasis  for 
imagination.  But  to  infer  from  this  that  there  is  really 
an  image  in  the  mind,  distinct  from  the  operation  of  con- 


^ Sir  W.  Hamilton,  in  his  Supplementary  Dissertations^  Note  B,  § 2,  re- 
marks as  follows  on  this  puzzle  of  Dr.  Reid’s  : — “ Reid  maintains  that  in 
our  cognitions  there  must  be  an  object  (real  or  imaginary)  distinct  from  the 
operation  of  the  mind  conversant  about  it ; for  the  act  is  one  thing,  and  the 
object  of  the  act  another.  This  is  erroneous,  — at  least,  it  is  erroneously  ex- 
pressed. Take  an  imaginary  object,  and  Reid’s  own  instance,  — a centaur. 
Here  he  says,  ‘ The  sole  object  of  conception  (imagination)  is  an  animal 
which  I believe  never  existed.’  It  ‘ never  existed  ’ ; that  is,  never  really, 
never  in  nature,  never  externally,  existed.  But  it  is  ‘ an  object  of  imagina- 
tion.’ It  is  not,  therefore,  a mere  non-existence ; for  if  it  had  no  kind  of 
existence,  it  could  not  possibly  be  the  positive  object  of  any  kind  of  thought. 
For  were  it  an  absolute  nothing,  it  could  have  no  qualities  {non-entis  nulla 
sunt  attribuia)  ; but  the  object  we  are  conscious  of,  as  a centaur,  has  quali- 
ties, — qualities  which  constitute  it  a determinate  something,  and  distin- 
guish it  from  every  other  entity  whatsoever.  We  must,  therefore,  perforce, 
allow  it  some  sort  of  imaginary,  ideal  representative,  or  (in  the  older  mean- 
ing of  the  word)  objective  existence  in  the  mind.  Now  this  existence  can 
only  be  one  or  other  of  two  sorts ; for  such  object  in  the  mind  either  is,  or 
is  not,  a mode  of  mind.  Of  these  alternatives  the  latter  cannot  be  supposed  ; 
for  this  would  be  an  affirmation  of  the  crudest  kind  of  non-egoistical  repre- 
sentation, — the  very  hypothesis  against  which  Reid  so  strenuously  con- 
tends. The  former  alternative  remains,  — that  it  is  a mode  of  the  imagining 
mind ; that  it  is  in  fact  the  plastic  act  of  imagination  considered  as  repre- 
senting to  itself  a certain  possible  form,  — a centaur.  But  then  Reid’s  as- 
sertion, that  there  is  always  an  object  distinct  from  the  operation  of  the 
mind  conversant  about  it,  the  act  being  one  thing,  the  object  of  the  act 
another,  must  be  surrendered.  For  the  object  and  the  act  are  here  only 
one  and  the  same  thing  in  two  several  relations.  Reid’s  error  consists  in 
mistaking  a logical  for  a metaphysical  difference, — a distinction  of  rela- 
tion for  a distinction  of  entity.  Or  is  the  error  only  from  the  vagueness 
and  ambiguity  of  expression  ? ” — Ed. 

23* 


270  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

ceiving  the  object^  is  to  be  misled  by  an  analogical  ex- 
pression ; as  if,  from  the  phrases  of  deliberating  and 
balancing  things  in  the  mind,  we  should  infer  that  there 
is  really  a balance  existing  in  the  mind  for  weighing 
motives  and  arguments. 

III.  Distinction  between  Conception  and  Imagination^ 
I take  imagination,  in  its  most  proper  sense,  to  signify 
a lively  conception  of  objects  of  sight.  This  is  a talent 
of  importance  to  poets  and  orators,  and  deserves  a 
proper  name,  on  account  of  its  connection  with  those 
arts.  According  to  this  strict  meaning  of  the  word, 
imagination  is  distinguished  from  conception  as  a part 
from  the  whole.  We  conceive  the  objecta  of  the  other 
senses,  but  it  is  not  so  proper  to  say  that  we  imagine 
them.  We  conceive  judgment,  reasoning,  propositions, 
and  arguments  ; but  it  is  rather  improper  to  say  that 
we  imagine  these  things. 

This  distinction  between  imagination  and  concep- 
tion may  be  illustrated  by  an  example,  which  Descartes 
uses  to  illustrate  the  distinction  between  imagination 
and  pure  intellection.  We  can  imagine  a triangle  or 
a square  so  clearly  as  to  distinguish  them  from  every 
other  figure.  But  we  cannot  imagine  a figure  of  a 
thousand  equal  sides  and  angles  so  clearly.  The  best 
eye,  by  looking  at  it,  could  not  distinguish  it  from 
every  figure  of  more  or  fewer  sides.  And  that  concep- 
tion of  its  appearance  to  the  eye,  which  we  properly 
call  imagination.)  cannot  be  more  distinct  than  the  ap- 
pearance itself ; yet  we  can  conceive  a figure  of  a thou- 
sand sides,  and  even  can  demonstrate  the  properties 
which  distinguish  it  from  all  figures  of  more  or  fewer 
sides.  It  is  not  by  the  eye,  but  by  a superior  faculty, 
that  we  form  the  notion  of  a great  number,  such  as  a 
thousand : and  a distinct  notion  of  this  number  of  sides 
not  being  to  be  got  by  the  eye,  it  is  not  imagined,  but 
it  is  distinctly  conceived^  and  easily  distinguished  from 
every  other  number.* 


^ It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Reid  did  not  more  fully  develop  the  distinc- 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


271 


IV.  Whether  the  Conceiv ability  of  Things  is  a Test 
of  their  Possibility^]  Writers  on  logic  affirm,  that  our 
conception  of  things  is  a test  of  their  possibitity ; so 
that  what  we  can  distinctly  conceive,  we  may  conclude 


tion  between  imagination  and  conception^  on  which  he  here  and  elsewhere 
inadequately  touches.  Imagination  is  not,  though  in  conformity  to  the  ety- 
mology of  the  term,  to  be  limited  to  the  representation  of  visible  objects. 
Neither  ought  the  term  conceive  to  be  used  in  the  extensive  sense  of  under- 
stand.  — H.  • 

On  the  use  of  these  terms  Mr.  Stewart  expresses  himself  as  follows  : — 
“ Dr  Reid  substitutes  the  word  conception  instead  of  the  simple  apprehension 
of  the  schools,  and  employs  it  in  the  same  extensive  signification.  I think 
it  may  contribute  to  make  our  ideas  more  distinct,  to  restrict  its  meaning ; 
and  for  such  a restriction  we  have  the  authority  of  philosophers  in  a case 
perfectly  analogous.  In  ordinary  language,  we  apply  the  same  word  per- 
ception to  the  knowledge  which  we  have  by  our  senses  of  external  objects, 
and  to  our  knowledge  of  speculative  truth ) and  yet  an  author  would  be 
justly  censured,  who  should  treat  of  these  two  operations  of  mind  under 
the  same  article  of  perception.  I apprehend  there  is  as  wide  a difference 
between  the  conception  of  a truth  and  the  conception  of  an  absent  object  of 
sense,  as  between  the  perception  of  a tree  and  the  perception  of  a mathe- 
matical theorem.  I have  therefore  taken  the  liberty  to  distinguish  also 
the  two  former  operations  of  the  mind;  and  under  the  article  of  conception 
shall  confine  myself  to  that  faculty  whose  province  it  is  to  enable  us  to 
form  a notion  of  our  past  sensations,  or  of  the  objects  of  sense  that  we  have 
formerly  perceived. 

“ The  business  of  conception,  according  to  the  account  I have  given  of 
it,  is  to  present  us  with  an  exact  transcript  of  what  we  have  felt  or  per- 
ceived. But  we  have,  moreover,  a power  of  modifying  our  conceptions.,  by 
combining  the  parts  of  different  ones  together,  so  as  to  form  new  wholes  of 
our  own  creation.  I shall  employ  the  word  imagination  to  express  this 
power ; and  I apprehend  that  this  is  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  if  imag- 
ination be  the  power  which  gives  birth  to  the  productions  of  the  poet  and 
the  painter.”  — Elements^  Part  I.  Chap.  III. 

He  afterwards  shows  that  the  province  of  imagination  is  not  limited  to 
the  perceptions  of  sight,  or  to  the  sensible  world  : — “ All  the  objects  of 
human  knowledge  supply  materials  to  her  forming  hand  ; diversifying  in- 
finitely the  works  she  produces,  while  the  mode  of  her  operation  remains 
essentially  the  same.  As  it  is  the  same  power  of  reasoning  which  enables 
us  to  carry  on  our  investigations  with  respect  to  individual  objects,  and 
with  respect  to  classes  or  genera,  so  it  was  by  the  same  processes  of  analy- 
sis and  combination  that  the  genius  of  Milton  produced  the  garden  of  Eden, 
that  of  Harrington  the  commonwealth  of  Oceana,  and  that  of  Shakspeare 
the  characters  of  Hamlet  and  Falstaff.”  — Ihid.,  Chap.  VII.  See,  also, 
Rauch’s  Psychology^  Part  II.  Sect.  I.  Chap.  II. 

Mr.  Stewart  has  not  been  generally  followed  in  the  restricted  and 
peculiar  sense  which  he  gives  to  the  term  conception.  Sir  W.  Hamilton, 
as  appears  from  his  note  on  page  269,  limits  it  to  the  thought  of  what  can- 
not be  represented  in  the  imagination, — as  the  thought  suggested  by  a 
general  term.  So  does  Dr.  Whewell,  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences^ 
Part  I.  Book  1.  Chap.  V.  — Ed. 


272  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

to  be  possible,  while  of  what  is  impossible  we  can  have 
no  conception. 

This  opinion  has  been  held  by  philosophers  for  more 
than  a hundred  years,  without  contradiction  or  dissent, 
as  far  as  I know ; and  if  it  be  an  error,  it  may  be  of 
some  use  to  inquire  into  its  origin,  and  the  causes  that 
it  has  been  so  generally  received  as  a maxim  whose 
truth  could  not  be  brought  into  doubt. 

One  of  the  fruitless  questions  agitated  among  the 
scholastic  philosophers  in  the  dark  ages  * was,  What  is 
the  criterion  of  truth  ? — as  if  men  could  have  any 
other  way  to  distinguish  truth  from  error  but  by  the 
right  use  of  that  power  of  judging  which  God  has 
given  them. 

Descartes  endeavoured  to  put  an  end  to  this  contro- 
versy, by  making  it  a fundamental  principle  in  his  sys- 
tem, that  ichatever  we  clearly  and  distinctly  perceive  is 
true.  To  understand  this  principle  of  Descartes,  it 
must  be  observed  that  he  gave  the  name  of  perception 
to  every  power  of  the  human  understanding ; and  in 
explaining  this  very  maxim,  he  tells  us  that  sense,  im- 
agination, and  pure  intellection  are  only  different  modes 
of  perceiving,  and  so  the  maxim  was  understood  by  all 
his  followers.  The  learned  Dr.  Cudworth  seems  also 
to  have  adopted  this  principle.  “ The  criterion  of  true 
knowledge,”  says  he,  “ is  only  to  be  looked  for  in  our 
knowledge  and  conceptions  themselves : for  the  entity 
of  all  theoretical  truth  is  nothing  else  but  clear  intelli- 
gibility, and  whatever  is  clearly  conceived  is  an  entity 
and  a truth ; but  that  which  is  false,  Divine  power  itself 
cannot  make  it  to  be  clearly  and  distinctly  understood. 
A falsehood  can  never  be  clearly  conceived  or  appre- 
hended to  be  true.” — Eternal  and  Immutable  Morality^ 
p.  172. 

This  Cartesian  maxim  seems  to  me  to  have  led  the 
way  to  that  now  under  consideration,  which  seems  to 
have  been  adopted  as  the  proper  correction  of  the 


* This  was  more  a question  with  the  Greek  philosophers  than  with  the 
schoolmen.  — H. 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


273 


former.  When  the  authority  of  Descartes  declined, 
men  began  to  see  that  we  may  clearly  and  distinctly 
conceive  what  is  not  true,  but  thought  that  our  concep- 
tion, though  not  in  all  cases  a test  of  truth,  might  be  a 
test  of  possibility.  This,  indeed,  seems  to  be  a neces- 
sary consequence  of  the  received  doctrine  of  ideas  ; it 
being  evident  that  there  can  be  no  distinct  image,  either 
in  the  mind  or  anywhere  else,  of  that  which  is  impos- 
sible. The  ambiguity  of  the  word  conceive^  as  when 
we  say  we  cannot  conceive  such  a thing,  meaning  that 
we  think  it  impossible,  might  likewise  contribute  to  the 
reception  of  this  doctrine. 

But  whatever  was  the  origin  of  this  opinion,  it  seems 
to  prevail  universally,  and  to  be  received  as  a maxim. 

The  bare  having  an  idea  of  the  proposition  proves 
the  thing  not  to  be  impossible ; for  of  an  impossible 
proposition  there  can  be  no  idea.”  — Dr.  Samuel 
Clarke. 

“ Of  that  which  neither  does  nor  can  exist  we  can 
have  no  idea.”  — Lord  Bolingbroke. 

‘‘  The  measure  of  impossibility  to  us  is  inconceiva- 
bleness ; that  of  which  we  can  have  no  idea  but  that, 
reflecting  upon  it,  it  appears  to  be  nothing,  we  pro- 
nounce to  be  impossible.”  — Abernethy. 

‘‘  In  every  idea  is  implied  the  possibility  of  the  exist- 
ence of  its  object,  nothing  being  clearer  than  that  there 
can  be  no  idea  of  an  impossibility,  or  conception  of 
what  cannot  exist.”  — Dr.  Price. 

Impossibile  est  cujus  nullam  notionem  formare  pos- 
sumus ; possibile  e contra,  cui  aliqua  respondet  notio.” 
— Wo  LP 1 1 Ontologia* 


* These  are  not  exactly  Wolfs  expressions.  See  Ontologia^  §§  102, 103; 
Philosophia  Rationalis,  §§  522,  528.  The  same  doctrine  is  held  by  Tschim- 
hausen  and  others.  Iii  so  far,  however,  as  it  is  said  that  inconceivability  is 
the  criterion  of  impossibility,  it  is  manifestly  erroneous.  Of  many  contra- 
dictories we  are  able  to  conceive  neither  ; but,  by  the  law  of  thought  called 
that  of  excluded  middle^  one  of  two  contradictories  must  be  admitted,  — 
must  be  true.  For  example,  we  can  neither  conceive,  on  the  one  hand,  an 
ultimate  minimum  of  space  or  of  time ; nor  can  we,  on  the  other,  conceive 
their  infinite  divisibility.  In  like  manner,  we  cannot  conceive  the  absolute 
commencement  of  time  or  the  utmost  limit  of  space,  and  are  yet  equally 


274  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

“ It  is  an  established  maxim  in  metaphysics,  that 
whatever  the  mind  conceives  includes  the  idea  of  pos- 
sible existence,  or,  in  other  words,  that  nothing  we  im- 
agine is  absolutely  impossible.’’  — D.  Hume. 

It  were  easy  to  muster  up  many  other  respectable 
authorities  for  this  maxim,  and  I have  never  found  one 
that  called  it  in  question.  If  the  maxim  be  true  in  the 
extent  which  the  famous  Wolf  has  given  it,  in  the  pas- 
sage above  quoted,  we  shall  have  a short  road  to  the 
determination  of  every  question  about  the  possibility 
or  impossibility  of  things.  We  need  only  look  into 
our  own  breast,  and  that,  like  the  Urim  and  Thummim, 
will  give  an  infallible  answer.  If  we  can  conceive  the 
thing,  it  is  possible  ; if  not,  it  is  impossible.  And  surely 
every  man  may  know  whether  he  can  conceive  what  is 
affirmed  or  not. 

Other  philosophers  have  been  satisfied  with  one  half 
of  the  maxim  of  Wolf.  They  say,  that  whatever  we 
can  conceive  is  possible ; but  they  do  not  say,  that  what- 
ever we  cannot  conceive  is  impossible.  I cannot  help 
thinking  even  this  to  be  a mistake,  which  philosophers 
have  been  unwarily  led  into,  from  the  causes  before 
mentioned.  My  reasons  are  these  : — 

1.  Whatever  is  said  to  be  possible  or  impossible  is 
expressed  by  a proposition.  Now,  wffiat  is  it  to  con- 
ceive a proposition  ? I think  it  is  no  more  than  to  un- 
derstand distinctly  its  meaning* *  I know  no  more  that 


unable  to  conceive  them  without  any  commencement  or  limit.  The  ab- 
surdity that  would  result  from  the  assertion,  that  all  that  is  inconceivable 
is  impossible,  is  thus  obvious ; and  so  far  Reid’s  criticism  is  just,  though 
not  new.  — H. 

* In  this  sense  of  the  word  conception^  I make  bold  to  say  that  there  is 
no  philosopher  who  ever  held  an  opinion  different  from  that  of  our  author. 
The  whole  dispute  arises  from  Reid’s  giving  a wider  signification  to  this 
term  than  that  which  it  has  generally  received.  In  his  view,  it  has  two 
meanings  ; in  that  of  the  philosophers  whom  he  attacks,  it  has  only  one. 
To  illustrate  this,  take  the  proposition,  A circle  is  a square.  Here  we  easily 
understand  the  meaning  of  the  affirmation,  because  what  is  necessary  to  an 
act  of  judgment  is  merely  that  the  subject  and  predicate  should  be  brought 
into  a unity  of  relation.  A judgment  is  therefore  possible,  even  where  the 
two  terms  are  contradictory.  But  the  philosophers  never  expressed  by 
the  term  conception  this  understanding  of  the  purport  of  a proposition. 
What  they  meant  by  conception  was  not  the  unity  of  relation^  but  the  unity 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


275 


can  be  meant  by  simple  apprehension  or  conception, 
when  applied  to  a proposition.  The  axiom,  therefore, 
amounts  to  this  : every  proposition,  of  which  you  un- 
derstand the  meaning  distinctly,  is  possible.  I am  per- 
suaded that  I understand  as  distinctly  the  meaning  of 
this  proposition,  — Any  two  sides  of  a triangle  are  to- 
gether equal  to  the  thirds  — as  of  this,  — Any  two  sides 
of  a triangle  are  together  greater  than  the  third ; yet 
the  first  of  these  is  impossible. 

Perhaps  it  will  be  said,  that,  though  you  understand 
the  meaning  of  the  impossible  proposition,  you  cannot 
suppose  or  conceive  it  to  be  true. 

Here  we  are  to  examine  the  meaning  of  the  phrases 
of  supposing  and  conceiving  a proposition  to  be  true,  I 
can  certainly  suppose  it  to  be  true,  because  I can  draw 
consequences  from  it  which  I find  to  be  impossible,  as 
well  as  the  proposition  itself.  If  by  conceiving  it  to 
be  true  be  meant  giving  some  degree  of  assent  to  it, 
however  small,  this  I confess  I cannot  do.  But  will  it 
be  said,  that  every  proposition  to  which  I can  give  any 
degree  of  assent  is  possible  ? This  contradicts  experi- 
ence, and  therefore  the  maxim  cannot  be  true  in  this 
sense.  Sometimes,  when  we  say  that  we  cannot  con- 
ceive a thing  to  be  true,  we  mean  by  that  expression, 
that  we  judge  it  to  be  impossible.  In  this  sense,  I can- 
not, indeed,  conceive  it  to  be  true  that  two  sides  of  a 
triangle  are  equal  to  a third.  I judge  it  to  be  impos- 
sible. If,  then,  we  understand  in  this  sense  the  maxim, 
that  nothing  we  can  conceive  is  impossible,  the  mean- 
ing will  be,  that  nothing  is  impossible  which  we  judge 


of  representation ; and  this  unity  of  representation  they  made  the  criterion 
of  logical  possibility.  To  take  the  example  already  given,  they  did  not 
say  a circle  may  possibly  be  a square,  because  we  can  understand  the  mean- 
ing of  the  proposition,  A circle  is  square ; but,  on  the  contrary,  they  said  it 
is  impossible  that  a circle  can  be  square,  and  the  proposition  affirming  this 
is  necessarily  false,  because  we  cannot,  in  consciousness,  bring  to  a unity 
of  representation  the  repugnant  notions,  circle  and  square,  — that  is,  conceive 
the  notion  of  a square  circle.  Reid’s  mistake  in  this  matter  is  so  palpable, 
that  it  is  not  more  surprising  that  he  should  have  committed  it,  than  that 
so  many  should  not  only  have  followed  him  in  the  opinion,  but  even  have 
lauded  it  as  the  refutation  of  an  important  error.  — H. 


276  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

to  be  possible.  But  does  it  not  often  happen,  that 
what  one  man  judges  to  be  possible,  another  man 
judges  to  be  impossible  ? The  maxim,  therefore,  is  not 
true  in  this  sense. 

I am  not  able  to  find  any  other  meaning  of  conceiv- 
ing  a proposition^  or  of  conceiving  it  to  he  true^  besides 
these  I have  mentioned.  I know  nothing  that  can  be 
meant  by  having  the  idea  of  a proposition,  but  either 
the  understanding  its  meaning,  or  the  judging  of  its 
truth.  I can  understand  a proposition  that  is  false  or 
impossible,  as  well  as  one  that  is  true  or  possible ; and 
I find  that  men  have  contradictory  judgments  about 
what  is  possible  or  impossible,  as  well  as  about  other 
things.  In  what  sense,  then,  can  it  be  said,  that  the 
having  an  idea  of  a proposition  gives  certain  evidence 
that  it  is  possible  ? 

If  it  be  said,  that  the  idea  of  a proposition  is  an 
image  of  it  in  the  mind,  I think,  indeed,  there  cannot 
be  a distinct  image,  either  in  the  mind  or  elsewhere,  of 
that  which  is  impossible  ; but  what  is  meant  by  the 
image  of  a proposition  I am  not  able  to  comprehend, 
and  I shall  be  glad  to  be  informed. 

2.  Every  proposition  that  is  necessarily  true  stands 
opposed  to  a contradictory  proposition  that  is  impossi- 
ble ; and  he  that  conceives  one  conceives  both:  thus,  a 
man  who  believes  that  two  and  three  necessarily  make 
five,  must  believe  it  to  be  impossible  that  two  and 
three  should  not  make  five.  He  conceives  both  prop- 
ositions when  he  believes  one.  Every  proposition  car- 
ries its  contradictory  in  its  bosom,  and  both  are  con- 
ceived at  the  same  time.  “ It  is  confessed,’’  says  Mr. 
Hume,  “ that,  in  all  cases  where  we  dissent  from  any 
person,  we  conceive  both  sides  of  the  question,  but  we 
can  believe  only  one.”  From  this  it  certainly  follows, 
that  when  we  dissent  from  any  person  about  a neces- 
sary proposition,  we  conceive  one  that  is  impossible ; 
yet  I know  no  philosopher  who  has  made  so  much  use 
of  the  maxim,  that  whatever  we  conceive  is  possible, 
as  Mr.  Hume.  A great  part  of  his  peculiar  tenets  are 
built  upon  it ; and  if  it  is  true,  they  must  be  true.  But 


ITS  CHARACTERISTIC  PROPERTIES. 


277 


he  did  not  perceive  that  in  the  passage  now  quoted, 
the  truth  of  which  is  evident,  he  contradicts  it  himself. 

3.  Mathematicians  have,  in  many  cases,  proved  some 
things  to  be  possible,  and  others  to  be  impossible, 
which,  without  demonstration,  would  not  have  been 
believed ; yet  I have  never  found  that  any  mathema- 
tician has  attempted  to  prove  a thing  to  be  possible 
because  it  can  be  conceived,  or  impossible  because  it 
cannot  be  conceived.*  Why  is  not  this  maxim  applied 
to  determine  whether  it  is  possible  to  square  the  circle  ? 
— a point  about  which  very  eminent  mathematicians 
have  differed.  It  is  easy  to  conceive,  that,  in  the  in- 
finite series  of  numbers  and  intermediate  fractions, 
some  one  number,  integral  or  fractional,  may  bear  the 
same  ratio  to  another  as  the  side  of  a square  bears  to 
its  diagonal ; f yet,  however  conceivable  this  may  be,  it 
may  be  demonstrated  to  be  impossible. 

4.  Mathematicians  often  require  us  to  conceive  things 
that  are  impossible,  in  order  to  prove  them  to  be  so. 
This  is  the  case  in  all  their  demonstrations  ad  absur- 
dum.  Conceive,  says  Euclid,  a right  line  drawn  from 
one  point  of  the  circumference  of  a circle  to  another 
to  fall  without  the  circle ; :j:  I conceive  this,  1 reason 
from  it,  until  I come  to  a consequence  that  is  mani- 
festly absurd  ; and  from  thence  conclude  that  the  thing 
which  I conceived  is  impossible. 

Having  said  so  much  to  show  that  our  power  of  con- 
ceiving a proposition  is  no  criterion  of  its  possibility  or 
impossibility,  I shall  add  a few  observations  on  the 
extent  of  our  knowledge  of  this  kind. 

1.  There  are  many  propositions  which,  by  the  facul- 
ties God  has  given  us,  we  judge  to  be  necessary  as 
well  as  true.  All  mathematical  propositions  are  of  this 
kind,  and  many  others.  The  contradictories  of  such 


* All  geometry  is,  in  fact,  founded  on  our  intuitions  of  space ; that  is,  in 
common  language,  on  our  conceptions  of  space  and  its  relations.  — H. 

t We  are  able  to  conceive  nothing  infinite  ; and  we  may  suppose^  but  we 
cannot  conceive^  represent^  or  imagine^  the  possibility  in  question.  — H. 

J Euclid  does  not  require  us  to  conceive  or  imagine  any  such  impossi- 
bility. The  proposition  to  which  Reid  must  refer  is  the  second  of  the 
third  book  of  the  Elements.  — H. 

24 


278  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

propositions  must  be  impossible.  Our  knowledge, 
therefore,  of  what  is  impossible  must  at  least  be  as  ex- 
tensive as  our  knowledge  of  necessary  truth. 

2.  By  our  senses,  by  memory,  by  testimony,  and  by 
other  means,  we  know  many  things  to  be  true  which 
do  not  appear  to  be  necessary.  But  whatever  is  true 
is  possible.  Our  knowledge,  therefore,  of  what  is  pos- 
sible  must  at  least  extend  as  far  as  our  knowledge  of 
truth. 

3.  If  a man  pretends  to  determine  the  possibility  or 
impossibility  of  things  beyond  these  limits,  let  him 
bring  proof.  I do  not  say  that  no  such  proof  can  be 
brought.  It  has  been  brought  in  many  cases,  particu- 
larly in  mathematics.  But  I say,  that  his  being  able  to 
conceive  a thing  is  no  proof  that  it  is  possible."^  Mathe- 
matics afford  many  instances  of  impossibilities  in  the 
nature  of  things,  which  no  man  would  have  believed 
if  they  had  not  been  strictly  demonstrated.  Perhaps, 
if  we  were  able  to  reason  demonstratively  in  other  sub- 
jects to  as  great  extent  as  in  mathematics,  we  might 
find  many  things  to  be  impossible  which  we  conclude 
without  hesitation  to  be  possible. 

It  is  possible,  you  say,  that  God  might  have  made  a 
universe  of  sensible  and  rational  creatures,  into  which 
neither  natural  nor  moral  evil  should  ever  enter.  It 
may  be  so  for  what  I know : but  how  do  you  know 
that  it  is  possible  ? That  you  can  conceive  it,  I grant ; 
but  this  is  no  proof.  I cannot  admit  as  an  argument, 
or  even  as  a pressing  difficulty,  what  is  grounded  on 
the  supposition  that  such  a thing  is  possible,  when  there 
is  no  good  evidence  that  it  is  possible,  and,  for  any 
thing  we  know,  it  may  in  the  nature  of  things  be  im- 
possible. 


* Not,  certainly,  that  it  is  really  possible^  but  that  it  is  problematically  pos- 
sible ; that  is,  involves  no  contradiction,  violates  no  law  of  thought.  This 
latter  is  that  possibility  alone  in  question.  — H. 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


279 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  TRAIN  OF  THOUGHT  IN  THE  MIND;  OR  MEN- 
TAL ASSOCIATION. 

L Preliminary  Observations,]  Every  man  is  con- 
scious of  a succession  of  thoughts  which  pass  in  his 
mind  while  he  is  awake,  even  when  they  are  not  excited 
by  external  objects* 

This  continued  succession  of  thought  has,  by  modern 
philosophers,  been  called  the  imagination,^  I think  it 
was  formerly  called  the  fancy or  the  phantasy, % If  the 
old  name  be  laid  aside,  it  were  to  be  wished  that  it  had 
got  a name  less  ambiguous  than  that  of  imagination, 
a name  which  had  two  or  three  meanings  besides. 

It  is  often  called  the  train  of  ideas.  This  may  lead 
one  to  think  that  it  is  a train  of  bare  conceptions ; but 
this  would  surely  be  a mistake.  It  is  made  up  of  many 
other  operations  of  mind,  as  well  as  of  conceptions  or 


* Mr.  Mill,  who  follows  Hume  in  the  distinction  which  he  makes  be- 
tween impressions  and  ic/eas,  begins  his  chapter  on  this  subject  thus:  — 
“ Thought  succeeds  thought,  idea  follows  idea,  incessantly.  If  our  senses 
are  awake,  we  are  continually  receiving  sensations  of  the  eye,  the  ear,  the 
touch,  and  so  forth  ; but  not  sensations  alone.  After  sensations,  ideas  are 
perpetually  excited  of  sensations  formerly  received ; after  those  ideas, 
other  ideas  : and  during  the  whole  of  our  lives  a series  of  those  two  states 
of  consciousness,  called  sensations  and  ideas^  is  constantly  going  on.  I see 
a horse : that  is  a sensation.  Immediately  I think  of  his  master  : that  is 
an  idea.  The  idea  of  his  master  makes  me  think  of  his  office ; he  is  a 
minister  of  state : that  is  another  idea.  The  idea  of  a minister  of  state 
makes  me  think  of  public  affairs ; and  I am  led  into  a train  of  political 
ideas ; when  I am  summoned  to  dinner.  This  is  a new  sensation,  fol- 
lowed by  the  idea  of  dinner  and  of  the  company  with  whom  I am  to  par- 
take it.  The  sight  of  the  company  and  of  the  food  are  other  sensations  ; 
these  suggest  ideas  without  end ; other  sensations  perpetually  intervene, 
suggesting  other  ideas  : and  so  the  process  goes  on.”  Analysis^  Chap.  III. 
— Ed. 

t By  some  only,  and  that  improperly.  — H. 

f The  Latin  imagination  with  its  modifications  in  the  vulgar  languages, 
was  employed  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times  to  express  what  the 
Greeks  denominated  (havraerLa.  ^ Phantasy ^ of  which  phansy  or  fancy  is  a 
corruption,  and  now  employed  in  a more  limited  sense,  was  a common 
name  for  imagination  with  the  old  English  writers.  — H. 


280  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

ideas.  Memory,  judgment,  reasoning,  passions,  affec- 
tions, and  purposes,  — in  a word,  every  operation  of 
the  mind,  excepting  those  of  sense^  is  exerted  occasion- 
ally in  this  train  of  thought,  and  has  its  share  as  an 
ingredient : so  that  we  must  take  the  word  idea  in  a 
very  extensive  sense,  if  we  make  the  train  of  our 
thoughts  to  be  only  a train  of  ideas.* 

To  pass  from  the  name  and  consider  the  thing,  we 
may  observe  that  the  trains  of  thought  in  the  mind  are 
of  two  kinds  : they  are  either  such  as  flow  spontane- 
ously, like  water  from  a fountain,  without  any  exertion 
of  a governing  principle  to  arrange  them ; or  they  are 
regulated  and  directed  by  an  active  effort  of  the  mind, 
with  some  view  and  intention. 

Before  we  consider  these  in  their  order,  it  is  proper 
to  premise,  that  these  two  kinds,  however  distinct  in 
their  nature,  are  for  the  most  part  mixed,  in  persons 
awake  and  come  to  years  of  understanding.  On  the 
one  hand,  we  are  rarely  so  vacant  of  all  project  and 
design  as  to  let  our  thoughts  take  their  own  course 
without  the  least  check  or  direction ; or  if,  at  any  time, 
we  should  be  in  this  state,  some  object  will  present 
itself  which  is  too  interesting  not  to  engage  the  atten- 
tion and  rouse  the  active  or  contemplative  powers  that 
were  at  rest.  On  the  other  hand,  when  a man  is  giv- 
ing the  most  intense  application  to  any  speculation,  or 
to  any  scheme  of  conduct,  when  he  wills  to  exclude 
every  thought  that  is  foreign  to  his  present  purpose, 
such  thoughts  will  often  impertinently  intrude  upon 
him,  in  spite  of  his  endeavours  to  the  contrary,  and 
occupy,  by  a kind  of  violence,  some  part  of  the  time 
destined  to  another  purpose.  One  man  may  have  the 
command  of  his  thoughts  more  than  another  man,  and 
the  same  man  more  at  one  time  than  at  another ; but  I 
apprehend,  in  the  best-trained  mind  the  thoughts  will 
sometimes  be  restive,  sometimes  capricious  and  self- 


* Stewart  and  Mill,  after  Hartley,  have  proposed  to  call  this  succession 
of  thought,  association  of  ideas^  and  this  is  now  the  common  name ; Dr. 
Brown  would  substitute  suggestion  for  association;  Sir  W.  Hamilton  calls 
it  mental  suggestion  or  association.  — Ed. 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


281 


willed,  when  we-  wish  to  have  them  most  under  com- 
mand. 

It  has  been  observed  very  justly,  that  we  must  not 
ascribe  to  the  mind  the  power  of  calling  up  any  thought 
at  pleasure^  because  such  a call  or  volition  supposes 
that  thought  to  be  already  in  the  mind  ; for  otherwise, 
how  should  it  be  the  object  of  volition?  As  this  must 
be  granted  on  the  one  hand,  so  it  is  no  less  certain,  on 
the  other,  that  a man  has  a considerable  power  in  regu- 
lating and  disposing  his  own  thoughts.  Of  this  every 
man  is  conscious,  and  I can  no  more  doubt  of  it  than 
I can  doubt  whether  I think  at  all. 

We  seem  to  treat  the  thoughts  that  present  them- 
selves to  the  fancy,  as  a great  man  treats  the  persons  who 
attend  his  levee.  They  are  all  ambitious  of  his  atten- 
tion ; he  goes  round  the  circle,  bestowing  a bow  upon 
one,  a smile  upon  another,  asks  a short  question  of  a 
third,  while  a fourth  is  honored  with  a particular  con- 
ference, and  the  greater  part  have  no  particular  mark  of 
attention,  but  go  as  they  came.  It  is  true,  he  can  give 
no  mark  of  his  attention  to  those  who  were  not  there, 
but  he  has  a sufficient  number  for  making  a choice  and 
distinction.  In  like  manner,  a number  of  thoughts  pre- 
sent themselves  to  the  fancy  spontaneously ; but  if  we 
pay  no  attention  to  them,  nor  hold  any  conference  with 
them,  they  pass  with  the  crowd,  and  are  immediately 
forgotten  as  if  they  had  never  appeared.  But  those  to 
which  we  think  proper  to  pay  attention  may  be  stop- 
ped, examined,  and  arranged,  for  any  particular  purpose 
we  have  in  view. 

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  a train  of  thought, 
which  was  at  first  composed  by  application  and  judg- 
ment, when  it  has  been  often  repeated  and  becomes 
familiar,  will  present  itself  spontaneously.  Thus,  when 
a man  has  composed  an  air  in  music,  so  as  to  please 
his  own  ear,  after  he  has  played  or  sung  it  often,  the 
notes  will  range  themselves  in  just  order,  and  it  re- 
quires no  effort  to  regulate  their  succession. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  fancy  is  made  up  of  trains  of 
thinking,  some  of  which  are  spontaneous,  others  studied 
24* 


282  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

and  regulated,  and  the  greater  part  are  mixed  of  both 
kinds,  and  take  their  denomination  from  that  which  is 
most  prevalent ; and  that  a train  of  thought,  which  at 
first  was  studied  and  composed,  may  by  habit  present 
itself  spontaneously. 

Having  premised  these  things,  let  us  return  to  those 
trains  of  thought  which  are  spontaneous,  which  must 
be  first  in  the  order  of  nature. 

II.  Spontaneous  Trains  of  Thought]  When  the 
work  of  the  day  is  over,  and  a man  lies  down  to  relax 
his  body  and  mind,  he  cannot  cease  from  thinking, 
though  he  desires  it.  Something  occurs  to  his  fancy ; 
that  is  followed  by  another  thing,  and  so  his  thoughts 
are  carried  on  from  one  object  to  another  until  sleep 
closes  the  scene. 

In  this  operation  * of  the  mind,  it  is  not  one  faculty 
only  that  is  employed ; there  are  many  that  join  to- 
gether in  its  production.  Sometimes  the  transactions 
of  the  day  are  brought  upon  the  stage  and  acted  over 
again,  as  it  were,  upon  this  theatre  of  the  imagination. 
In  this  case,  memory  surely  acts  the  most  considerable 
part,  since  the  scenes  exhibited  are  not  fictions,  but 
realities,  which  we  remember ; yet  in  this  case  the 
memory  does  not  act  alone,  — other  powers  are  em- 
ployed, and  attend  upon  their  proper  objects.  The 
transactions  remembered  will  be  more  or  less  interest- 
ing ; and  we  cannot  then  review  our  own  conduct,  nor 
that  of  others,  without  passing  some  judgment  upon 
it.  This  we  approve,  that  we  disapprove.  This  ele- 
vates, that  humbles  and  depresses  us.  Persons  that  are 
not  absolutely  indifferent  to  us  can  hardly  appear,  even 
to  the  imagination,  without  some  friendly  or  unfriendly 
emotion.  We  judge  and  reason  about  things,  as  well 
as  persons,  in  such  reveries.  We  remember  what  a 
man  said  and  did  ; from  this  we  pass  to  his  designs  and 
to  his  general  character,  and  frame  some  hypothesis  to 


* The  word  process  might  be  here  preferable.  Operation  would  denote 
that  the  mind  is  active  in  associating  the  train  of  thought.  — H. 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


283 


make  the  whole  consistent.  Such  trains  of  thought  we 
may  call  historical. 

There  are  others  which  we  may  call  romantic^  in 
which  the  plot  is  formed  by  the  creative  power  of  fancy, 
without  any  regard  to  what  did  or  will  happen.  In 
these,  also,  the  powers  of  judgment,  taste,  moral  senti- 
ment, as  well  as  the  passions  and  affections,  come  in 
and  take  a share  in  the  execution.  In  these  scenes,  the 
man  himself  commonly  acts  a very  distinguished  part, 
and  seldom  does  any  thing  which  he  cannot  approve. 
Here  the  miser  will  be  generous,  the  coward  brave,  and 
the  knave  honest.  Mr.  Addison,  in  The  Spectator^  calls 
this  play  of  the  fancy  castle-building. 

The  young  politician,  who  has  turned  his  thoughts 
to  the  affairs  of  government,  becomes  in  his  imagina- 
tion a minister  of  state.  He  examines  every  spring 
and  wheel  of  the  machine  of  government  with  the 
nicest  eye  and  the  most  exact  judgment.  He  finds  a 
proper  remedy  for  every  disorder  of  the  commonwealth, 
quickens  trade  and  manufactures  by  salutary  laws, 
encourages  arts  and  sciences,  and  makes  the  nation 
happy  at  home  and  respected  abroad.  He  feels  the 
reward  of  his  good  administration  in  that  self-approba- 
tion which  attends  it,  and  is  happy  in  acquiring,  by  his 
wise  and  patriotic  conduct,  the  blessings  of  the  present 
age  and  the  praises  of  those  that  are  to  come. 

It  is  probable  that,  upon  the  stage  of  imagination, 
more  great  exploits  have  been  performed  in  every  age, 
than  have  been  upon  the  stage  of  life  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world.  An  innate  desire  of  self-approba- 
tion is  undoubtedly  a part  of  the  human  constitution. 
It  is  a powerful  spur  to  worthy  conduct,  and  is  intended 
as  such  by  the  Author  of  our  being.  A man  cannot 
be  easy  or  happy  unless  this  desire  be  in  some  measure 
gratified.  While  he  conceives  himself  worthless  and 
base,  he  can  relish  no  enjoyment.  The  humiliating, 
mortifying  sentiment  must  be  removed,  and  this  natural 
desire  of  self-approbation  will  either  produce  a noble 
effort  to  acquire  real  worth,  which  is  its  proper  direc- 
tion, or  it  will  lead  into  some  of  those  arts  of  self- 
deceit  which  create  a false  opinion  of  worth. 


284  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

A castle-builder,  in  the  fictitious  scenes  of  his  fancy, 
will  figure,  not  according  to  his  real  character,  but 
according  to  the  highest  opinion  he  has  been  able  to 
form  of  himself,  and  perhaps  far  beyond  that  opinion. 
For  in  those  imaginary  conflicts  the  passions  easily 
yield  to  reason,  and  a m^n  exerts  the  noblest  efforts  of 
virtue  and  magnanimity  with  the  same  ease  as,  in  his 
dreams,  he  flies  through  the  air,  or  plunges  to  the  bot- 
tom of  the  ocean. 

The  romantic  scenes  of  fancy  are  most  commonly 
the  occupation  of  young  minds,  not  yet  so  deeply  en- 
gaged in  life  as  to  have  their  thoughts  taken  up  by  its 
real  ca>*es  and  business.  Those  active  powers  of  the 
mind  which  are  most  luxuriant  by  constitution,  or  have 
been  most  cherished  by  education,  impatient  to  exert 
themselves,  hurry  the  thought  into  scenes  that  give 
them  play ; and  the  boy  commences  in  imagination, 
according  to  the  bent  of  his  mind,  a general  or  a states- 
man, a poet  or  an  orator. 

In  persons  come  to  maturity  there  is,  even  in  these 
spontaneous  sallies  of  fancy,  some  arrangement  of 
thought ; and  I conceive  that  it  will  be  readily  allowed, 
that,  in  those  who  have  the  greatest  stock  of  knowledge 
and  the  best  natural  parts,  even  the  spontaneous  move- 
ments of  fancy  will  be  the  most  regular  and  connected. 
They  have  an  order,  connection,  and  unity,  by  which 
they  are  no  less  distinguished  from  the  dreams  of  one 
asleep,  or  the  ravings  of  one  delirious,  on  the  one  hand, 
than  from  the  finished  productions  of  art,  on  the  other. 

III.  How  what  is  regular  in  these  Trains  is  to  be  ex- 
plained,]  How  is  this  regular  arrangement  brought 
about  ? It  has  all  the  marks  of  judgment  and  reason, 
yet  it  seems  to  go  before  judgment,  and  to  spring  forth 
spontaneously. 

Shall  we  believe,  with  Leibnitz,  that  the  mind  was 
originally  formed  like  a watch  wound  up,  and  that  all 
its  thoughts,  purposes,  passions,  and  actions  are  effected 
by  the  gradual  evolution  of  the  original  spring  of  the 
machine,  and  succeed  each  other  in  order  as  necessarily 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


285 


as  the  motions  and  pulsations  of  a watch  ? If  a child 
of  three  or  four  years  were  put  to  account  for  the  phe- 
nomena of  a watch,  he  would  conceive  that  there  is  a 
little  man  within  the  watch,  or  some  other  little  ani- 
mal, that  beats  continually  and  produces  the  motion. 
Whether  the  hypothesis  of  this  young  philosopher  in 
turning  the  watch-spring  into  a man,  or  that  of  the 
German  philosopher  in  turning  a man  into  a watch- 
spring,  be  the  most  rational,  seems  hard  to  determine.* 

To  account  for  the  regularity  of  our  thoughts  from 
motions  of  animal  spirits,  vibrations  of  nerves,  attrac- 
tions of  ideas,  or  from  any  other  unthinking  cause, 
whether  mechanical  or  contingent,  seems  equally  irra- 
tional. 

If  we  be  not  able  to  distinguish  the  strongest  marks 
of  thought  and  design  from  the  effects  of  mechanism 
or  contingency,  the  consequence  will  be  very  melan- 
choly ; for  it  must  necessarily  follow,  that  we  have  no 
evidence  of  thought  in  any  of  our  fellow-men,  — nay, 
that  we  have  no  evidence  of  thought  or  design  in  the 
structure  and  government  of  the  universe.  If  a good 
period  or  sentence  was  ever  produced  without  having 
had  any  judgment  previously  employed  about  it,  why 
not  an  Iliad  or  ^neid  ? They  differ  only  in  less  and 
more ; and  we  should  do  injustice  to  the  philosopher 
of  Laputa  in  laughing  at  his  project  of  making  poems 
by  the  turning  of  a wheel,  if  a concurrence  of  unthink- 
ing causes  may  produce  a rational  train  of  thought. 

It  is,  therefore,  in  itself  highly  probable,  to  say  no 
more,  that  whatsoever  is  regular  and  rational  in  a train 
of  thought  which  presents  itself  spontaneously  to  a 
man’s  fancy,  without  any  study,  is  a copy  of  what  had 
been  before  composed  by  his  own  rational  powers^  or 
those  of  some  other  person. 

We  certainly  judge  so  in  similar  cases.  Thus,  in  a 
book  I find  a train  of  thinking,  which  has  the  marks  of 
knowledge  and  judgment.  I ask  how  it  was  produced? 


^ The  theory  of  our  mental  associations  owes  much  to  the  philosophers 
of  the  Leibnitzian  school.  — H. 


286  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

It  is  printed  in  a book.  This  does  not  satisfy  me,  be- 
cause the  book  has  no  knowledge  nor  reason.  I am 
told  that  a printer  printed  it,  and  a compositor  set  the 
types.  Neither  does  this  satisfy  me.  These  causes 
perhaps  knew  very  little  of  the  subject.  There  must 
be  a prior  cause  of  the  composition.  It  was  printed 
from  a manuscript.  True.  But  the  manuscript  is  as 
ignorant  as  the  printed  book.  The  manuscript  was 
written  or  dictated  by  a -man  of  knowledge  and  judg- 
ment. This,  and  this  only,  will  satisfy  a man  of  com- 
mon understanding ; and  it  appears  to  him  extremely 
ridiculous  to  believe  that  such  a train  of  thinking  could 
originally  be  produced  by  any  cause  that  neither  rea- 
sons nor  thinks. 

Whether  such  a train  of  thinking  be  printed  in  a 
book,  or  printed,  so  to  speak,  in  his  mind,  and  issue 
spontaneously  from  his  fancy,  it  must  have  been  com- 
posed with  judgment  by  himself  or  by  some  other  ra- 
tional being. 

This,  I think,  will  be  confirmed  by  tracing  the  prog- 
ress of  the  human  fancy  as  far  back  as  we  are  able. 

Man  has  undoubtedly  a power  (whether  we  call  it 
taste  or  judgment  is  not  of  any  consequence  in  jLhe 
present  argument)  whereby  he  distinguishes  between 
a composition  and  a heap  of  materials ; between  a 
house,  for  instance,  and  a heap  of  stones ; between  a 
sentence  and  a heap  of  words  ; between  a picture  and 
a heap  of  colors.  It  does  not  appear  to  me,  that  chil- 
dren have  any  regular  trains  of  thought  until  this  power 
begins  to  operate.  Those  who  are  born  such  idiots  as 
never  to  show  any  signs  of  this  power,  show  as  little 
any  signs  of  regularity  of  thought.  It  seems,  there- 
fore, that  this  power  is  connected  with  all  regular  trains 
of  thought,  and  may  be  the  cause  of  them. 

Such  trains  of  thought  discover  themselves  in  chil- 
dren about  two  years  of  age.  They  can  then  give 
attention  to  the  operations  of  older  children  in  making 
their  little  houses  and  ships,  and  other  such  things,  in 
imitation  of  the  works  of  men.  They  are  then  capable 
of  understanding  a little  of  language,  which  shows 


ASSOCIATION  OP  IDEAS. 


287 


both  a regular  train  of  thinking  and  some  degree  of 
abstraction.  I think  we  may  perceive  a distinction 
between  the  faculties  of  children  of  two  or  three  years 
of  age,  and  those  of  the  most  sagacious  brutes.  They 
can  then  perceive  design  and  regularity  in  the  works  of 
others,  especially  of  older  children  ; their  little  minds 
are  fired  with  the  discovery ; they  are  eager  to  imitate 
them,  and  never  at  rest  till  they  can  exhibit  something 
of  the  same  kind. 

As  children  grow  up,  they  are  delighted  with  tales, 
with  childish  games,  with  designs  and  stratagems. 
Every  thing  of  this  kind  stores  the  fancy  with  a new 
regular  train  of  thought,  which  becomes  familiar  by 
repetition,  so  that  one  part  draws  the  whole  after  it  in 
the  imagination.  The  imagination  of  a child,  like  the 
hand  of  a painter,  is  long  employed  in  copying  the 
works  of  others  before  it  attempts  any  invention  of  its 
own. 

The  power  of  invention  is  not  yet  brought  forth,  but 
it  is  coming  forward,  and,  like  the  bud  of  a tree,  is 
ready  to  burst  its  integuments,  when  some  accident 
aids  its  eruption.  There  is  no  power  of  the  under- 
standing that  gives  so  much  pleasm^e  to  the  owner  as 
that  of  invention,  whether  it  be  employed  in  mechanics, 
in  science,  in  the  conduct  of  life,  in  poetry,  in  wit,  or  in 
the  fine  arts.  I am  aware  that  the  power  of  invention 
is  distributed  among  men  more  unequally  than  almost 
any  other.  When  it  is  able  to  produce  any  thing  that 
is  interesting  to  mankind,  we  call  it  genius,  — a talent 
which  is  the  lot  of  very  few.  But  there  is  perhaps  a 
lower  kind  or  lower  degree  of  invention,  that  is  more 
common.  However  this  may  be,  it  must  be  allowed 
that  the  power  of  invention,  in  those  who  have  it,  will 
produce  many  new  regular  trains  of  thought,  and  these, 
being  expressed  in  works  of  art,  in  writing,  or  in  dis- 
course, will  be  copied  by  others. 

Thus,  I conceive  the  minds  of  children,  as  soon  as 
they  have  judgment  to  distinguish  what  is  regular, 
orderly,  and  connected  from  a mere  medley  of  thought, 
are  furnished  with  regular  trains  of  thinking  by  these 


288  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

means.  And  the  condition  of  man  requires  a longer 
infancy  and  youth  than  that  of  other  animals  ; for  this 
reason,  among  others,  that  almost  every  station  in  civil 
society  requires  a multitude  of  regular  trains  of  thought 
to  be  not  only  acquired,  but  to  be  made  so  familiar,  by 
frequent  repetition,  as  to  present  themselves  spontane- 
ously when  there  is  occasion  for  them.  The  imagina- 
tion even  of  men  of  good  parts  never  serves  them 
readily  but  in  things  wherein  it  has  been  much  exer- 
cised. A minister  of  state  holds  a conference  with  a 
foreign  ambassador  with  no  greater  emotion  than  a 
professor  in  a college  prelects  to  his  audience.  The 
imagination  of  each  presents  to  him  what  the  occasion 
requires  to  be  said,  and  how.  Let  them  change  places, 
and  both  would  find  themselves  at  a loss. 

The  habits  which  the  human  mind  is  capable  of 
acquiring  by  exercise  are  wonderful  in  many  instances ; 
in  none  more  wonderful  than  in  that  versatility  of  im- 
agination which  a well-bred  man  acquires  by  being 
much  exercised  in  the  various  scenes  of  life.  In  the 
morning  he  visits  a friend  in  affliction.  Here  his  im- 
agination brings  forth  from  its  store  every  topic  of 
consolation,  every  thing  that  is  agreeable  to  the  laws  of 
friendship  and  sympathy,  and  nothing  that  is  not  so. 
From  thence  he  drives  to  the  minister’s  levee,  where 
imagination  readily  suggests  what  is  proper  to  be  said 
or  replied  to  every  man,  and  in  what  manner,  accord- 
ing to  the  degree  of  acquaintance  or  familiarity,  of  rank 
or  dependence,  of  opposition  or  concurrence  of  inter- 
ests, of  confidence  or  distrust,  that  is  between  them. 
Nor  does  all  this  employment  hinder  him  from  carrying 
on  some  design  with  much  artifice,  and  endeavouring 
to  penetrate  into  the  views  of  others  through  the  closest 
disguises.  From  the  levee  he  goes  to  the  House  of 
Commons,  and  speaks  upon  the  affairs  of  the  nation  ; 
from  thence  to  a ball  or  assembly,  and  entertains  the 
ladies. 

When  such  habits  are  acquired  and  perfected,  they 
are  exercised  without  any  laborious  effort,  — like  the 
habit  of  playing  upon  an  instrument  of  music.  There 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


289 


are  innumerable  motions  of  the  fingers  upon  the  stops 
or  keys,  which  must  be  directed  in  one  particular  train 
or  succession.  There  is  only  one  arrangement  of  those 
motions  that  is  right,  while  there  are  ten  thousand  that 
are  wrong,  and  would  spoil  the  music.  The  musician 
thinks  not  in  the  least  of  the  arrangement  of  those 
motions ; he  has  a distinct  idea  of  the  tune,  and  wills 
to  play  it.  The  motions  of  the  fingers  arrange  them- 
selves so  as  to  answer  his  intention. 

In  like  manner,  when  a man  speaks  upon  a subject 
with  which  he  is  acquainted,  there  is  a certain  arrange- 
ment of  his  thoughts  and  words  necessary  to  make  his 
discourse  sensible,  pertinent,  and  grammatical.  In 
every  sentence  there  are  more  rules  of  grammar,  logic, 
and  rhetoric  that  may  be  transgressed,  than  there  are 
words  and  letters.  He  speaks  without  thinking  of  any 
of  those  rules,  and  yet  observes  them  all,  as  if  they 
were  all  in  his  eye.  This  is  a habit  so  similar  to  that 
of  a player  on  an  instrument,  that  I think  both  must 
be  got  in  the  same  way,  that  is,  by  much  practice  and 
the  power  of  habit.  When  a man  speaks  well  and 
methodically  upon  a subject  without  study,  and  with 
perfect  ease,  I believe  we  may  take  it  for  granted  that 
his  thoughts  run  in  a beaten  track.  There  is  a mould 
in  his  mind,  which  has  been  formed  by  much  practice, 
or  by  study,  for  this  very  subject,  or  for  some  other  so 
similar  and  analogous,  that  his  discourse  falls  into  this 
mould  with  ease,  and  takes  its  form  from  it. 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  operations  of  fancy 
that  are  either  spontaneous,  or  at  least  require  no 
laborious  effort  to  guide  and  direct  them,  and  have 
endeavoured  to  account  for  that  degree  of  regularity 
and  arrangement  which  is  found  even  in  them.  (1.)  The 
natural  powers  of  judgment  and  invention,  (2.)  the 
pleasure  that  always  attends  the  exercise  of  those 
powers,  (3.)  the  means  we  have  of  improving  them  by 
imitation  of  others,  and  (4.)  the  effect  of  practice  and 
habit,  seem  to  me  sufficiently  to  account  for  this  phe- 
nomenon, without  supposing  any  unaccountable  attrac- 
tions of  ideas  by  which  they  arrange  themselves. 

25 


290  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

IV.  Trains  of  Thought  directed  and  regulated  by  the 
Will\  But  we  are  able  to  direct  our  thoughts  in  a cer- 
tain course,  so  as  to  perform  a destined  task. 

Every  work  of  art  has  its  model  framed  in  the  imagi- 
nation. Here  the  Iliad  of  Homer,  the  Republic  of 
Plato,  the  Principia  of  Newton,  were  fabricated.  Shall 
we  believe  that  those  works  took  the  form  in  which 
they  now  appear  of  themselves?  — that  the  sentiments, 
the  manners,  and  the  passions  arranged  themselves  at 
once  in  the  mind  of  Homer  so  as  to  form  the  Iliad  ? 
Was  there  no  more  effort  in  the  composition  than  there 
is  in  telling  a well-known  tale,  or  singing  a favorite 
song  ? This  cannot  be  believed.  Granting  that  some 
happy  thought  first  suggested  the  design  of  singing  the 
wrath  of  Achilles,  yet,  surely,  it  was  a matter  of  judg- 
ment and  choice  where  the  narration  should  begin,  and 
where  it  should  end.  Granting  that  the  fertility  of  the 
poet’s  imagination  suggested  a variety  of  rich  materials, 
was  not  judgment  necessary  to  select  what  was  proper, 
to  reject  what  was  improper,  to  arrange  the  materials 
into  a just  composition,  and  to  adapt  them  to  each  other 
and  to  the  design  of  the  whole  ? No  man  can  believe 
that  Homer’s  ideas,  merely  by  certain  sympathies  and 
antipathies,  by  certain  attractions  and  repulsions  in- 
herent in  their  natures,  arranged  themselves  according 
to  the  most  perfect  rules  of  epic  poetry,  and  Newton’s 
according  to  the  rules  of  mathematical  composition. 
I should  sooner  believe  that  the  poet,  after  he  invoked 
his  Muse,  did  nothing  at  all  but  listen  to  the  song  of 
the  goddess.  Poets,  indeed,  and  other  artists,  must 
make  their  works  appear  natural;  but  nature  is  the 
perfection  of  art,  and  there  can  be  no  just  imitation  of 
nature  without  art.  When  the  building  is  finished,  the 
rubbish,  the  scaffolds,  the  tools,  and  engines,  are  car- 
ried out  of  sight,  but  we  know  it  could  not  have  been 
reared  without  them. 

The  train  of  thinking,  therefore,  is  capable  of  being 
guided  and  directed,  much  in  the  same  manner  as  the 
horse  we  ride.*  The  horse  has  his  strength,  his  agility, 

* Mr.  Stewart  is  obliged  to  admit  that  the  mind  has  no  direct  power 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


291 


and  his  mettle  in  himself;  he  has  been  taught  certain 
movements,  and  many  useful  habits  that  will  make 
him  more  subservient  to  our  purposes,  and  obedient  to 
our  will;  but  to  accomplish  a journey,  he  must  be  di- 
rected by  the  rider. 

In  like  manner,  fancy  has  its  original  powers,  which 
are  very  different  in  different  persons ; it  has  likewise 
more  regular  motions,  to  which  it  has  been  trained  by 
a long  course  of  discipline  and  exercise ; and  by  which 
it  may,  extempore^  and  without  much  effort,  produce 
things  that  have  a considerable  degree  of  beauty,  regu- 
larity, and  design.  But  the  most  perfect  works  of  de- 
sign are  never  extemporary.  Our  first  thoughts  are  re- 
viewed ; we  place  them  at  a proper  distance  ; examine 
every  part,  and  take  a complex  view  of  the  whole.  By 
our  critical  faculties,  we  perceive  this  part  to  be  redun- 
dant, that  deficient  ; here  is  a want  of  nerves,  there 
a want  of  delicacy ; this  is  obscure,  that  too  diffuse. 
Things  are  marshalled  anew,  according  to  a second 
and  more  deliberate  judgment ; what  was  deficient  is 
supplied;  what  was  dislocated  is  put  in  joint ; redun- 
dances are  lopped  off,  and  the  whole  polished. 

over  the  train  of  our  thoughts ; that  is,  we  cannot  call  up  at  will  a particu- 
lar thought,  as  this  would  be  to  suppose  it  already  in  the  mind.  But  it 
has  a twofold  indirect  power.  1 . In  the  first  place,  it  has  the  power  of 
singling  out  at  pleasure  any  one  idea  in  the  train,  detaining  it,  and  making 
it  a particular  object  of  attention.  “ By  doing  so,  we  not  only  stop  the 
succession  that  would  otherwise  take  place,  but,  in  consequence  of  our 
bringing  to  view  the  less  obvious  relations  among  our  ideas,  we  frequently 
divert  the  current  of  our  thoughts  into  a new  channel.  2.  But  the  princi- 
pal power  we  possess  over  the  train  of  our  ideas  is  founded  on  the  influ- 
ence which  our  habits  of  thinking  have  on  the  laws  of  association  ; — an 
influence  which  is  so  great,  that  we  may  form  a pretty  shrewd  judgment 
concerning  a man’s  prevailing  turn  of  thought  from  the  transitions  he 
makes  in  conversation  or  in  writing.  It  is  well  known,  too,  that  by  means 
of  habit  a particular  associating  principle  may  be  strengthened  to  such  a 
degree,  as  to  give  us  a command  of  all  the  different  ideas  in  our  mind 
which  have  a certain  relation  to  each  other ; so  that,  when  any  one  of  the 
class  occurs  to  us,  we  have  almost  a certainty  that  it  will  suggest  the  rest. 
Thus,  a man  who  has  an  ambition  to  become  a punster  seldom  or  never 
fails  in  the  attainment  of  his  object ; that  is,  he  seldom  or  never  fails  in 
acquiring  the  power  which  other  men  have  not,  of  summoning  up,  on  a 
particular  occasion,  a number  of  words  different  from  each  other  in  mean- 
ing, but  resembling  each  other,  more  or  less,  in  sound.”  — Elements^  Part  1. 
Chap.  V.  Sect.  III.  — Ed. 


292  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

Though  poets,  of  all  artists,  make  the  highest  claim 
to  inspiration,  yet  if  we  believe  Horace,  a competent 
judge,  no  production  in  that  art  can  have  merit,  which 
has  not  cost  such  labor  as  this  in  the  birth. 

“ Vos  O ! 

Pompilius  sanguis,  carmen  reprehendite  quod  non 
Multa  dies,  et  multa  litura  coercuit,  atque 
Perfectum  decies  non  castigavit  ad  unguem.” 

The  conclusion  I would  draw  from  all  that  has  been 
said  upon  this  subject  is,  that  every  thing  that  is  regu- 
lar in  that  train  of  thought  which  we  call  fancy  or 
imagination,  from  the  little  designs  and  reveries  of  chil- 
dren to  the  grandest  productions  of  human  genius,  was 
originally  the  offspring  of  judgment  or  taste,  applied  with 
some  effort  greater  or  less.  What  one  person  composed 
with  art  and  judgment  is  imitated  by  another  with  great 
ease.  What  a man  himself  at  first  composed  with 
pains  becomes  by  habit  so  familiar,  as  to  offer  itself 
spontaneously  to  his  fancy  afterwards.  But  nothing 
that  is  regular  was  ever  at  first  conceived  without  de- 
sign, attention,  and  care. 

V.  Laws  or  Conditions  of  Mental  Association,]  I 
shall  now  make  a few  reflections  upon  a theory  which 
has  been  applied  to  account  for  this  successive  train  of 
thought  in  the  mind.  It  was  hinted  by  Mr.  Hobbes, 
but  has  drawn  more  attention  since  it  was  distinctly 
explained  by  Mr.  Hume. 

That  author  thinks,  that  the  train  of  thought  in  the 
mind  is  owing  to  a kind  of  attraction  which  ideas  have 
for  other  ideas  that  bear  certain  relations  to  them.  He 
thinks  the  complex  ideas,  which  are  the  common  sub- 
jects of  our  thoughts  and  reasoning,  are  owing  to  the 
same  cause.  The  relations  which  produce  this  attrac- 
tion of  ideas,  he  thinks,  are  these  three  only,  — to  wit, 
causation,  contiguity  in  time  or  place,  and  similitude. 
He  asserts,  that  these  are  the  only  general  principles 
that  unite  ideas.  And  having,  in  another  place,  occa- 
sion to  take  notice  of  contrariety  as  a principle  of  con- 
nection among  ideas,  in  order  to  reconcile  this  to  his 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


293 


system,  he  tells  us  gravely,  that  contrariety  may  per- 
haps be  considered  as  a mixture  of  causation  and  resem- 
blance. That  ideas  which  have  any  of  these  three  rela- 
tions do  mutually  attract  each  other,  so  that,  one  of 
them  being  presented  to  the  fancy,  the  other  is  drawn 
along  with  it,  — this  he  seems  to  think  an  original 
property  of  the  mind,  or  rather  of  the  ideas,  and  there- 
fore inexplicable.* 


* The  history  of  the  doctrine  of  association  has  never  yet  been  at  all 
adequately  developed.  Some  of  the  most  remarkable  speculations  on  this 
matter  are  wholly  unknown.  Mr.  Hume  says,  — “ I do  not  find  that  any 
philosopher  has  attempted  to  enumerate  or  class  all  the  principles  of  asso- 
ciation 5 a subject,  however,  that  seems  to  me  very  worthy  of  curiosity. 
To  me  there  appear  to  be  only  three  principles  of  connection  among  ideas : 
resemblance^  contiguity  in  time  or  place,  cause  and  effect.'^  — Essays,  Vol.  11. 
p.  24.  Aristotle,  and,  after  him,  many  other  philosophers,  had,  however, 
done  this,  and  with  even  greater  success  than  Hume  himself.  Aristotle’s 
reduction  is  to  the  four  following  heads : — proximity  in  time,  contiguity  in 
place,  resemblance,  contrast.  This  is  more  correct  than  Hume’s  ; for  Hume’s 
second  head  ought  to  be  divided  into  two  ; while  our  connecting  any  par- 
ticular events  in  the  relation  of  cause  and  effect  is  itself  the  result  of  their 
observed  proximity  in  time  and  contiguity  in  place ; nay,  to  custom  and 
this  empirical  connection  (as  observed  by  Reid)  does  Hume  himself  en- 
deavour to  reduce  the  principle  of  causality  altogether.  — H. 

In  his  Supplementary  Dissertations,  Note  D**,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  returns 
to  the  subject,  reaffirming  that  all  the  attempts  which  have  been  made  un- 
der the  name  of  Histories  of  the  Association  o f Ideas  are  fragmentary  contri- 
butions, and  meagre  and  inaccurate  as  far  as  they  go.  “ These  inade- 
quate attempts,”  he  also  says,  “ have  been  limited  to  Germany ; and  in 
Germany  to  the  treatises  of  three  authors ; for  the  historical  notices  on 
this  doctrine,  found  in  the  works  of  other  German  psychologists,  are  wholly 
borrowed  from  them.  I refer  to  the  Geschichte  of  Hissmann  (1777)  ; to 
the  Paralipomena  and  Beytrcege  of  Maass  (1787,  1792) ; and  to  the  Vestigia 
of  Goerenz  (1791).  In  England,  indeed,  we  have  a chapter  in  Mr.  Cole- 
ridge’s Biographia  Literaria.  entitled.  On  the  Law  of  Association,  — its  His- 
tory traced  from  Aristotle  to  Hartley  ; but  this,  in  so  far  as  it  is  of  any  value, 
is  a plagiarism,  and  a blundering  plagiarism,  from  Maass;  — the  whole 
chapter  exhibiting,  in  fact,  more  mistakes  than  paragraphs.  We  may 
judge  of  Mr.  Coleridge’s  competence  to  speak  of  Aristotle,  the  great  phi- 
losopher of  ancient  times,  when  we  find  him  referring  to  the  De  Anima  for 
his  speculations  on  the  associative  principle  ; opposing  the  De  Memoria  and 
Parva  Naturalia  as  distinct  works ; and  attributing  to  Aquinas  what  be- 
longs exclusively  and  notoriously  to  the  Stagirite.  We  may  judge  of  his 
competence  to  speak  of  Descartes,  the  great  philosopher  of  modern  times, 
when  telling  us,  that  idea,  in  the  Cartesian  philosophy,  denotes  merely  a 
configuration  of  the  brain ; the  term,  he  adds,  being  first  extended  by 
Locke  to  denote  the  immediate  object  of  the  mind’s  attention  in  conscious- 
ness  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  again,  founding  on  his  own  research, 

affirms  that  Aristotle  and  his  disciples,  among  whom  Vives  is  specified, 
confine  the  application  of  the  law  of  association  ‘ exclusively  to  the  phenomena 


294  CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 

Firsts  I observe  with  regard  to  this  theory,  that,  al- 
though it  is  true  that  the  thought  of  any  object  is  apt 
to  lead  us  to  the  thought  of  its  cause  or  effect,  of  things 
contiguous  to  it  in  time  or  place,  or  of  things  resem- 
bling it,  yet  this  enumeration  of  the  relations  of  things 
which  are  apt  to  lead* *  us  from  one  object  to  another  is 
very  inaccurate. 

The  enumeration  is  too  large  upon  his  own  princi- 
ples ; but  it  is  by  far  too  scanty  in  reality.  Causation, 
according  to  his  philosophy,  implies  nothing  more  than 
a constant  conjunction  observed  between  the  cause  and 
the  effect,  and  therefore  contiguity  must  include  causa- 
tion, and  his  three  principles  of  attraction  are  reduced 
to  two.  But  when  we  take  all  the  three,  the  enumera- 
tion is  in  reality  very  incomplete.  Every  relation  of 
things  has  a tendency^  more  or  less^  to  lead  the . thovghU 
in  a thinking  mind^  from  one  to  the  other ; and  not  only 
every  relation,  but  every  kind  of  contrariety  and  opposi- 
tion* What  Mr.  Hume  says,  — that  contrariety  may 
perhaps  be  considered  as  a mixture  “ of  causation  and 


of  recollection^  without  any  glimpse  of  a more  general  operation  extending 
to  all  the  connections  of  thought  and  feeling  ’ ; while  the  enouncement  of  a 
general  theory  of  association,  thus  denied  to  the  genius  of  Aristotle,  is  all, 
and  more  than  all,  accorded  to  the  sagacity  of  Hobbes.  The  truth,  how- 
ever, is,  that  in  his  whole  doctrine  upon  this  subject,  name  and  thing, 
Hobbes  is  simply  a silent  follower  of  the  Stagirite  ; inferior  to  his  master 
in  the  comprehension  and  accuracy  of  his  general  views,  and  not  superior, 
even  on  the  special  points  selected,  either  to  Aristotle  or  to  Vives.”  — Ed. 

* Still  something  may  be  gained  by  a judicious  classification  of  the  con- 
ditions and  relations  on  which  mental  association  depends.  Dr.  Brown, 
who  has  bestowed  much  attention  on  this  subject,  reduces  the  primary  laws 
of  association  or  suggestion  to  three  : resemblance^  contrasty  nearness  in  time 
or  place.  These  correspond  to  the  four  of  Aristotle,  the  third  being  divisi- 
ble into  two.  Again,  Dr.  Brown  thinks  that  the  influence  of  the  three 
primary  laws  is  modified,  in  different  persons  and  under  different  circum- 
stances, by  nine  secondary  laios.  The  latter  are  : — 1 . The  longer  or  shorter 
continuance  of  the  attention  which  was  given  to  the  associated  ideas  when 
in  connection.  2.  Vividness  of  the  coexistent  emotions.  3.  Frequency  of 
repetition.  4.  Lapse  of  time.  5.  The  exclusion  of  all  other  associations. 
6.  Original  constitutional  differences.  7.  The  state  of  the  mind  at  the  time. 
8.  The  state  of  the  body.  9.  Professional  habits.  See  his  Physiology  of 
the  Mind,  p.  199,  and  also  his  Lectures,  Lect.  XXXV. -XXXVII.  Com- 
pare Ballantyne’s  Examination  of  the  Human  Mind,  Chap.  II.;  Mill’s  Analy- 
sis, Chap.  III. ; and  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  Supplementary  Dissertations,  Note 
D^^*._Ed. 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


295 


resemblance,”  — I can  as  little  comprehend,  as  if  he  had 
said  that  figure  may  perhaps  be  considered  as  a mixture 
of  color  and  sound. 

Our  thoughts  pass  easily  from  the  end  to  the  means ; 
from  any  truth  to  the  evidence  on  which  it  is  founded, 
the  consequences  that  may  be  drawn  from  it,  or  the  use 
that  may  be  made  of  it.  From  a part  we  are  easily 
led  to  think  of  the  whole,  from  a subject  to  its  qualities, 
or  from  things  related  to  the  relation.  Such  transitions 
in  thinking  must  have  been  made  thousands  of  times  by 
every  man  who  thinks  and  reasons,  and  thereby  become, 
as  it  were,  beaten  tracks  for  the  imagination. 

Not  only  the  relations  of  objects  to  each  other  influ- 
ence our  train  of  thinking,  but  the  relation  they  bear  to 
the  present  temper  and  disposition  of  the  mind ; their 
relation  to  the  habits  we  have  acquired,  whether  moral 
or  intellectual ; to  the  company  we  have  kept,  and  to 
the  business  in  which  we  have  been  chiefly  employed. 
The  same  event  will  suggest  very  different  reflections 
to  different  persons,  and  to  the  same  person  at  different 
times,  according  as  he  is  in  good  or  bad  humor,  as  he  is 
lively  or  dull,  angry  or  pleased,  melancholy  or  cheerful. 

Secondly^  Let  us  consider  how  far  this  attraction  of 
ideas  must  be  resolved  into  original  qualities  of  human 
nature. 

I believe  the  original  principles  of  the  mind,  of  which 
we  can  give  no  account  but  that  such  is  our  constitu- 
tion, are  more  in  number  than  is  commonly  thought. 
But  we  ought  not  to  multiply  them  without  necessity. 
That  trains  of  thinking,  which  by  frequent  repetition 
have  become  familiar,  should  spontaneously  offer  them- 
selves to  our  fancy,  seems  to  require  no  other  original 
quality  but  the  power  of  habit*  In  all  rational  think- 


* We  can  as  well  explain  habit  by  association,  as  association  by  habit.  — H. 

Better  even,  according  to  Mr.  Stewart,  who  says ; — “ The  wonderful 
effect  of  practice  in  the  formation  of  habits  has  been  often  and  justly  taken 
notice  of,  as  one  of  the  most  curious  circumstances  in  the  human  constitu- 
tion. A mechanical  operation,  for  example,  which  we  at  first  performed 
with  the  utmost  difficulty,  comes,  in  time,  to  be  so  familiar  to  us,  that  we 
are  able  to  perform  it  without  the  smallest  danger  of  mistake  ; even  while 


298 


CONCEPTION,  OR  SIMPLE  APPREHENSION. 


ing,  and  in  all  rational  discourse,  whether  serious  or  fa- 
cetious, the  thought  must  have  some  relation  to  what 
went  before.  Every  man,  therefore,  from  the  dawn  of 
reason,  must  have  been  accustomed  to  a train  of  related 
objects.  These  please  the  understanding,  and  by  custom 
become  like  beaten  tracks  which  invite  the  traveller. 

As  far  as  it  is  in  our  power  to  give  a direction  to  our 
thoughts  (which  it  is,  undoubtedly,  in  a great  degree), 
they  will  be  directed  by  the  active  principles  common 
to  men,  — by  our  appetites,  our  passions,  our  affections, 
our  reason,  and  conscience.  And  that  the  trains  of 
thinking  in  our  minds  are  chiefly  governed  by  these, 
according  as  one  or  another  prevails  at  the  time,  every 
man  will  find  in  his  experience.  If  the  mind  is  at  any 
time  vacant  from  every  passion  and  desire,  there  are 
still  some  objects  that  are  more  acceptable  to  us  than 
others.  The  facetious  man  is  pleased  with  surprising 
similitudes  or  contrasts  ; the  philosopher,  with  the  rela- 
tions of  things  that  are  subservient  to  reasoning ; the 
merchant,  with  what  tends  to  profit;  and  the  politician, 
with  what  may  mend  the  state. 

Nevertheless,  I believe  we  are  originally  disposed,  in 
imagination,  to  pass  from  any  one  object  of  thought  to 
others  that  are  contiguous  to  it  in  time  or  place.  This 
I think  may  be  observed  in  brutes  and  in  idiots,  as  well 
as  iiT  children,  before  any  habit  can  be  acquired  that 
might  account  for  it.  The  sight  of  an  object  is  apt  to 
suggest  to  the  imagination  what  has  been  seen  or  felt 
in  conjunction  with  it,  even  when  the  memory  of  that 
conjunction  is  gone.  They  expect  events  in  the  same 
order  and  succession  in  which  they  happened  before ; 
and  by  this  expectation,  their  actions  and  passions,  as 
well  as  their  thoughts,  are  regulated.  A horse  takes 


the  attention  appears  to  be  completely  engaged  with  other  subjects.  The 
truth  seems  to  be,  that,  in  consequence  of  the  association  of  ideas^  the  different 
steps  of  the  process  present  themselves  successively  to  the  thoughts,  with- 
out any  recollection  on  our  part,  and  with  a degree  of  rapidity  proportioned 
to  the  length  of  our  experience,  so  as  to  save  us  the  trouble  of  hesitation 
and  reflection,  by  giving  us  every  moment  a precise  and  steady  notion  of 
the  effect  to  be  produced.”  — Elements^  Part  I.  Chap.  II.  — Ed. 


ASSOCIATION  OF  IDEAS. 


297 


fright  at  the  place  where  some  object  frighted  him  be- 
fore. We  are  apt  to  conclude  from  this,  that  he  re- 
members the  former  accident.  But  perhaps  there  is 
only  an  association  formed  in  his  mind  between  the 
place  and  the  passion  of  fear,  without  any  distinct  re- 
membrance. 

Mr.  Locke  has  given  us  a very  good  chapter  upon 
the  association  of  ideas ; and,  by  the  examples  he  has 
given  to  illustrate  this  doctrine,  I think  it  appears  that 
very  strong  associations  may  be  formed  at  once  ; not 
of  ideas  to  ideas  only,  but  of  ideas  to  passions  and  emo- 
tions ; and  that  strong  associations  are  never  formed  at 
once,  but  when  accompanied  by  some  strong  passion  or 
emotion.  I believe  this  must  also  be  resolved  into  the 
constitution  of  our  nature. 

It  will  be  allowed  by  every  man,  that  our  happiness 
or  misery  in  life,  that  our  improvement  in  any  art  or 
science  which  we  profess,  and  that  our  improvement  in 
real  virtue  and  goodness,  depend  in  a very  great  degree 
on  the  train  of  thinking  that  occupies  the  mind  both  in 
our  vacant  and  in  our  more  serious  hours.  As  far, 
therefore,  as  the  direction  of  our  thoughts  is  in  our 
power  (and  that  it  is  so  in  a great  measure  cannot  be 
doubted),  it  is  of  the  last  importance  to  give  them  that 
direction  which  is  most  subservient  to  those  valuable 
purposes.  How  happy  is  that  mind,  in  which  the  light 
of  real  knowledge  dispels  the  phantoms  of  superstition ; 
in  which  the  belief  and  reverence  of  a perfect  all-govern- 
ing Mind  casts  out  all  fear  but  the  fear  of  acting  wrong ; 
in  which  serenity  and  cheerfulness,  innocence,  humanity, 
and  candor,  guard  the  imagination  against  the  entrance 
of  every  unhallowed  intruder,  and  invite  more  amiable 
and  worthier  guests  to  dwell ! * 


* On  the  doctrine  of  mental  association  the  student  may  consult  with 
advantage,  in  addition  to  the  works  already  indicated,  Dr.  Priestley’s 
Hartley's  Theory  of  the  Human  Mind^  on  the  Principle  of  the  Association  of 
Ideas;  with  Essays  relating  to  the  Subject  of  it;  Cardaillac,  Etudes  Element 
taires  de  Philosophies  Sect.  V.;  Systematic  Education,  Yol.  II.  Chap.  XIII., 
hy  Dr.  Lant  Carpenter.  The  important  subject  of  casual  associations,  and 
their  influence  on  character  and  happiness,  has  been  treated  most  fully  and 
satisfactorily  by  Mr.  Stewart,  Elements,  Part  I.  Chap.  V. — Ed. 


ESSAY  V. 


OF  ABSTRACTION. 


CHAPTER  I.  . 

OF  GENERAL  WORDS. 

L The  Distinction  between  General  Words  and  Proper 
Names,\  The  words  we  use  in  language  are  either 
general  words  or  proper  names.  Proper  names  are  in- 
tended to  signify  one  individual  only.  Such  are  the 
names  of  men,  kingdoms,  provinces,  cities,  rivers,  and 
of  every  other  creature  of  God,  or  work  of  man,  which 
we  choose  to  distinguish  from  all  others  of  the  kind  by 
a name  appropriated  to  it.  All  the  other  words  of  lan- 
guage are  general  words,  not  appropriated  to  signify 
any  one  individual  thing,  but  equally  related  to  many. 

In-  every  language,  rude  or  polished,  general  words 
make  the  greater  part,  and  proper  names  the  less. 
Grammarians  have  reduced  all  words  to  eight  or  nine 
classes,  which  are  called  parts  of  speech.  Of  these 
there  is  only  one  — to  wit,  that  of  nouns  — wherein 
proper  names  are  found.  All  pronouns^  verbs^  partici- 
ples^ adverbs^  articles,,  prepositions,,  conjunctions,  and  in- 
terjections are  general  words.  Of  nouns,  all  adjectives 
are  general  words,  and  the  greater  part  of  substantives. 
Every  substantive  that  has  a plural  number  is  a general 
word  ; for  no  proper  name  can  have  a plural  number, 
because  it  signifies  only  one  individual.  In  all  the  fif- 
teen books  of  Euclid’s  Elements,  there  is  not  one  word 
that  is  not  general ; and  the  same  may  be  said  of  many 
large  volumes. 


OF  GENERAL  WORDS. 


299 


At  the  same  time  it  must  be  acknowledged,  that  all 
the  objects  we  perceive  are  individuals.  Every  object 
of  sense,  of  memory,  or  of  consciousness  is  an  indi- 
vidual object.  All  the  good  things  we  enjoy  or  desire, 
and  all  the  evils  we  feel  or  fear,  must  come  from  indi- 
viduals ; and  I think  we  may  venture  to  say,  that  every 
creature  which  God  has  made,  in  the  heavens  above,  or 
in  the  earth  beneath,  or  in  the  waters  under  the  earth, 
is  an  individual. 

II.  Why  General  Words  are  so  much  more  numerous,] 
How  comes  it  to  pass,  then,  that  in  all  languages 
general  words  make  the  greatest  part  of  the  language, 
and  proper  names  but  a very  small  and  inconsiderable 
part  of  it  ? This  seemingly  strange  phenomenon  may, 
I think,  be  easily  accounted  for  by  the  following  obser- 
vations. 

Firsts  though  there  be  a few  individuals  that  are  ob- 
vious to  the  notice  of  all  men,  and  therefore  have 
proper  names  in  all  languages,  — such  as  the  sun  and 
moon,'  the  earth  and  sea,  — yet  the  greatest  part  of  the 
things  to  which  we  think  fit  to  give  proper  names  are 
local;  known  perhaps  to  a village  or  to  a neighbour- 
hood, but  unknown  to  the  greater  part  of  those  who 
speak  the  same  language,  and  to  all  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. The  names  of  such  things,  being  confined  to  a 
corner,  and  having  no  names  answering  to  them  in 
other  languages,  are  not  accounted  apart  of  the  language^ 
any  more  than  the  customs  of  a particular  hamlet  are 
accounted  part  of  the  law  of  the  nation. 

Secondly^  it  may  be  observed,  that  every  individual 
object  that  falls  within  our  view  has  various  attributes  ; 
and  it  is  by  them  that  it  becomes  useful  or  hurtful  to 
us.  We  know  not  the  essence  of  any  individual  object ; 
all  the  knowledge  we  can  attain  of  it  is  the  knowledge 
of  its  attributes,  — its  quantity,  its  various  qualities,  its 
various  relations  to  other  things,  its  place,  its  situation, 
and  motions.  It  is  by  such  attributes  of  things  only 
that  we  can  communicate  our  knowledge  of  them  to 
others.  By  their  attributes,  our  hopes  or  fears  from 


300 


ABSTRACTION. 


them  are  regulated ; and  it  is  only  by  attention  to  their 
attributes  that  we  can  make  them  subservient  to  our 
ends  ; and  therefore  we  give  names  to  such  attributes. 

Now  all  attributes  must  from  their  nature  be  ex- 
pressed by  general  words,  and  are  so  expressed  in  all 
languages.  In  the  ancient  philosophy,  attributes  in 
general  were  called  by  two  names  which  express  their 
nature.  They  were  called  universals^  because  they 
might  belong  equally  to  many  individuals,  and  are  not 
confined  to  one.  They  were  also  called  predicables^ 
because  whatever  is  predicated,  that  is,  affirmed  or  de- 
nied, of  one  subject  may  be  of  more,  and  therefore  is  a 
universal,  and  expressed  by  a general  word.  A predica- 
ble, therefore,  signifies  the  same  thing  as  an  attribute, 
with  this  difference  only,  that  the  first  is  Latin,  the  last 
English.*  The  attributes  we  find  either  in  the  creatures 
of  God,  or  in  the  works  of  men,  are  common  to  many 
individuals.  We  either  find  it  to  be  so,  ox  presume  it 
may  be  so,  and  give  them  the  same  name  in  every  sub- 
ject to  which  they  belong. 

There  are  not  only  attributes  belonging  to  individual 
subjects,  but  there  are  likewise  attributes  of  attributes, 
which  may  be  called  secondary  attributes.  Most  attri- 
butes are  capable  of  different  degrees,  and  different 
modifications,  which  must  be  expressed  by  general 
words.  Thus  it  is  an  attribute  of  many  bodies  to  be 
moved;  but  motion  may  be  in  an  endless  variety  of 
directions.  It  may  be  quick  or  slow,  rectilineal  or 
curvilineal ; it  may  be  equable,  or  accelerated,  or  re- 
tarded. 

As  all  attributes,  therefore,  whether  primary  or  secon- 
dary, are  expressed  by  general  words,  it  follows,  that, 
in  every  proposition  we  express  in  language,  what  is 
affirmed  or  denied  of  the  subject  of  the  proposition 
must  be  expressed  by  general  words. 

Thirdly^  the  same  faculties  by  which  we  distinguish 


* They  are  both  Latin,  or  both  English.  The  only  difference  is,  that 
the  one  is  of  technical,  the  other  of  popular  application,  and  that  the  for- 
mer expresses  as  potential  what  the  latter  does  as  actual.  — H. 


OF  GENERAL  WORDS. 


301 


the  different  attributes  belonging  to  the  same  subject, 
and  give  names  to  them,  enable  us  likewise  to  observe, 
that  many  subjects  agree  in  certain  attributes,  while 
they  differ  in  others.  By  this  means  we  are  enabled  to 
reduce  individuals,  which  are  infinite,  to  a limited  num- 
ber of  classes,  which  are  called  kinds  and  sorts  ; and,  in 
the  scholastic  language,  genera  and  species.  Observing 
many  individuals  to  agree  in  certain  attributes,  we  re- 
fer them  all  to  one  class,  and  give  a name  to  the  class. 
This  name  comprehends  in  its  signification,  not  one  at- 
tribute only,  but  all  the  attributes  which  distinguish 
that  class ; and  by  affirming  this  name  of  any  indi- 
vidual, we  affirm  it  to  have  all  the  attributes  which 
characterize  the  class : thus  men,  dogs,  horses,  elephants, 
are  so  many  different  classes  of  animals.  In  like  man- 
ner we  marshal  other  substances,  vegetable  and  inani- 
mate, into  classes.  Nor  is  it  only  substances  that  we 
thus  form  into  classes.  We  do  the  same  with  regard 
to  qualities,  relations,  actions,  affections,  passions,  and 
all  other  things. 

When  a class  is  very  large,  it  is  divided  into  subor- 
dinate classes  in  the  same  manner.  The  higher  class 
is  called  a genus  or  kind  ; the  lower,  a species  or  sort 
of  the  higher.  Sometimes  a species  is  still  subdivided 
into  subordinate  species ; and  this  subdivision  is  carried 
on  as  far  as  is  found  convenient  for  the  purpose  of  lan- 
guage, or  for  the  improvement  of  knowledge. 

In  this  distribution  of  things  into  genera  and  species^ 
it  is  evident  that  the  name  of  the  species  comprehends 
more  attributes  than  the  name  of  the  genus.  The  spe- 
cies comprehends  all  that  is  in  the  genus,  and  those 
attributes  likewise  which  distinguish  that  species  from 
others  belonging  to  the  same  genus ; and  the  more  sub- 
divisions we  make,  the  names  of  the  lower  become  still 
the  more  comprehensive  in  their  signification,  but  the 
less  extensive  in  their  application  to  individuals. 

Hence  it  is  an  axiom  in  logic,  that,  the  more  exten- 
sive any  general  term  is,  it  is  the  less  comprehensive ; 
and,  on  the  contrary,  the  more  comprehensive^  the  less 
extensive.  Thus,  in  the  following  series  of  subordinate 
26 


302 


ABSTRACTION. 


general  terms,  — animal,  man.  Frenchman,  Parisian, — 
every  subsequent  term  comprehends  in  its  signification 
all  that  is  in  the  preceding,  and  something  more  ; and 
every  antecedent  term  extends  to  more  individuals  than 
the  subsequent. 

Such  divisions  and  subdivisions  of  things  into  genera 
and  species^  with  general  names,  are  not  confined  to 
the  learned  and  polished  languages  ; they  are  found  in 
those  of  the  rudest  tribes  of  mankind  : from  which  we 
learn,  that  the  invention  and  the  use  of  general  words, 
both  to  signify  the  attributes  of  things,  and  to  signify 
the  genera  and  species  of  things,  is  not  a subtile  inven- 
tion of  philosophers,  but  am  operation  which  all  men 
perform  by  the  light  of  common  sense.  Philosophers 
may  speculate  about  this  operation,  and  reduce  it  to 
canons  and  aphorisms  ; but  men  of  common  under- 
standing, without  knowing  any  thing  of  the  philosophy 
of  it,  can  put  it  in  practice  ; in  like  manner  as  they  can 
see  objects,  and  make  good  use  of  their  eyes,  although 
they  know  nothing  of  the  structure  of  the  eye,  or  of  the 
theory  of  vision.* 


* This  is  well  illustrated  by  Adam  Smith  in  the  following  passage,  taken 
from  the  beginning  of  his  Considerations  concerning  the  First  Formation  of 
Languages:  — “The  assignation  of  particular  names  to  denote  particular 
objects,  that  is,  the  institution  of  nouns  substantive,  would,  probably,  be 
one  of  the  first  steps  towards  the  formation  of  language.  Two  savages, 
who  had  never  been  taught  to  speak,  but  had  been  bred  up  remote  from 
the  societies  of  men,  would  naturally  begin  to  form  that  language,  by  which 
they  would  endeavour  to  make  their  mutual  wants  intelligible  to  each  other, 
by  uttering  certain  sounds,  whenever  they  meant  to  denote  certain  objects. 
Those  objects  only  which  were  most  familiar  to  them,  and  which  they  had 
most  frequent  occasion  to  mention,  would  have  particular  names  assigned 
to  them.  The  particular  cave  whose  covering  sheltered  them  from  the 
weather,  the  particular  tree  whose  fruit  relieved  their  hunger,  the  particular 
fountain  whose  waters  allayed  their  thirst,  would  first  be  denominated  by 
the  words  cave^  tree,  fountain^  or  by  whatever  other  appellations  they  might 
think  proper,  in  that  primitive  jargon,  to  mark  them.  Afterwards,  when 
the  more  enlarged  experience  of  these  savages  had  led  them  to  observe, 
and  their  necessary  occasions  obliged  them  to  make  mention  of,  other 
caves,  and  other  trees,  and  other  fountains,  they  would  naturally  bestow 
upon  each  of  those  new  objects  the  same  name  by  which  they  had  been 
accustomed  to  express  the  similar  object  they  were  first  acquainted  with. 
And  thus  those  words,  which  were  originally  the  proper  names  of  indi- 
viduals, would  each  of  them  insensibly  become  the  common  name  of  a 
multitude.”  — Ed. 


OF  GENERAL  WORDS. 


303 


III.  General  Words  the  Signs  of  General  Concept 
tions,\  As  general  words  are  so  necessary  in  language, 
it  is  natural  to  conclude  that  there  must  be  general  con- 
ceptions^  of  which  they  are  the  signs.  Words  are  empty 
sounds  when  they  do  not  signify  the  thoughts  of  the 
speaker ; and  it  is  only  from  their  signification  that 
they  are  denominated  general.  Every  word  that  is 
spoken,  considered  merely  as  a sound,  is  an  individual 
sound.  And  it  can  only  be  called  a general  word,  be- 
cause that  which  it  signifies  is  general.  Now  that 
which  it  signifies  is  conceived  by  the  mind  both  of  the 
speaker  and  hearer,  if  the  word  have  a distinct  mean- 
ing, and  be  distinctly  understood.  It  is  therefore  im- 
possible that  words  can  have  a general  signification, 
unless  there  be  conceptions  in  the  mind  of  the  speaker, 
and  of  the  hearer,  of  things  that  are  general. 

We  are  therefore  here  to  consider  whether  we  have 
such  general  conceptions,  and  how  they  are  formed. 

To  begin  with  the  conceptions  expressed  by  general 
terms,  that  is,  by  such  general  words  as  may  be  the 
subject  or  the  predicate  of  a proposition.  They  are 
either  attributes  of  things,  or  they  are  genera  or  species 
of  things. 

It  is  evident,  with  respect  to  all  the  individuals  we 
are  acquainted  with,  that  we  have  a more  clear  and 
distinct  conception  of  their  attributes^  than  of  the  sub- 
ject to  which  those  attributes  belong. 

Take,  for  instance,  any  individual  body  we  have 
access  to  know,  — what  conception  do  we  form  of  it? 
Every  man  may  know  this  from  his  consciousness.  He 
will  find  that  he  conceives  it  as  a thing  that  has  length, 
breadth,  and  thickness,  such  a figure,  and  such  a color ; 
that  it  is  hard,  or  soft,  or  fluid ; that  it  has  such  quali- 
ties, and  is  fit  for  such  purposes.  If  it  is  a vegetable, 
he  may  know  where  it  grew,  what  is  the  form  of  its 
leaves,  and  flower,  and  seed ; if  an  animal,  what  are  its 
natural  instincts,  its  manner  of  life,  and.  of  rearing  its 
young.  Of  these  attributes  belonging  to  this  indi- 
vidual, and  numberless  others,  he  may  surely  have  a 
distinct  conception ; and  he  will  find  words  in  language 


304 


ABSTRACTION. 


by  which  he  can  clearly  and  distinctly  express  each  of 

them. 

Indeed,  the  attributes  of  individuals  are  all  that  we 
distinctly  conceive  about  them.  It  is  true,  we  conceive 
a subject  to  which  the  attributes  belong;  but  of  this 
subject,  w^hen  its  attributes  are  set  aside,  we  have  but 
an  obscure  and  relative  conception,  whether  it  be  body 
or  mind. 

The  other  class  of  general  terms  are  those  that  sig- 
nify the  genera  and  species  into  w^hich  we  divide  and 
subdivide  things.  And  if  we  be  able  to  form  distinct 
conceptions  of  attributes,  it  cannot  surely  be  denied 
that  we  may  have  distinct  conceptions  of  genera  and 
species  ; because  they  are  only  collections  of  attributes 
which  we  conceive  to  exist  in  a subject,  and  to  which 
we  give  a general  name.  If  the  attributes  compre- 
hended under  that  general  name  be  distinctly  con- 
ceived, the  thing  meant  by  the  name  must  be  distinctly 
conceived.  And  the  name  may  justly  be  attributed  to 
every  individual  which  has  those  attributes. 

Thus,  I conceive  distinctly  what  it  is  to  have  wings, 
to  be  covered  with  feathers,  to  lay  eggs.  Suppose, 

then,  that  we  give  the  name  of  bird  to  every  animal 
that  has  these  three  attributes.  Here,  undoubtedly,  my 
conception  of  a bird  is  as  distinct  as  my  notion  of  the 
attributes  which  are  common  to  this  species : and  if 
this  be  admitted  to  be  the  definition  of  a bird,  there  is 
nothing  I conceive  more  distinctly.  If  I had  never 
seen  a bird,  and  can  but  be  made  to  understand  the 
definition,  I can  easily  apply  it  to  every  individual  of 
the  species,  without  danger  of  mistake. 

When  things  are  divided  and  subdivided  by  men  of 
science,  and  names  given  to  the  genera  and  species^ 
those  names  are  defined.  Thus,  the  genera  and  species 
of  plants,  and  of  other  natural  bodies,  are  accurately 
defined  by  the  writers  in  the  various  branches  of  natural 
history ; so  that,  to  all  future  generations,  the  definition 
will  convey  a distinct  notion  of  the  genus  or  species 
defined. 

There  are,  without  doubt,  many  ^vords  signifying 


OF  GENERAL  WORDS. 


305 


genera  and  species  of  things,  which  have  a meaning 
somewhat  vague  and  indistinct;  so  that  those  who 
speak  the  same  language  do  not  always  use  them  in 
the  same  sense.  But  if  we  attend  to  the  cause  of  this 
indistinctness,  we  shall  find,  that  it  is  not  owing  to 
their  being  general  terms,  but  to  this,  that  there  is  no 
definition  of  them  that  has  authority.  Their  meaning, 
therefore,  has  not  been  learned  by  a definition,  but  by 
a kind  of  induction,  — by  observing  to  what  individuals 
they  are  applied  by  those  who  understand  the  lan- 
guage. We  learn  by  habit  to  use  them  as  we  see 
others  do,  even  when  we  have  not  a precise  meaning 
annexed  to  them.  A man  may  know,  that  to  certain 
individuals  they  may  be  applied  with  propriety;  but 
whether  they  can  be  applied  to  certain  other  individ- 
uals, he  may  be  uncertain,  either  from  want  of  good 
authorities,  or  from  having  contrary  authorities,  which 
leave  him  in  doubt. 

Thus,  a man  may  know,  that,  when  he  applies  the 
name  of  beast  to  a lion  or  tiger,  and  the  name  of  bird 
to  an  eagle  or  a turkey,  he  speaks  properly.  But 
whether  a bat  be  a bird  or  a beast,  he  may  be  uncertain. 
If  there  were  any  accurate  definition  of  a beast  and  of  a 
bird,  that  is  of  sufficient  authority,  he  could  be  at  no  loss. 

A genus  or  species,  being  a collection  of  attributes, 
conceived  to  exist  in  one  subject,  a definition  is  the 
only  way  to  prevent  any  addition  or  diminution  of  its 
ingredients  in  the  conception  of  different  persons ; and 
when  there  is  no  definition  that  can  be  appealed  to  as 
a standard,  the  name  will  hardly  retain  the  most  per- 
fect precision  in  its  signification. 

My  design  at  present  being  only  to  show  that  we 
have  general  conceptions  no  less  clear  and  distinct  than 
those  of  individuals,  it  is  sufficient  for  this  purpose,  if 
this  appears  with  regard  to  the  conceptions  expressed 
by  general  terms.  To  conceive  the  meaning  of  a gen- 
eral word,  and  to  conceive  that  which  it  signifies,  is  the 
same  thing.  We  conceive  distinctly  the  meaning  of 
general  terms,  therefore  we  conceive  distinctly  that 
which  they  signify.  But  such  terms  do  not  signify  any 


306 


ABSTRACTION. 


individual,  but  what  is  common  to  many  individuals  ; 
therefore  we  have  a distinct  conception  of  things  com- 
mon to  many  individuals,  that  is,  we  have  distinct  gen- 
eral conceptions. 

We  must  here  beware  of  the  ambiguity  of  the  word 
conception^  which  sometimes  signifies  the  act  of  the 
mind  in  conceiving,  sometimes  the  thing  conceived, 
which  is  the  object  of  that  act.*  If  the  word  be  taken 
in  the  first  sense,  I acknowledge  that  every  act  of  the 
mind  is  an  individual  act ; the  universality,  therefore, 
is  not  in  the  act  of  the  mind,  but  in  the  object,  or  thing 
conceived.  The  thing  conceived  is  an  attribute  com- 
mon to  many  subjects,  or  it  is  a genus  or  species  com- 
mon to  many  individuals.! 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  FORMATION  OF  GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 

I.  Distribution  of  the  Subject]  We  are  next  to  con- 
sider the  operations  of  the  understanding,  by  which  we 
are  enabled  to  form  general  conceptions.  These  ap- 
pear to  me  to  be  three  : — 

Firsts  The  resolving  or  analyzing  a subject  into  its 
known  attributes,  and  giving  a name  to  each  attribute, 
which  name  shall  signify  that  attribute,  and  nothing 
more. 

Secondly^  The  observing  one  or  more  such  attributes 
to  be  common  to  many  subjects. 

The  first  is  by  philosophers  called  abstraction;  the 
second  may  be  cdWe A generalizing ; but  both  are  com- 
monly included  under  the  name  of  abstraction. 


* This  last  should  be  called  concept^  which  was  a term  in  use  with  the 
old  English  philosophers.  — H. 

t On  the  whole  subject  of  names  and  naming^  see  James  Mill’s  Analysis^ 
Vol.  I p.  83  et  seq. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences^  Vol.  I., 
Aphorisms;  and  J.  S.  Mill’s  System  of  Logicj  Book  1. — Ed. 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


307 


It  is  difficult  to  say  which  of  them  goes  first,  or 
whether  they  are  not  so  closely  connected  that  neither 
can  claim  the  precedence.  For,  on  the  one  hand,  to 
perceive  an  agreement  between  two  or  more  objects  in 
the  same  attribute,  seems  to  require  nothing  more  than 
to  compare  them  together.  A savage,  upon  seeing 
snow  and  chalk,  would  find  no  difficulty  in  perceiving 
that  they  have  the  same  color.  Yet,  on  the  other  hand, 
it  seems  impossible  that  he  should  observe  this  agree- 
ment without  abstraction, — that  is,  distinguishing  in  his 
conception  the  color,  wherein  those  two  objects  agree, 
from  the  other  qualities  wherein  they  disagree. 

It  seems,  therefore,  that  we  cannot  generalize  with- 
out some  degree  of  abstraction ; but  I apprehend  we 
may  abstract  without  generalizing.  For  what  hinders 
me  from  attending  to  the  whiteness  of  the  paper  before 
me,  without  applying  that  color  to  any  other  object  ? 
The  whiteness  of  this  individual  object  is  an  abstract 
conception,  but  not  a general  one,  while  applied  to  one 
individual  only.  These  two  operations,  however,  are 
subservient  to  each  other ; for  the  more  attributes  we 
observe  and  distinguish  in  any  one  individual,  the  more 
agreements  we  shall  discover  between  it  and  other  in- 
dividuals. 

A third  operation  of  the  understanding,  by  which  we 
form  abstract  conceptions,  is  the  combining  into  one 
whole  a certain  number  of  those  attributes  of  which  we 
have  formed  abstract  notions,  and  giving  a name  to 
that  combination.  It  is  thus  we  form  abstract  notions 
of  the  genera  and  species  of  things.  These  three  oper- 
ations we  shall  consider  in  order. 

II.  General  Conceptions  formed  by  Abstraction  and 
Generalization,]  With  regard  to  abstraction^  strictly 
so  called,  I can  perceive  nothing  in  it  that  is  difficult 
either  to  be  understood  or  practised.  What  can  be 
more  easy  than  to  distinguish  the  different  attributes 
which  we  know  to  belong  to  a subject  ? In  a man, 
for  instance,  to  distinguish  his  size,  his  complexion,  his 
age,  his  fortune,  his  birth,  his  profession,  and  twenty 


308 


ABSTRACTION. 


other  things  that  belong  to  him  ? To  think  and  speak 
of  these  things  with  understanding,  is  surely  within  the 
reach  of  every  man  endowed  with  the  human  faculties. 

There  may  be  distinctions  that  require  nice  discern- 
ment, or  an  acquaintance  with  the  subject  that  is  not 
common.  Thus,  a critic  in  painting  may  discern  the 
style  of  Raphael  or  Titian,  when  another  man  could 
not.  A lawyer  may  be  acquainted  with  many  distinc- 
tions in  crimes,  and  contracts,  and  actions,  which  never 
occurred  to  a man  who  has  not  studied  law.  One  man 
may  excel  another  in  the  talent  of  distinguishing,  as  he 
may  in  memory  or  in  reasoning ; but  there  is  a certain 
degree  of  this  talent,  without  which  a man  would  have 
no  title  to  be  considered  as  a reasonable  creature. 

It  ought  likewise  to  be  observed,  that  attributes  may 
with  perfect  ease  be  distinguished  and  disjoined  in  our 
conception^  which  cannot  be  actually  separated  in  the 
subject  Thus,  in  a body,  I can  distinguish  its  solidity 
from  its  extension,  and  its  weight  from  both  ; in  ex- 
tension, I can  distinguish  length,  breadth,  and  thick- 
ness ; yet  none  of  these  can  be  separated  from  the  body, 
or  from  one  another.  One  cannot  exist  without  the 
other,  but  one  can  be  conceived  without  the  other. 

Having  considered  abstraction,  strictly  so  called,  let 
us  next  consider  the  operation  oi  generalizing^  which  is 
nothing  but  the  observing  one  or  more  attributes  to  be 
common  to  many  subjects. 

If  any  man  can  doubt  whether  there  be  attributes 
that  are  really  common  to  many  individuals,  let  him 
consider  whether  there  be  not  many  men  that  are  above 
six  feet  high,  and  many  below  it ; whether  there  be  not 
many  men  that  are  rich,  and  many  more  that  are  poor ; 
whether  there  be  not  many  that  were  born  in  Britain, 
and  many  that  were  born  in  France.  To  multiply  in- 
stances of  this  kind  would  be  to  affront  the  reader’s 
understanding.  It  is  certain,  therefore,  that  there  are 
innumerable  attributes  that  are  really  common  to  many 
individuals ; and  if  this  be  what  the  schoolmen  called 
universale  a parte  re^  we  may  affirm  with  certainty, 
that  there  are  such  universals. 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


309 


There  are  some  attributes  expressed  by  general  words, 
of  which  this  may  seem  more  doubtful.  Such  are  the 
qualities  which  are  inherent  in  their  several  subjects.  It 
may  be  said  that  every  subject  hath  its  own  qualities, 
and  that  which  is  the  quality  of  one  subject  cannot  be 
the  quality  of  another  subject.  Thus,  the  whiteness  of 
the  sheet  of  paper  upon  which  I write  cannot  be  the 
whiteness  of  another  sheet,  though  both  are  called 
white.  The  weight  of  one  guinea  is  not  the  weight 
of  another  guinea,  though  both  are  said  to  have  the 
same  weight. 

To  this  I answer,  that  the  whiteness  of  this  sheet  is 
one  thing,  whiteness  is  another ; the  conceptions  signi- 
fied by  these  two  forms  of  speech  are  as  different  as 
the  expressions.  The  first  signifies  an  individual  qual- 
ity really  existing,  and  is  not  a general  conception, 
though  it  be  an  abstract  one ; the  second  signifies  a 
general  conception,  which  implies  no  existence ,,  but  may 
be  predicated  of  every  thing  that  is  white,  and  in  the 
same  sense.  On  this  account,  if  one  should  say,  that 
the  whiteness  of  this  sheet  is  the  whiteness  of  another 
sheet,  every  man  perceives  this  to  be  absurd ; but  when 
he  says  both  sheets  are  white,  this  is  true  and  perfectly 
understood.  The  conception  of  whiteness  implies  no 
existence  ; it  would  remain  the  same,  though  every 
thing  in  the  universe  that  is  white  were  annihilated. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  general  names  of  quali- 
ties, as  well  as  of  other  attributes,  are  applicable  to 
many  individuals  in  the  same  sense,  which  could  not 
be  if  there  were  not  general  conceptions  signified  by 
such  names. 

The  ancient  philosophers  called  these  universals  or 
PREDICABLES,  and  endeavoured  to  reduce  them  to  five 
classes  ; to  wit,  genus^  species,^  specific  difference^  prop- 
erties^ and  accidents.  Perhaps  there  may  be  more 
classes  of  universals  or  attributes,  for  enumerations  so 
very  general  are  seldom  complete ; but  every  attribute, 
common  to  several  individuals,  may  be  expressed  by  a 
general  term,  which  is  the  sign  of  a general  conception. 

How  prone  men  are  to  form  general  conceptions  we 


310 


ABSTRACTION. 


may  see  from  the  use  of  metaphor,  and  of  the  other 
figures  of  speech  grounded  on  similitude.  Similitude 
is  nothing  else  than  an  agreement  of  the  objects  com- 
pared in  one  or  more  attributes ; and  if  there  be  no 
attribute  common  to  both,  there  can  be  no  similitude. 

The  similitudes  and  analogies  between  the  various 
objects  that  nature  presents  to  us  are  infinite  and  inex- 
haustible. They  not  only  please,  when  displayed  by 
the  poet  or  wit  in  works  of  taste,  but  they  are  highly 
useful  in  the  ordinary  communication  of  our  thoughts 
and  sentiments  by  language.  In  the  rude  languages 
of  barbarous  nations,  similitudes  and  analogies  supply 
the  want  of  proper  words  to  express  men’s  sentiments, 
so  much,  that  in  such  languages  there  is  hardly  a sen- 
tence without  a metaphor  ; and  if  we  examine  the  most 
copious  and  polished  languages,  we  shall  find  that  a 
great  proportion  of  the  words  and  phrases  which  are 
accounted  the  most  proper  may  be  said  to  be  the 
progeny  of  metaphor. 

As  foreigners,  who  settle  in  a nation  as  their  home, 
come  at  last  to  be  incorporated,  and  lose  the  denomi- 
nation of  foreigners,  so  words  and  phrases,  at  first  bor- 
rowed and  figurative,  by  long  use  become  denizens  in 
the  language,  and  lose  the  denomination  of  figures  of 
speech.  When  we  speak  of  the  extent  of  knowledge, 
the  steadiness  of  virtue,  the  tenderness  of  affection,  the 
perspicuity  of  expression,  no  man  conceives  these  to  be 
metaphorical  expressions  ; they  are  as  proper  as  any  in 
the  language.  Yet  it  appears  upon  the  very  face  of 
them,  that  they  must  have  been  metaphorical  in  those 
who  used  them  first;  and  that  it  is  by  use  and  prescrip- 
tion that  they  have  lost  the  denomination  of  figurative, 
and  acquired  a right  to  be  considered  as  proper  words. 
This  observation  will  be  found  to  extend  to  a great 
part,  perhaps  the  greater  part,  of  the  words  of  the  most 
perfect  languages. 

Sometimes  the  name  of  an  individual  is  given  to  a 
general  conception,  and  thereby  the  individual  in  a 
manner  generalized.  As  when  the  Jew,  in  Shakspeare, 
says,  “ A Daniel  come  to  judgment;  yea,  a Daniel ! ” 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


311 


In  this  speech,  “ a Daniel  ” is  an  attribute,  or  a univer- 
sal. The  character  of  Daniel,  as  a man  of  singular 
wisdom,  is  abstracted  from  his  person,  and  considered 
as  capable  of  being  attributed  to  other  persons. 

Upon  the  whole,  these  two  operations  of  abstracting 
and  generalizing  appear  common  to  all  men  that  have 
understanding.  The  practice  of  them  is,  and  must  be, 
familiar  to  every  man  that  uses  language ; but  it  is 
one  thing  to  practise  them,  and  another  to  explain  how 
they  are  performed ; as  it  is  one  thing  to  see,  another 
to  explain  how  we  see.  The  first  is  the  province  of  all 
men,  and  is  the  natural  and  easy  operation  of  the  fac- 
ulties which  God  has  given  us.  The  second  is  the 
province  of  philosophers,  and,  though  a matter  of  no 
great  difficulty  in  itself,  has  been  much  perplexed  by 
the  ambiguity  of  words,  and  still  more  by  the  hypothe- 
ses of  philosophers. 

A mistake  which  is  carried  through  the  whole  of  Mr. 
Locke’s  Essay  may  be  here  mentioned.  It  is,  that  our 
simplest  ideas  or  conceptions  are  got  immediately  by 
the  senses,  or  by  consciousness,  and  the  complex  after- 
wards formed  by  compounding  them.  I apprehend  it 
is  far  otherwise.  Nature  presents  no  object  to  the 
senses,  or  to  consciousness,  that  is  not  complex.  Thus, 
by  our  senses  we  perceive  bodies  of  various  kinds ; but 
every  body  is  a complex  body ; it  has  length,  breadth, 
and  thickness  ; it  has  figure,  and  color,  and  various 
other  sensible  qualities,  which  are  blended  together  in 
the  same  subject;  and  I apprehend  that  brute  animals, 
who  have  the  same  senses  that  we  have,  cannot  sepa- 
rate the  different  qualities  belonging  to  the  same  sub- 
ject, and  have  only  a complex  and  confused  notion  of 
the  whole.  Such,  also,  would  be  our  notions  of  the 
objects  of  sense,  if  we  had  not  superior  powers  of  un- 
derstanding, by  which  we  can  analyze  the  complex 
object,  abstract  every  particular  attribute  from  the  rest, 
and  form  a distinct  conception  of  it.  So  that  it  is  not 
by  the  senses  immediately,  but  rather  by  the  powers  of 
analyzing  and  abstraction,  that  we  get  the  most  simple 
and  the  most  distinct  notions  even  of  the  objects  of 
sense. 


812 


ABSTRACTION. 


As  it  is  by  analyzing  a complex  object  into  its  sev- 
eral attributes  that  we  acquire  our  simplest  abstract 
conceptions,  it  may  be  proper  to  compare  this  analysis 
with  that  which  a chemist  makes  of  a compounded  bdby 
into  the  ingredients  which  enter  into  its  composition ; 
for  although  there  be  such  an  analogy  between  these 
two  operations,  that  we  give  to  both  the  name  of  analy- 
sis or  resolution,  there  is  at  the  same  time  so  great  a 
dissimilitude  in  some  respects,  that  we  may  be  led  into 
error,  by  applying  to  one  what  belongs  to  the  other. 

It  is  obvious,  that  the  chemical  analysis  is  an  opera- 
tion of  the  hand  upon  matter,  by  various  material 
instruments.  The  analysis  we  are  now  explaining  is 
purely  an  operation  of  the  understanding,  which  re- 
quires no  material  instrument,  and  produces  no  change 
upon  any  external  thing ; we  shall  therefore  call  it  in- 
tellectual or  mental  analysis. 

In  chemical  analysis,  the  compound  body  itself  is 
the  subject  analyzed,  — a subject  so  imperfectly  known, 
that  it  may  be  compounded  of  various  ingredients, 
when  to  our  senses  it  appears  perfectly  simple;  and 
even  when  we  are  able  to  analyze  it  into  the  different 
ingredients  of  which  it  is  composed,  we  know  not  how 
or  why  the  combination  of  those  ingredients  produces 
such  a body. 

Thus,  pure  sea-salt  is  a body,  to  appearance,  as  sim- 
ple as  any  in  nature.  Every  the  least  particle  of  it, 
discernible  by  our  senses,  is  perfectly  similar  to  every 
other  particle  in  all  its  qualities.  The  nicest  taste,  the 
quickest  eye,  can  discern  no  mark  of  its  being  made  up 
of  different  ingredients ; yet,  by  the  chemical  art,  it 
can  be  analyzed  into  an  acid  and  an  alkali,  and  can  be 
again  produced  by  the  combination  of  those  two  ingre- 
dients. But  how  this  combination  produces  sea-salt, 
no  man  has  been  able  to  discover.  The  ingredients  are 
both  as  unlike  the  compound  as  any  bodies  we  know. 
No  man  could  have  guessed,  before  the  thing  was 
known,  that  sea-salt  is  compounded  of  those  two  in- 
gredients ; no  man  could  have  guessed,  that  the  union 
of  those  two  ingredients  should  produce  such  a com- 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


313 


pound  as  sea-salt.  Such,  in  many  cases,  are  the  phe- 
nomena of  the  chemical  analysis  of  a compound  body. 

If  we  consider  the  intellectual  analysis  of  an  object, 
it  is  evident  that  nothing  of  this  kind  can  happen ; be- 
cause the  thing  analyzed  is  not  an  external  object  im- 
perfectly known ; it  is  a conception  of  the  mind  itself. 
And  to  suppose  that  there  can  be  any  thing  in  a con- 
ception that  is  not  conceived,  is  a contradiction. 

The  reason  of  observing  the  difference  between  these 
two  kinds  of  analysis  is,  that  some  philosophers,  in 
order  to  support  their  systems,  have  maintained,  that  a 
complex  idea  may  have  the  appearance  of  the  most 
perfect  simplicity,  and  retain  no  similitude  to  any  of 
the  simple  ideas  of  which  it  is  compounded;  just  as  a 
white  color  may  appear  perfectly  simple,  and  retain  no 
similitude  to  any  of  the  seven  primary  colors  of  which 
it  is  compounded  ; or  as  a chemical  composition  may 
appear  perfectly  simple,  and  retain  no  similitude  to  any 
of  the  ingredients. 

From  which  those  philosophers  have  drawn  this  im- 
portant conclusion,  that  a cluster  of  the  ideas  of  sense, 
properly  combined,  may  make  the  idea  of  a mind  ; and 
that  all  the  ideas  which  Mr.  Locke  calls  ideas  of  reflec- 
tion are  only  compositions  of  the  ideas  which  ice  have 
by  our  five  senses.  From  this  the  transition  is  easy, 
that  if  a proper  composition  of  the  ideas  of  matter 
may  make  the  idea  of  a mind,  then  a proper  compo- 
sition of  matter  itself  may  make  a mind,  and  that  man 
is  only  a piece  of  matter  curiously  formed. 

In  this  curious  system,  the  whole  fabric  rests  upon 
this  foundation,  that  a complex  idea,  which  is  made  up 
of  various  simple  ideas,  may  appear  to  be  perfectly 
simple,  and  have  no  marks  of  composition,  because  a 
compound  body  may  appear  to  our  senses  to  be  per- 
fectly simple. 

As  far  as  I am  able  to  judge,  this,  which  it  is  said 
may  be,  cannot  be.  That  a complex  idea  should  be 
made  up  of  simple  ideas,  so  that,  to  a ripe  understand- 
ing reflecting  upon  that  idea,  there  should  be  no  ap- 
pearance of  composition,  nothing  similar  to  the  simple 
27 


314 


ABSTRACTION. 


ideas  of  which  it  is  compounded,  seems  to  me  to 
involve  a contradiction.  The  idea  is  a conception  of 
the  mind.  If  any  thing  more  than  this  is  meant  by 
the  idea,  I know  not  what  it  is ; and  I wish  both  to 
know  what  it  is,  and  to  have  proof  of  its  existence. 
Now,  that  there  should  be  any  thing  in  the  conception 
of  an  object  which  is  not  conceived,  appears  to  me  as 
manifest  a contradiction,  as  that  there  should  be  an 
existence  which  does  not  exist,  or  that  a thing  should 
be  conceived  and  not  conceived  at  the  same  time. 

But,  say  these  philosophers,  a white  color  is  produced 
by  the  composition  of  the  primary  colors,  and  yet  has 
no  resemblance  to  any  of  them.  I grant  it.  But  what 
can  be  inferred  from  this  with  regard  to  the  composition 
of  ideas  ? To  bring  this  argument  home  to  the  point, 
they  must  say  that,  because  a white  color  is  com- 
pounded of  the  primary  colors,  therefore  the  idea  of  a 
white  color  is  compounded  of  the  ideas  of  the  primary 
colors.  This  reasoning,  if  it  was  admitted,  would  lead 
to  innumerable  absurdities.  An  opaque  fluid  may  be 
compounded  of  two  or  more  pellucid  fluids.  Hence 
we  might  infer  with  equal  force,  that  the  idea  of  an 
opaque  fluid  may  be  compounded  of  the  idea  of  two 
or  more  pellucid  fluids. 

Nature’s  way  of  compounding  bodies^  and  our  way 
of  compounding  ideas^  are  so  different  in  many  respects, 
that  we  cannot  reason  from  the  one  to  the  other,  unless 
it  can  be  found  that  ideas  are  combined  by  fermenta- 
tions and  elective  attractions,  and  may  be  analyzed  in 
a furnace  by  the  force  of  fire  and  of  rnenstruums.  Until 
this  discovery  be  made,  we  must  hold  those  to  be 
simple  ideas,  which,  upon  the  most  attentive  reflection, 
have  no  appearance  of  composition ; and  those  only  to 
be  the  ingredients  of  complex  ideas,  which,  by  atten- 
tive reflection,  can  be  perceived  to  be  contained  in 
them. 

III.  General  Conceptions  formed  by  Combination.^ 
As,  by  an  intellectual  analysis  of  objects,  we  form  gen- 
eral conceptions  of  single  attributes  (which,  of  all  con- 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


815 


ceptions  that  enter  into  the  human  mind,  are  the  most 
simple),  so,  by  combining  several  of  these  into  one 
parcel,  and  giving  a name  to  that  combination,  we 
form  general  conceptions  that  may  be  very  complex, 
and  at  the  same  time  very  distinct. 

Thus,  one  who,  by  analyzing  extended  objects,  has 
got  the  simple  notions  of  a point,  a line,  straight  or 
curve,  an  angle,  a surface,  a solid,  can  easily  conceive 
a plane  surface  terminated  by  four  equal  straight  lines 
meeting  in  four  points  at  right  angles.  To  this  species 
of  figure  he  gives  the  name  of  a square.  In  like  man- 
ner, he  can  conceive  a solid  terminated  by  six  equal 
squares,  and  give  it  the  name  of  a cube,  A square,  a 
cube,  and  every  name  of  a mathematical  figure,  is  a 
general  term  expressing  a complex  general  conception, 
made  by  a certain  combination  of  the  simple  elements 
into  which  we  analyze  extended  bodies. 

Every  mathematical  figure  is  accurately  defined  by 
enumerating  the  simple  elements  of  which  it  is  formed, 
and  the  manner  of  their  combination.  The  definition 
contains  the  whole  essence  of  it ; and  every  property 
that  belongs  to  it  may  be  deduced  by  demonstrative 
reasoning  from  its  definition.  It  is  not  a thing  that 
exists,  for  then  it  would  be  an  individual ; but  it  is  a 
thing  that  is  conceived  without  regard  to  existence. 

A farm,  a manor,  a parish,  a county,  a kingdom, 
are  complex  general  conceptions,  formed  by  various 
combinations  and  modifications  of  inhabited  territory, 
under  certain  forms  of  government.  Different  combi- 
nations ol’  military  men  form  the  notions  of  a com- 
pany, a regiment,  an  army.  The  several  crimes  which 
are  the  objects  of  criminal  law,  such  as  theft,  murder, 
robbery,  piracy,  — what  are  they  but  certain  combina- 
tions of  human  actions  and  intentions,  which  are  accu- 
rately defined  in  criminal  law,  and  which  it  is  found 
convenient  to  comprehend  under  one  name  and  con- 
sider as  one  thing  ? 

When  we  observe  that  Nature,  in  her  animal,  vege- 
table, and  inanimate  productions,  has  formed  many  in- 
dividuals that  agree  in  many  of  their  qualities  and 


316 


ABSTRACTION. 


attributes,  we  are  led  by  natural  instinct  to  expect  their 
agreement  in  other  qualities  which  we  have  not  had  oc- 
casion to  perceive. 

The  physician  expects  that  the  rhubarb  which  has 
never  yet  been  tried  will  have  like  medical  virtues  with 
that  which  he  has  prescribed  on  former  occasions.  Two 
parcels  of  rhubarb  agree  in  certain  sensible  qualities, 
from  which  agreement  they  are  both  called  by  the  same 
general  name,  rhubarb.  Therefore  it  is  expected  that 
they  will  agree  in  their  medical  virtues.  And  as  expe- 
rience has  discovered  certain  virtues  in  one  parcel,  or  in 
many  parcels,  we  presume,  without  experience,  that  the 
same  virtues  belong  to  all  parcels  of  rhubarb  that  shall 
be  used. 

If  a traveller  meets  a horse,  an  ox,  or  a sheep  which 
he  never  saw  before,  he  is  under  no  apprehension,  be- 
lieving these  animals  to  be  of  a species  that  is  tame 
and  inoffensive.  But  he  dreads  a lion  or  a tiger,  be- 
cause they  are  of  a fierce  and  ravenous  species. 

We  are  capable  of  receiving  innumerable  advantages, 
and  are  exposed  to  innumerable  dangers,  from  the  va- 
rious productions  of  nature,  animal,  vegetable,  and  in- 
animate. The  life  of  man,  if  a hundred  times  longer 
than  it  is,  would  be  insufficient  to  learn  from  experience 
the  useful  and  hurtful  qualities  of  every  individual  pro- 
duction of  nature,  taken  singly. 

We  have,  therefore,  a strong  and  rational  inducement 
both  to  distribute  natural  substances  into  classes, 
and  species^  under  general  names,  and  to  do  this  with 
all  the  accuracy  and  distinctness  we  are  able.  For  the 
more  accurate  our  divisions  are  made,  and  the  more 
distinctly  the  several  species  are  defined,  the  more 
securely  we  may  rely  that  the  qualities  we  find  in  one 
or  in  a few  individuals  will  be  found  in  all  of  the  same 
species. 

It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that  the  combinations 
that  have  names  are  nearly,  though  not  perfectly,  the 
same  in  the  different  languages  of  civilized  nations  that 
have  intercourse  with  one  another.  Hence  it  is  that 
the  lexicographer,  for  the  most  part,  can  give  words  in 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


317 


one  language  answering  perfectly,  or  very  nearly,  to 
those  of  another ; and  what  is  written  in  a simple  style 
in  one  language  can  be  translated,  almost  word  for 
word,  into  another.*  From  this  we  may  conclude  that 
there  are  either  certain  common  principles  of  human 
nature,  or  certain  common  occurrences  of  human  life, 
which  dispose  men,  out  of  an  infinite  number  that 
might  be  formed,  to  form  certain  combinations  rather 
than  others. 

In  the  rudest  state  of  society,  men  must  have  occa- 
sion to  form  the  general  notions  of  man,  woman,  father, 
mother,  son,  daughter,  sister,  brother,  neighbour,  friend, 
enemy,  and  many  others,  to  express  the  common  rela- 
tions of  one  person  to  another. 

If  they  are  employed  in  hunting,  they  must  have 
general  terms  to  express  the  various  implements  and 
operations  of  the  chase.  Their  houses  and  clothing, 
however  simple,  will  furnish  another  set  of  general 
terms,  to  express  the  materials,  the  workmanship,  and 
the  excellences  and  defects  of  those  fabrics.  If  they 
sail  upon  rivers  or  upon  the  sea,  this  will  give  occasion 
to  a great  number  of  general  terms,  which  otherwise 
would  never  have  occurred  to  their  thoughts. 

The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  agriculture,  of  pas- 
turage, of  every  art  they  practise,  and  of  every  branch 
of  knowledge  they  attain.  The  necessity  of  general 
terms  for  communicating  our  sentiments  is  obvious,  and 
the  invention  of  them,  as  far  as  we  find  them  necessary, 
requires  no  other  talent  than  that  degree  of  understand- 
ing which  is  common  to  men. 

New  inventions  of  general  use  give  an  easy  birth  to 
new  complex  notions  and  new  names,  which  spread  as 
far  as  the  invention  does.  How  many  new  complex 
notions  have  been  formed,  and  names  for  them  invented 
in  the  languages  of  Europe,  by  the  modern  inventions 
of  printing,  of  gunpowder,  of  the  mariner’s  compass,  of 
optical  glasses!  The  simple  ideas  combined  in  those 
complex  notions,  and  the  associating  qualities  of  those 


* This  is  only  strictly  true  of  the  words  relative  to  objects  of  sense.  — H. 

27* 


818 


ABSTRACTION. 


ideas,  are  very  ancient,  but  they  never  produced  those 
complex  notions  until  there  was  use  for  them. 

What  is  peculiar  to  a nation  in  its  customs,  manners, 
or  laws,  will  give  occasion  to  complex  notions  and 
words  peculiar  to  the  language  of  that  nation.  Hence 
it  is  easy  to  see  why  impeachment  and  attainder  in  the 
English  language,  and  ostracism  in  the  Greek  language, 
have  not  names  answering  to  them  in  other  languages. 

I apprehend,  therefore,  that  it  is  utility.^  and  not,  as 
some  have  thought,  the  associating  qualities  of  the  ideas^ 
that  has  led  men  to  form  only  certain  combinations, 
and  to  give  names  to  them  in  language,  while  they 
neglect  an  infinite  number  that  might  be  formed. 

There  remains  a very  large  class  of  complex  general 
terms,  on  which  I shall  make  some  observations ; I 
mean  those  by  which  we  name  the  genera  and  species 
of  natural  substances. 

It  is  utility,  indeed,  that  leads  us  to  give  general 
names  to  the  various  species  of  natural  substances ; but, 
in  combining  the  attributes  which  are  included  under 
the  specific  name,  we  are  more  aided  and  directed  by 
nature,  than  in  forming  other  combinations  of  mixed 
modes  and  relations.  In  the  last,  the  ingredients  are 
brought  together  in  the  occurrences  of  life,  or  in  the  ac- 
tions or  thoughts  of  men.  But  in  the  first,  the  ingre- 
dients are  united  by  nature  in  many  individual  sub- 
stances which  God  has  made.  We  form  a general  no- 
tion of  those  attributes  wherein  many  individuals  agree. 
We  give  a specific  name  to  this  combination,  which 
name  is  common  to  all  substances  having  those  attri- 
butes, which  either  do  or  may  exist.  The  specific  name 
comprehends  neither  more  nor  fewer  attributes  than  we 
find  proper  to  put  into  its  definition.  It  comprehends 
not  time,  nor  place,  nor  even  existence,  although  there 
can  be  no  individual  without  these. 

This  work  of  the  understanding  is  absolutely  neces- 
sary for  speaking  intelligibly  of  the  productions  of  na- 
ture, and  for  reaping  the  benefits  we  receive,  and  avoid- 
ing the  dangers  we  are  exposed  to,  vfrom  them.  The 
individuals  are  so  many,  that  to  give  a proper  name  to 


GENERAL  CONCEPTIONS. 


319 


each  would  be  beyond  the  power  of  language.  If  a 
good  or  bad  quality  were  observed  in  an  individual,  of 
how  small  use  would  this  be  if  there  were  not  a species 
in  which  the  same  quality  might  be  expected  ? 

Without  some  general  knowledge  of  the  qualities  of 
natural  substances,  human  life  could  not  be  preserved. 
And  there  can  be  no  general  knowledge  of  this  kind 
without  reducing  them  to  species  under  specific  names. 
For  this  reason,  among  the  rudest  nations,  we  find 
names  for  fire,  water,  earth,  air,  mountains,  fountains, 
rivers  ; for  the  kinds  of  vegetables  they  use  ; of  animals 
they  hunt  or  tame,  or  that  are  found  useful  or  hurtful. 
Each  of  those  names  signifies  in  general  a substance 
having  a certain  combination  of  attributes.  The  name, 
therefore,  must  be  common  to  all  substances  in  which 
those  attributes  are  found. 

Such  general  names  of  substances  being  found  in  all 
vulgar  languages,  before  philosophers  began  to  make 
accurate  divisions  and  less  obvious  distinctions,  it  is 
not  to  be  expected  that  their  meaning  should  be 
more  precise  than  is  necessary  for  the  common  pur- 
poses of  life. 

As  the  knowledge  of  nature  advances,  more  species 
of  natural  substances  are  observed,  and  their  useful 
qualities  discovered.  In  order  that  this  important  part 
of  human  knowledge  may  be  communicated,  and  hand- 
ed down  to  future  generations,  it  is  not  sufficient 
that  the  species  have  names.  Such  is  the  fluctuating 
state  of  language,  that  a general  name  will  not  always 
retain  the  same  precise  signification,  unless  it  have  a 
definition  in  which  men  are  disposed  to  acquiesce. 

There  was  undoubtedly  a great  fund  of  natural 
knowledge  among  the  Greeks  and  Romans  in  the  time 
of  Pliny.  There  is  a great  fund  in  his  Natural  History ; 
but  much  of  it  is  lost  to  us,  for  this  reason,  among 
others,  that  we  know  not  what  species  of  substance'  he 
means  by  such  a name.  Nothing  could  have  prevented 
this  loss  but  an  accurate  definition  of  the  name,  by 
which  the  species  might  have  been  distinguished  from 
all  others,  as  long  as  that  name  and  its  definition  re- 


320 


ABSTRACTION. 


mained.  To  prevent  such  loss  in  future  times,  mod- 
ern philosophers  have  very  laudably  attempted  to  give 
names  and  accurate  definitions  of  all  the  known  species 
of  substances  wherewith  the  bountiful  Creator  has  en- 
riched our  globe. 

Nature  invites  to  this  work,  by  having  formed  things 
so  as  to  make  it  both  easy  and  important.  For, 
we  perceive  numbers  of  individual  substances  so  like 
in  their  obvious  qualities  that  the  most  unimproved 
tribes  of  men  consider  them  as  of  one  species,  and  give 
them  one  common  name.  Secondly^  the  more  latent 
qualities  of  substances  are  generally  the  same  in  all  the 
individuals  of  a species ; so  that  what,  by  observation 
or  experiment,  is  found  in  a few  individuals  of  a spe- 
cies, is  presumed  and  commonly  found  to  belong  to  the 
W’-hole.  By  this  we  are  enabled,  from  particular  facts, 
to  draw  general  conclusions.  This  kind  of  induction  is 
indeed  the  master  key  to  the  knowledge  of  nature,  with- 
out which  we  could  form  no  general  conclusions  in  that 
branch  of  philosophy.  And,  thirdly^  by  the  very  consti- 
tution of  our  nature,  we  are  led,  without  reasoning,  to 
ascribe  to  the  whole  species  what  we  have  found  to  be- 
long to  the  individuals.  It  is  thus  we  come  to  know 
that  fire  burns  and  water  drowns,  that  bodies  gravitate 
and  bread  nourishes. 

The  species  of  two  of  the  kingdoms  of  nature  — to 
wit,  the  animal  and  the  vegetable  — seem  to  be  fixed  by 
nature,  by  the  power  they  have  of  producing  their  like. 
And  in  these,  men  in  all  ages  and  nations  have  ac- 
counted the  parent  and  the  progeny  of  the  same  species. 
The  differences  among  naturalists  with  regard  to  the 
species  of  these  two  kingdoms  are  very  inconsiderable, 
and  may  be  occasioned  by  the  changes  produced  by 
soil,  climate,  and  culture,  and  sometimes  by  monstrous 
productions,  which  are  comparatively  rare. 

In  the  inanimate  kingdom  we  have  not  the  same 
means  of  dividing  things  into  species,  and  therefore 
the  limits  of  species  seem  to  be  more  arbitrary ; but, 
from  the  progress  already  made,  there  is  ground  to 
hope,  that,  even  in  this  kingdom,  as  the  knowledge  of 


REALISTS,  NOMINALISTS,  AND  CONCEPTUALISTS.  321 


it  advances,  the  various  species  may  be  so  well  distin- 
guished and  defined  as  to  answer  every  valuable  pur- 
pose. 


CHAPTER  III. 

OPINIONS  OF  PHILOSOPHERS  ABOUT  UNIVERSALS. 

I.  Opinions  of  the  Ancients  on  the  Subject,]  In  the 
ancient  philosophy,  the  doctrine  of  universals^  that  is, 
of  things  which  we  express  by  general  terms,  makes  a 
great  figure.  The  ideas  of  the  Pythagoreans  and  Pla- 
tonists  were  universals.  All  science  is  employed  about 
universals  as  its  object.  It  was  thought  that  there  can 
be  no  science  unless  its  object  be  something  real  and 
immutable,  and  therefore  those  who  paid  homage  to 
truth  and  science  maintained  that  ideas  or  universals 
have  a real  and  immutable  existence. 

To  these  ideas  they  ascribed  the  most  magnificent 
attributes.  Of  man,  of  a rose,  of  a circle,  and  of  every 
species  of  things,  they  believed  that  there  is  one  idea  or 
form  which  existed  from  eternity,  before  any  individual 
of  the  species  was  formed ; that  this  idea  is  the  exem- 
plar or  pattern  according  to  which  the  Deity  formed 
the  individuals  of  the  species ; that  every  individual  of 
the  species  participates  of  this  idea,  which  constitutes 
its  essence ; and  that  this  idea  is  likewise  an  object  of 
the  human  intellect,  when,  by  due  abstraction,  we  dis- 
cern it  to  be  one  in  all  the  individuals  of  the  species. 

Thus  the  idea  of  every  species,  though  one  and  im- 
mutable, might  be  considered  in  three  different  views  or 
respects ; first,^  as  having  an  external  existence  before 
there  was  any  individual  of  the  species ; secondly,^  as 
existing  in  every  individual  of  that  species,  without 
division  or  multiplication,  and  making  the  essence  of 
the  species ; and,  thirdly^  as  an  object  of  intellect  and 
of  science  in  man. 


322 


ABSTRACTION. 


Such  I take  to  be  the  doctrine  of  Plato,  as  far  as  I 
am  able  to  comprehend  it.  His  disciple,  Aristotle,  re- 
jected the  first  of  these  views  of  ideas  as  visionary,  but 
differed  little  from  his  master  with  regard  to  the  last 
two.  He  did  not  admit  the  existence  of  universal  na- 
tures antecedent  to  the  existence  of  individuals  ; but 
he  held  that  every  individual  consists  of  matter  and 
form ; that  the  form  (which  I take  to  be  what  Plato 
calls  the  idea)  is  common  to  all  the  individuals  of  the 
species,  and  that  the  human  intellect  is  fitted  to  receive 
the  forms  of  things  as  objects  of  contemplation.*  Such 
profound  speculations  about  the  nature  of  universals 
we  find  even  in  the  first  ages  of  philosophy.  I wish  I 
could  make  them  more  intelligible  to  myself  and  to  the 
reader. 

II.  Rise  of  Nominalism  and  Conceptualism^  and  their 
Moderrt  Defenders,]  Near  the  beginning  of  the  twelfth 
century,  Roscelin,  the  master  of  the  famous  Abelard, 
introduced  a new  doctrine,  — that  there  is  nothing  uni- 
versal but  words  or  names.  For  this  and  other  heresies 
he  was  much  persecuted.  However,  by  his  eloquence 
and  abilities,  and  those  of  his  disciple,  Abelard,  the 
doctrine  spread,  and  those  who  followed  it  were  called 
Nominalists,^  His  antagonists,  who  held  that  there  are 


* Different  philosophers  have  maintained  that  Aristotle  was  a Realist,  a 
Conceptualist,  and  a Nominalist,  in  the  strictest  sense.  — H. 

“ Now  I venture  to  think  that  the  interminable  contest  between  Platonist 
and  Aristotelian,  Realist  and  Nominalist,  is,  at  bottom,  not  so  much  a 
question  of  what  universals  are,  as  of  how  they  shall  be  treated  ; not  so 
much  a question  of  metaphysics  as  of  method.  Upon  the  nature  of  gen- 
eral notions  there  is  a large  amount  of  agreement  between  the  parties : 
the  Realist  believes,  with  the  Nominalist,  that  they  are  in  the  human  mind, 
whilst,  if  the  Nominalist  believes  at  all  that  the  world  was  created  hy  design^ 
he  can  scarcely  escape  from  recognizing  the  Realist  position,  that  such 
ideas  as  animal^  rights  motion^  must  have  had  their  existence  from  the  be- 
ginning in  the  creative  mind.  Aristotle  might  have  owned  that  the  uni- 
versal notions  in  his  mind  answer  to  certain  ideas  in  the  Divine,  whilst 
his  illustrious  master  might  have  confessed  that,  putting  revelation  out 
of  the  question,  there  is  no  way  to  the  absolute,  — to  knowledge  of  the 
ideas,  — except  a careful  observation  of,  and  reasoning  from,  the  facts 
before  our  eyes.”  — Thomson’s  Laws  of  Thought^  2d  ed.,  p.  114  et  seq. 
Compare  Ravaisson,  M6taphysique  d'’Aristote.  — - Ed. 

t Abelard  was  not  a Nominalist,  like  Roscelin ; but  held  a doctrine  inter- 


REALISTS,  NOMINALISTS,  AND  CONCEPTUALISTS.  323 

things  that  are  really  universal,  were  called  Realists. 
The  scholastic  philosophers,  from  this  time,  were  divided 
into  these  two  sects.  Some  few  took  a middle  road 
between  the  contending  parties.  That  universality, 
which  the  Realists  held  to  be  in  things  themselves. 
Nominalists  in  names  only,  they  held  to  be  neither  in 
things  nor  in  names  only^  but  in  our  conceptions.  On 
this  account  they  were  called  Conceptualists ; but,  being 
exposed  to  the  batteries  of  both  the  opposite  parties, 
they  made  no  great  figure.* * 

When  the  sect  of  Nominalists  was  like  to  expire,  it 
received  new  life  and  spirit  from  Occam,  the  disciple  of 
Scotus,  in  the  fourteenth  century.  Then  the  dispute 
about  universals,  a parte  re%  was  revived  with  the 
greatest  animosity  in  the  schools  of  Britain,  France, 
and  Germany,  and  carried  on,  not  by  arguments  only, 
but  by  bitter  reproaches,  blows,  and  bloody  affrays, 
until  the  doctrines  of  Luther  and  the  other  Reformers 
turned  the  attention  of  the  learned  world  to  more  im- 
portant subjects. 

After  the  revival  of  learning,  Mr.  Hobbes  adopted  the 
opinion  of  the  Nominalists.f  Human  Nature^  Chap. 
V.  Sect.  6 : — “ It  is  plain,  therefore,”  says  he,  that 
there  is  nothing  universal  but  names.”  And  in  his 
Leviathan^  Part  I.  Chap.  IV.,  — “ There  being  nothing 
universal  but  names,  proper  names  bring  to  mind  one 
thing  only ; universals  recall  any  one  of  many.” 

Mr.  Locke,  according  to  the  division  before  men- 
tioned, I think,  may  be  accounted  a Conceptualist. 
He  does  not  maintain  that  there  are  things  that  are 
universal ; but  that  we  have  general  or  universal  ideas 
which  we  form  by  abstraction  ; and  this  power  of  form- 
ing abstract  and  general  ideas  he  conceives  to  be  that 


mediate  between  absolute  Nominalism  and  Realism,  corresponding  to  the 
opinion  since  called  Conceptualism.  A flood  of  light  has  been  thrown 
upon  Abelard’s  doctrines  by  M.  Cousin’s  introduction  to  his  recent  publi- 
cation of  the  unedited  works  of  that  illustrious  thinker.  — H. 

* The  later  Nominalists  of  the  school  of  Occam  were  really  Concept- 
ualists, in  our  sense  of  the  term.  — H. 

t Hobbes  is  justly  said  by  Leibnitz  to  have  been  ipsis  NominaUhus  nonii- 
nalior.  They  were  really  Conceptualists.  — H. 


324 


ABSTRACTION. 


which  makes  the  chief  distinction  in  point  of  under- 
standing between  men  and  brutes. 

Mr.  Locke’s  doctrine  about  abstraction  has  been  com- 
bated by  two  very  powerful  antagonists,  — Bishop 
Berkeley  and  Mr.  Hume,  — who  have  taken  up  the 
opinion  of  the  Nominalists.  The  former  thinks  (Intro- 
duction to  his  Principles  of  Human  Knowledge)^  ‘‘  that 
the  opinion,  that  the  mind  has  a power  of  forming  ab- 
stract ideas,  or  notions  of  things,  has  had  a chief  part 
in  rendering  speculation  intricate  and  perplexed,  and 
has  occasioned  innumerable  errors  and  difficulties  in 
almost  all  parts  of  knowledge.”  To  the  same  effect 
Mr.  Hume,  Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  Book  1.  Part  I. 
Sect.  7 : — “A  very  material  question  has  been  started 
concerning  abstract  or  general  ideas,  whether  they  be 
general  or  particular  in  the  mind’s  conception  of  them  ? 
A great  philosopher  [he  means  Dr.  Berkeley]  has  dis- 
puted the  received  opinion  in  this  particular,  and  has 
asserted  that  all  general  ideas  are  nothing  but  par- 
ticular ones  annexed  to  a certain  term,  which  gives 
them  a more  extensive  signification,  and  makes  them 
recall,  upon  occasion,  other  individuals  which  are  sim- 
ilar to  them.  As  I look  upon  this  to  be  one  of  the 
greatest  and  most  valuable  discoveries  that  have  been 
made  of  late  years  in  the  republic  of  letters,  I shall 
here  endeavour  to  confirm  it  by  some  arguments,  which 
I hope  will  put  it  beyond  all  doubt  and  controversy.” 

I shall  make  an  end  of  this  subject  with  some  reflec- 
tions on  what  has  been  said  upon  it  by  these  two  emi- 
nent philosophers. 

1.  A triangle,  in  general,  or  any  other  universal, 
might  be  called  an  idea  by  a Platonist;  but,  in  the 
style  of  modern  philosophy,  it  is  not  an  idea,  nor  do 
we  ever  ascribe  to  ideas  the  properties  of  triangles.  It 
is  never  said  of  any  idea,  that  it  has  three  sides  and 
three  angles.  We  do  not  speak  of  equilateral,  isosceles, 
or  scalene  ideas,  nor  of  right-angled,  acute-angled,  or 
obtuse-angled  ideas.  And  if  these  attributes  do  not 
belong  to  ideas,  it  follows  necessarily  that  a triangle 
is  not  an  idea.  The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied 
to  everv  other  nni versa]. 


REALISTS,  NOMINALISTS,  AND  CONCEPTUALISTS.  325 


Ideas  are  said  to  have  a real  existence  in  the  mind, 
at  least  while  we  think  of  them  ; but  universals  have 
no  real  existence.  When  we  ascribe  existence  to  them, 
it  is  not  an  existence  in  time  or  place,  but  existence 
in  some  individual  subject ; and  this  existence  means 
no  more  than  that  they  are  truly  attributes  of  such  a 
subject.  Their  existence  is  nothing  but  predicability^ 
or  the  capacity  of  being;  attributed  to  a subject.  The 
name  of  predicables,,  which  was  given  them  in  ancient 
philosophy,  is  that  which  most  properly  expresses  their 
nature.* 

2.  I think  it  must  also  be  granted  that  universals 
cannot  be  the  objects  of  imagination^  when  we  take 
that  word  in  its  strict  and  proper  sense.  I find,”  says 
Berkeley,  “ I have  a faculty  of  imagining  or  represent- 
ing to  myself  the  ideas  of  those  particular  things  I 
have  perceived,  and  of  variously  compounding  and 
dividing  them.  I can  imagine  a man  with  two  heads, 
or  the  upper  parts  of  a man  joined  to  the  body  of  a 
horse.  I can  imagine  the  hand,  the  eye,  the  nose,  each 
by  itself,  abstracted  or  separated  from  the  rest  of  the 
body.  But  then,  whatever  hand  or  eye  I imagine,  it 


* Here  M.  Cousin  makes  a distinction  and  an  exception ; — “ Let  us 
consult  the  human  mind  and  the  truth  of  internal  facts.  It  is  an  unques- 
tionable fact,  that,  when  you  speak  of  hook  in  general,,  you  do  not  connect 
with  the  idea  of  book  that  of  real  existence.  On  the  contrary,  I ask  if, 
when  you  speak  of  space  in  general^  you  do  not  add  to  this  idea  a belief  in 
the  reality  of  space  ? I ask  if  it  is  with  space  as  with  book  ; if  you  be- 
lieve, for  instance,  that  there  are,  without  you,  nothing  but  particular 
spaces,  — that  there  is  not  a universal  space,  capable  of  embracing  all 
possible  bodies,  a space  one  and  the  same  with  itself,  of  which  different 
particular  spaces  are  nothing  but  arbitrary  portions  and  measures  ? It  is 
certain  that,  when  you  speak  of  space,  you  have  the  conviction  that  out  of 
yourself  there  is  something  which  is  space  ; and  also,  when  you  speak  of 
time,,  you  have  the  conviction  that  there  is  out  of  yourself  something  which 
is  time,  although  you  know  neither  the  nature  of  time  nor  space.  Differ- 
ent times  and  different  spaces  are  not  the  constituent  elements  of  space 
and  time ; time  and  space  are  not  solely  for  you  the  collection  of  different 
times  and  different  spaces.  But  you  believe  that  time  and  space  are  in 
themselves  5 that  it  is  not  two  or  three  spaces,  two  or  three  ages,  which 
constitute  space  and  time : for  every  thing  derived  from  experience,  whether 
in  respect  to  space  or  time,  is  finite,  and  the  characteristic  of  space  and  of 
time  for  you  is  to  be  infinite,  without  beginning  and  without  end.  Time 
resolves  itself  into  eternity,  and  space  into  immensity.”  — Elements  of 
Psychology^  Chap.  V.  — Ed. 


326 


ABSTRACTION. 


must  have  some  particular  shape  or  color.  Likewise, 
the  idea  of  a man  that  I frame  to  myself  must  be 
either  of  a white,  or  a black,  or  a tawny,  a straight  or 
a crooked,  a tall,  or  a low,  or  a middle-sized  man.” 

I believe  every  man  will  find  in  himself  what  this 
ingenious  author  found,  — that  he  cannot  imagine  a 
man  without  color,  or  stature,  or  shape.  Imagination, 
^s  we  before  observed,  properly  signifies  a conception 
of  the  appearance  an  object  would  make  to  the  eye  if 
actually  seen.  A universal  is  not  an  object  of  any 
external  sense,  and  therefore  cannot  be  imagined;  but 
it  may  be  distinctly  conceived.  When  Mr.  Pope  says, 

“ The  proper  study  of  mankind  is  man^' 

I conceive  his  meaning  distinctly,  though  I neither  im- 
agine a black  or  a white,  a crooked  or  a straight  man. 
The  distinction  between  conception  and  imagination 
is  real,  though  it  be  too  often  overlooked,  and  the  words 
taken  to  be  synonymous.  I can  conceive  a thing  that 
is  impossible,  but  I cannot  distinctly  imagine  a thing 
that  is  impossible.  I can  conceive  a proposition  or  a 
demonstration,  but  I cannot  imagine  either.  I can  con- 
ceive understanding  and  will,  virtue  and  vice,  and  other 
attributes  of  mind,  but  I cannot  imagine  them.  In 
like  manner,  I can  distinctly  conceive  universals,  but  I 
cannot  imagine  them. 

3.  Berkeley,  in  his  reasoning  against  abstract  gen- 
eral ideas,  seems  unwillingly  or  unwarily  to  grant  all 
that  is  necessary  to  support  abstract  and  general  con- 
ceptions. “ A man,”  he  says,  “ may  consider  a figure 
merely  as  triangular,  without  attending  to  the  particu- 
lar qualities  of  the  angles  or  relations  of  the  sides.  So 
far  he  may  abstract.  But  this  will  never  prove  that  he 
can  frame  an  abstract  general  inconsistent  idea  of  a 
triangle.” 

If  a man  may  consider  a figure  merely  as  triangular, 
he  must  have  some  conception  of  this  object  of  his 
consideration ; for  no  raan  can  consider  a thing  which 
he  does  not  conceive.  He  has  a conception,  therefore, 
of  a triangular  figure,  merely  as  such.  I know  no  more 


REALISTS,  NOMINALISTS,  AND  CONCEPTUALISTS.  327 

that  is  meant  by  an  abstract  general  conception  of  a 
triangle. 

He  that  considers  a figure  merely  as  triangular  must 
understand  what  is  meant  by  the  word  triangular.  If 
to  the  conception  he  joins  to  this  word  he  adds  any 
particular  quality  of  angles  or  relation  of  sides,  he  mis- 
understands it,  and  does  not  consider  the  figure  merely 
as  triangular.  Whence  I think  it  is  evident,  that  he 
who  considers  a figure  merely  as  triangular  must  have 
the  conception  of  a triangle,  abstracted  from  any  qual- 
ity of  angles  or  relation  of  sides. 

4.  Let  us  next  consider  the  Bishop’s  notion  of  gener- 
alizing.  He  does  not  absolutely  deny  that  there  are 
general  ideas,  but  only  that  there  are  abstract  general 
ideas.  “ An  idea,”  he  says,  which,  considered  in  it- 
self, is  particular,  becomes  general  by  being  made  to 
represent  or  stand  for  all  other  particular  ideas  of  the 
same  sort.  To  make  this  plain  by  an  example,  suppose 
a geometrician  is  demonstrating  the  method  of  cutting 
a line  in  two  equal  parts.  He  draws,  for  instance,  a 
black  line  of  an  inch  in  length.  This,  which  is  in 
itself  a particular  line,  is  nevertheless,  with  regard  to  its 
signification,  general ; since,  as  it  is  there  used,  it  rep- 
resents all  particular  lines  whatsoever ; so  that  what  is 
demonstrated  of  it  is  demonstrated  of  all  lines,  or,  in 
other  words,  of  a line  in  general.  And  as  that  particu- 
lar line  becomes  general  by  being  made  a sign,  so  the 
name  line.,  which,  taken  absolutely,  is  particular,  by 
being  a sign  is  made  general.” 

Here  I observe,  that  when  a particular  idea  is  made 
a sign  to  represent  and  stand  for  all  of  a sort,  this  sup- 
poses a distinction  of  things  into  sorts  or  species.  To 
be  of  a sort,  implies  having  those  attributes  which 
characterize  the  sort  and  are  common  to  all  the  individ- 
uals that  belong  to  it.  There  cannot,  therefore,  be  a 
sort  without  general  attributes,  nor  can  there  be  any 
conception  of  a sort  without  a conception  of  those  gen- 
eral attributes  which  distinguish  it.  The  conception  of 
a sort,  therefore,  is  an  abstract  general  conception.  The 
particular  idea  cannot  surely  be  made  a sign  of  a thing 


328 


ABSTRACTION. 


of  which  we  have  no  conception.  I do  not  say  that 
yon  must  have  an  idea  of  the  sort,  but  surely  you 
ought  to  understand  or  conceive  what  it  means,  when 
you  make  a particular  idea  a representative  of  it,  other- 
wise your  particular  idea  represents  you  know  not 
what. 

When  I demonstrate  any  general  property  of  a tri- 
angle, — such  as  that  the  three  angles  are  equal  to  two 
right-angles,  — I must  understand  or  conceive  distinctly 
what  is  common  to  all  triangles.  I must  distinguish  the 
common  attributes  of  all  triangles  from  those  wherein 
particular  triangles  may  differ.  And  if  I conceive  dis- 
tinctly what  is  common  to  all  triangles,  without  con- 
founding it  with  what  is  not  so,  this  is  to  form  a gen- 
eral conception  of  a triangle.  And  without  this,  it  is 
impossible  to  know  that  the  demonstration  extends  to 
all  triangles. 

The  Bishop  takes  particular  notice  of  this  argument, 
and  makes  this  answer  to  it : — Though  the  idea  I 
have  in  view,  whilst  I make  the  demonstration,  be, 
for  instance,  that  of  an  isosceles  rectangular  triangle, 
whose  sides  are  of  a determinate  length,  I may  never- 
theless be  certain  that  it  extends  to  all  other  rectilinear 
triangles,  of  what  sort  or  bigness  soever ; and  that  be- 
cause neither  the  right  angle,  nor  the  equality  or  deter- 
minate length  of  the  sides,  is  at  all  concerned  in  the 
demonstration.” 

But  if  he  do  not,  in  the  idea  he  has  in  view,  clearly 
distinguish  what  is  common  to  all  triangles  from  what 
is  not,  it  would  be  impossible  to  discern  whether  some- 
thing that  is  not  common  be  concerned  in  the  demon- 
stration or  not.  In  order,  therefore,  to  perceive  that 
the  demonstration  extends  to  all  triangles,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  have  a distinct  conception  of  what  is  common  to 
all  triangles^  excluding  from  that  conception  all  that  is 
not  common.  And  this  is  all  I understand  by  an  ab- 
stract general  conception  of  a triangle. 

5.  Having  considered  the  opinions  of  Bishop  Berke- 
ley on  this  subject,  let  us  next  attend  to  those  of  Mr. 
Hume,  as  they  are  expressed,  Part  I.  Sect.  7,  Treatise 


REALISTS,  NOMINALISTS,  AND  CONCEPTUALISTS.  329 

of  Human  Nature.  Quantity  or  quality,  according  to 
him,  is  inconceivable,  without  a precise  notion  of  its 
degree  ; and  on  this  ground,  that  it  is  impossible  to  dis- 
tinguish things  that  are  not  actually  separable.  ‘‘  The 
precise  length  of  a line  is  not  different  or  distinguishable 
from  the  line.’’ 

I have  before  endeavoured  to  show  that  things  in- 
separable in  their  nature  may  be  distinguished  in  our'^ 
conception.  And  we  need  go  no  farther  to  be  con- 
vinced of  this  than  the  instance  here  brought  to  prove 
the  contrary.  The  precise  length  of  a line,  he  says,  is 
not  distinguishable  from  the  line.  When  I say.  This  is 
a line^  I say  and  mean  one  thing.  When  I say.  It  is  a 
line  of  three  inches^  I say  and  mean  another  thing.  If 
this  be  not  to  distinguish  the  precise  length  of  the  line 
from  the  line,  I know  not  what  it  is  to  distinguish. 

6.  Mr.  Hume  endeavours  to  explain  how  it  is  that  an 
individual  idea,  annexed  to  a general  term,  may  serve 
all  the  purposes  in  reasoning  which  have  been  ascribed 
to  abstract  general  ideas  : — “ When  we  have  found  a 
resemblance  among  several  objects  that  often  occur  to 
us,  we  apply  the  same  name  to  all  of  them,  whatever 
differences  we  may  observe  in  the  degrees  of  their 
quantity  and  quality,  and  whatever  other  differences 
may  appear  among  them.  After  we  have  acquired  a 
custom  of  this  kind,  the  hearing  of  that  name  revives 
the  idea  of  one  of  these  objects,  and  makes  the  imagi- 
nation conceive  it,  with  all  its  circumstances  and  pro- 
portions.” 

He  allows  that  we  find  a resemblance  among  several 
objects,  and  such  a resemblance  as  leads  us  to  apply 
the  same  name  to  all  of  them.  This  concession  is 
sufficient  to  show  that  we  have  general  conceptions. 
There  can  be  no  resemblance  in  objects  that  have  no 
common  attribute ; and  if  there  be  attributes  belonging 
in  common  to  several  objects,  and  in  man  a faculty  to 
observe  and  conceive  these  and  to  give  names  to  them, 
this  is  to  have  general  conceptions. 

7.  The  author  says,  — It  is  certain  that  we  form  the 
idea  of  individuals  whenever  we  use  any  general  term. 

28^ 


330 


ABSTRACTION. 


The  word  raises  up  an  individual  idea,  and  makes  the 
imagination  conceive  it,  with  all  its  particular  circum- 
stances and  proportions.” 

This  fact  he  takes  a great  deal  of  pains  to  account 
for  from  the  effect  of  custom.  But  the  fact  should  be 
ascertained  before  we  take  pains  to  account  for  it.  I 
can  see  no  reason  to  believe  the  fact ; and  I think  a 
farmer  can  talk  of  his  sheep  and  his  black  cattle  with- 
out conceiving  in  his  imagination  one  individual,  with 
all  its  circumstances  and  proportions.  If  this  be  true, 
the  whole  of  his  theory  of  general  ideas  falls  to  the 
ground.  To  me  it  appears  that,  when  a general  term 
is  well  understood,  it  is  only  by  accident  if  it  suggest 
some  individual  of  the  kind ; but  this  effect  is  by  no 
means  constant. 

I perfectly  understand  what  mathematicians  call  a 
line  of  the  fifth  order ; yet  I never  conceived  in  my 
imagination  any  on^  of  the  kind,  in  all  its  circumstances 
and  proportions.  Sir  Isaac  Newton  first  formed  a dis- 
tinct general  conception  of  lines  of  the  third  order  ; and 
afterwards^  by  great  labor  and  deep  penetration,  found 
out  and  described  the  particular  species  comprehended 
under  that  general  term.  According  to  Mr.  Hume’s 
theory,  he  must  first  have  been  acquainted  with  the 
particulars^  and  then  have  learned  by  custom  to  apply 
one  general  name  to  all  of  them.* 


* The  whole  controversy  of  Nominalism  and  Conceptualism  is  founded 
on  the  ambiguity  of  the  terms  employed.  The  opposite  parties  are  sub- 
stantially at  one.  Had  our  British  philosophers  been  aware  of  the  Leib- 
nitzian  distinction  of  intuitive  and  symbolical  knowledge,  and  had  we,  like 
the  Germans,  different  terms,  like  Begriff  and  Anschauung^  to  denote  differ- 
ent kinds  of  thought,  there  would  have  been  as  little  difference  of  opinion 
in  regard  to  the  nature  of  general  notions  in  this  country  as  in  the  Em- 
pire. With  us,  idea^  notion^  conception^  &c.,  are  confounded,  or  applied  by 
different  philosophers  in  different  senses. 

I must  put  the  reader  on  his  guard  against  Dr.  Thomas  Brown’s  specu- 
lations on  this  subject.  His  own  doctrine  of  universals,  in  so  far  as  it  is 
peculiar,  is  self-contradictory ; and  nothing  can  be  more  erroneous  than 
his  statement  of  the  doctrine  held  by  others,  especially  by  the  Nominalists. 
— H. 


For  a full  account  of  this  famous  controversy,  see  the  general  historians 
of  philosophy,  particularly  Brucker  and  Tennemann.  Also,  Bousselot, 
Etudes  sur  la  Philosophie  dans  le  Moyen-Age^  Tome  I.  p.  126  seq.;  Remu- 


ESSAY  VI. 


OF  JUDGMENT. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  JUDGMENT  IN  GENERAL. 

L Definition  of  the  Term,]  The  definition  commonly 
given  oi  judgment^  by  the  more  ancient  writers  in  logic, 
was,  that  it  is  an  act  of  the  mind,^  whereby  one  thing  is 
affirmed  or  denied  of  another,  I believe  this  is  as  good 
a definition  of  it  as  can  be  given.  Why  I prefer  it  to 
some  later  definitions  will  afterwards  appear.  With- 
out pretending  to  give  any  other,  I shall  make  two  re- 
marks upon  it,  and  then  offer  some  general  observations 
on  this  subject. 

It  is  true,  that  it  is  by  affirmation  or  denial  that  we 
express  our  judgments  ; but  there  may  be  judgment 
which  is  not  expressed.  It  is  a solitary  act  of  the 
mind,  and  the  expression  of  it  by  affirmation  or  denial 
is  not  at  all  essential  to  it.  It  may  be  tacit,  and  not 
expressed.  Nay,  it  is  well  known  that  men  may  judge 
contrary  to  what  they  affirm  or  deny  ; the  definition, 
therefore,  must  be  understood  of  mental  affirmation  or 


sat,  Abelard^  Tome  I.  p.  313  et  seq.^  and  Tome  11.  p.  1 et  seq.;  and,  above 
all,  the  brilliant  Preface  by  Cousin  to  his  Ouvrages  inedits  d’ Abelard^  refer- 
red to  in  a former  note.  Of  English  works,  besides  those  already  men- 
tioned, the  following  are  proper  to  be  consulted : — Stewart’s  Elements^ 
Part  I.  Chap.  IV. ; R.  E.  Scott’s  Intellectual  Philosophy^  Chap.  lY.  Sect. 
2 ; Brown’s  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind^  Lect.  XL VI.,  XL VII. ; Haz- 
litt’s  Essays  on  the  Principles  of  Human  Action^  on  the  Systems  of  Hartley 
and  Helvetius.  and  on  Abstract  Ideas ; and  Hampden’s  Scholastic  Philosophy 
considered  in  Belation  to  Christian  Theology^  Lecture  II.,  and  Notes.  — Ed. 


332 


JUDGx^IENT. 


denial^  which  indeed  is  only  another  name  for  judg- 
ment. 

Affirmation  or  denial  is  very  often  the  expression 
of  testimony,  which  is  a different  act  of  the  mind,  and 
ought  to  be  distinguished  from  judgment.  A judge 
asks  of  a witness  what  he  knows  of  such  a matter  to 
which  he  was  an  eye  or  ear  witness.  He  answers  by 
affirming  or  denying  something.  But  his  answer  does 
not  express  his  judgment ; it  is  his  testimony.  Again, 
I ask  a man  his  opinion  in  a matter  of  science  or  of 
criticism.  His  answer  is  not  testimony ; it  is  the  ex- 
pression of  his  judgment.  Testimony  is  a social  act, 
and  it  is  essential  to  it  to  be  expressed  by  vjords  or  signs. 
A tacit  testimony  is  a contradiction  : but  there  is  no 
contradiction  in  a tacit  judgment ; it  is  complete  with- 
out being  expressed.  In  testimony,  a man  pledges  his 
veracity  for  what  he  affirms ; so  that  a false  testimony 
is  a lie  : but  a wrong  judgment  is  not  a lie ; it  is  only 
an  error. 

I believe,  in  all  languages,  testimony  and  judgment 
are  expressed  by  the  same  form  of  speech.  A propo- 
sition affirmative  or  negative,  with  a verb  in  what  is 
called  the  indicative  mood,  expresses  both.  To  distin- 
guish them  by  the  form  of  speech,  it  would  be  neces- 
sary that  verbs  should  have  two  ihdicative  moods,  one 
for  testimony,  and  another  to  express  judgment.  1 
know  not  that  this  is  found  in  any  language.  And  the 
reason  is,  not  surely  that  the  vulgar  cannot  distinguish 
the  two  (for  every  man  knows  the  difference  between  a 
lie  and  an  error  of  judgment),  but  that,  from  the  matter 
and  circumstances,  we  can  easily  see  whether  a man 
intends  to  give  his  testimony,  or  barely  to  express  his 
judgment. 

Although  men  must  have  judged  in  many  cases  be- 
fore tribunals  of  justice  were  erected,  yet  it  is  very 
probable  that  there  were  tribunals  before  men  began  to 
speculate  about  judgment,  and  that  the  word  may  be 
borrowed  from  the  practice  of  tribunals.  As  ^ judge, 
after  taking  the  proper  evidence,  passes  sentence  in  a 
cause,  and  that  sentence  is  called  his  judgment ^ so  the 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


833 


mind,  with  regard  to  whatever  is  true  or  false,  passes 
sentence,  or  determines  according  to  the  evidence  that 
appears.  Some  kinds  of  evidence  leave  no  room  for 
doubt.  Sentence  is  passed  immediately,  without  seek- 
ing or  hearing  any  contrary  evidence,  because  the  thing 
is  certain  and  notorious.  In  other  cases,  there  is  room 
for  weighing  evidence  on  both  sides  before  sentence  is 
passed.  The  analogy  between  a tribunal  of  justice 
and  this  inward  tribunal  of  the  mind  is  too  obvious  to 
escape  the  notice  of  any  man  who  ever  appeared  before 
a judge.  And  it  is  probable  that  the  word  judgment^ 
as  well  as  many  other  words  we  use  in  speaking  of  this 
operation  of  mind,  is  grounded  on  this  analogy. 

II.  Observations  respecting  the  Nature  and  Province 
of  Judgment]  Having  premised  these  things,  that  it 
may  be  clearly  understood  what  I mean  by  judgment, 
I proceed  to  make  some  general  observations  concern- 
ing it. 

Firsts  judgment  is  an  act  of  the  mind  specifically 
different  from  simple  apprehension^  or  the  bare  concep- 
tion of  a thing.  It  would  be  unnecessary  to  observe 
this,  if  some  philosophers  had  not  been  led  by  their 
theories  to  a contrary  opinion.  Although  there  can  be 
no  judgment  without  a conception  of  the  things  about 
which  we  judge,  yet  conception  may  be  without  any 
judgment.*  Judgment  can  be  expressed  by  a proposi- 
tion only,  and  a proposition  is  a complete  sentence ; 
but  simple  apprehension  may  be  expressed  by  a word 
or  words  which  make  no  complete  sentence.  When 
simple  apprehension  is  employed  about  a proposition, 
every  man  knows  that  it  is  one  thing  to  apprehend  a 
proposition,  that  is,  to  conceive  what  it  means ; but  it 
is  quite  another  thing  to  judge  it  to  be  true  or  false. 


* There  is  no  conception  possible  without  a judgment  affirming  its  (ideal) 
existence,  its  subjective  reality,  — an  existential  judgment.  Apprehension 
is  as  impossible  without  judgment,  as  judgment  is  impossible  without  ap- 
prehension. The  apprehension  of  a thing,  or  notion,  is  only  realized  in 
the  mental  affirmation  that  the  concept  ideally  exists,  and  this  affirmation  is 
a judgment.  In  fact,  all  consciousness  supposes  a judgment,  as  all  con- 
sciousness supposes  a discrimination.  — H. 


334 


JUDGMENT. 


Secondly^  there  are  notions  or  ideas  that  ought  to  be 
referred  to  the  faculty  of  judgment  as  their  source ; be- 
cause, if  we  had  not  that  faculty,  they  could  not  enter 
into  our  minds  ; and  to  those  that  have  that  faculty, 
and  are  capable  of  reflecting  upon  its  operations,  they 
are  obvious  and  familiar. 

Among  these  we  may  reckon  the  notion  of  judgment 
itself;  the  notions  of  a proposition,  of  its  subject,  pred- 
icate, and  copula ; of  affirmation  and  negation,  of  true 
and  false,  of  knowledge,  belief,  disbelief,  opinion,  assent, 
evidence.  From  no  source  could  we  acquire  these  no- 
tions, but  from  reflecting  upon  our  judgments.  Rela- 
tions of  things  make  one  great  class  of  our  notions  or 
ideas ; and  we  cannot  have  the  idea  of  any  relation 
without  some  exercise  of  judgment,  as  will  appear  after- 
wards. 

Thirdly^  in  persons  come  to  years  of  understanding, 
judgment  necessarily  accompanies  all  sensation^  per  cep- 
tion  by  the  senses^  consciousness^  and  memory, 

I restrict  this  to  persons  come  to  the  years  of  under- 
standing, because  it  may  be  a question,  whether  infants, 
in  the  first  period  of  life,  have  any  judgment  or  belief 
at  all.  The  same  question  may  be  put  with  regard  to 
brutes  and  some  idiots.  This  question  is  foreign  to  the 
present  subject ; and  I say  nothing  here  about  it,  but 
speak  only  of  persons  who  have  the  exercise  of  judg- 
ment. In  them  it  is  evident,  that  a man  who  feels  pain 
judges  and  believes  that  he  is  really  pained.  The  man 
who  perceives  an  object  believes  that  it  exists,  and  is 
what  he  distinctly  perceives  it  to  be ; nor  is  it  in  his 
power  to  avoid  such  judgment.  And  the  like  may  be 
said  of  memory  and  of  consciousness. 

Whether  judgment  ought  to  be  called  a necessary 
concomitant  of  these  operations,  or  rather  a part  or  in- 
gredient of  them,  I do  not  dispute  ; but  it  is  certain, 
that  all  of  them  are  accompanied  with  a determination 
that  something  is  true  or  false,  and  a consequent  belief. 
If  this  determination  be  not  judgment,  it  is  an  opera- 
tion that  has  got  no  name ; for  it  is  not  simple  appre- 
hension, neither  is  it  reasoning ; it  is  a mental  affirma- 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


335 


tion  or  negation  ; it  may  be  expressed  by  a proposition 
affirmative  or  negative,  and  it  is  accompanied  with  the 
firmest  belief.  These  are  the  characteristics  of  judg- 
ment ; and  I must  call  it  judgment,  till  I can  find 
another  name  for  it. 

The  judgments  we  form  are  either  of  things  necessary^ 
or  of  things  contingent. 

That  three  times  three  are  nine,  that  the  whole  is 
greater  than  a part,  are  judgments  about  things  neces- 
sary. Our  assent  to  such  necessary  propositions  is  not 
grounded  upon  any  operation  of  sense,  of  memory,  or 
of  consciousness,  nor  does  it  require  their  concurrence  ; 
it  is  unaccompanied  by  any  other  operation  than  that 
of  conception,  which  must  accompany  all  judgment; 
we  may  therefore  call  this  judgment  of  things  neces- 
sary, pure  judgment. 

Our  judgment  of  things  contingent  must  always  rest 
upon  some  other  operation  of  the  mind,  such  as  sense, 
or  memory,  or  consciousness,  or  credit  in  testimony, 
which  is  itself  grounded  upon  sense.  That  I now  write 
upon  a table  covered  with  green  cloth,  is  a contingent 
event,  which  I judge  to  be  most  undoubtedly  true.  My 
judgment  is  grounded  upon  my  perception,  and  is  a 
necessary  concomitant  or  ingredient  of  my  perception. 
That  I dined  with  such  a company  yesterday,  I judge 
to  be  true,  because  I remember  it ; and  my  judgment 
necessarily  goes  along  with  this  remembrance,  or  makes 
a part  of  it. 

There  are  many  forms  of  speech  in  common  lan- 
guage which  show  that  the  senses,  memory,  and  con- 
sciousness are  considered  as  judging  faculties.  We 
say  that  a man  judges  of  colors  by  his  eye,  of  sounds 
by  his  ear.  We  speak  of  the  evidence  of  sense,  the 
evidence  of  memory,  the  evidence  of  consciousness. 
But  evidence  is  the  ground  of  judgment,  and  when  we 
see  evidence,  it  is  impossible  not  to  judge. 

When  we  speak  of  seeing  or  remembering  any  thing, 
we  indeed  hardly  ever  add,  that  we  judge  it  to  be  true. 
But  the  reason  of  this  appears  to  be,  that  such  addition 
would  be  mere  superfluity  of  speech,  because  every  one 


336 


JUDGEMENT. 


knows  that  what  I see  or  remember  I must  judge  to  be 
true,  and  cannot  do  otherwise.  And  for  the  same  rea- 
son, in  speaking  of  any  thing  that  is  self-evident  or 
strictly  demonstrated,  we  do  not  say  that  we  judge  it 
to  be  true.  This  would  be  superfluity  of  speech,  be- 
cause every  man  knows  that  we  must  judge  that  to  be 
true  which  we  hold  self-evident  or  demonstrated. 

There  is  therefore  good  reason  why,  in  speaking  or 
writing,  judgment  should  not  be  expressly  mentioned, 
when  all  men  know  it  to  be  necessarily  implied ; that 
is,  when  there  can  be  no  doubt.  In  such  cases,  we 
barely  mention  the  evidence.  But  when  the  evidence 
mentioned  leaves  room  for  doubt,  then,  without  any 
superfluity  or  tautology,  we  say  we  judge  the  thing  to 
be  so,  because  this  is  not  implied  in  what  was  said  be- 
fore. A woman  with  child  never  says,  that,  going  such 
a journey,  she  carried  her  child  along  with  her.  We 
know  that,  while  it  is  in  her  womb,  she  must  carry  it 
along  with  her.  There  are  some  operations  of  mind 
that  may  be  said  to  carry  judgment  in  their  womb,  and 
can  no  more  leave  it  behind  them  than  the  pregnant 
woman  can  leave  her  child.  Therefore,  in  speaking  of 
such  operations,  it  is  not  expressed. 

Our  judgments  of  this  kind  are  purely  the  gift  of  na- 
ture, nor  do  they  admit  of  improvement  by  culture. 
The  memory  of  one  man  may  be  more  tenacious 
than  that  of  another ; but  both  rely  with  equal  assur- 
ance upon  what  they  distinctly  remember.  One  man’s 
sight  may  be  more  acute,  or  his  feeling  more  delicate, 
than  that  of  another  ; but  both  give  equal  credit  to  the 
distinct  testimony  of  their  sight  and  touch.  And  as  we 
have  this  belief  by  the  constitution  of  our  nature,  with- 
out any  effort  of  our  own,  so  no  effort  of  ours  can  over- 
turn it.  The  skeptic  may  perhaps  persuade  himself,  in 
general,  that  he  has  no  ground  to  believe  his  senses  or 
his  memory ; but  in  particular  cases  that  are  interest- 
ing, his  disbelief  vanishes,  and  he  finds  himself  under  a 
necessity  of  believing  both. 

These  judgments  may,  in  the  strictest  sense,  be  called 
judgments  of  nature.  Nature  has  subjected  us  td  them 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


337 


whether  we  will  or  not.  They  are  neither  got,  nor  can 
they  be  lost,  by  any  use  or  abuse  of  our  faculties  ; and 
it  is  evidently  necessary  to  our  preservation  that  it 
should  be  so.  For  if  belief  in  our  senses  and  in  our 
memory  were  to  be  learned  by  culture,  the  race  of  men 
would  perish  before  they  learned  this  lesson.  It  is 
necessary  to  all  men  for  their  being  and  preservation, 
and  therefore  is  unconditionally  given  to  all  men  by  the 
Author  of  nature. 

A fourth  observation  is,  that  some  exercise  of  judg- 
ment is  necessary  in  the  formation  of  all  abstract  and 
general  conceptions^  whether  more  simple  or  more  com- 
plex,— in  dividing^  in  defining^  and,  in  general,  in  form- 
ing all  clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of  things^  ivhich  are 
the  only  fit  materials  of  reasoning. 

These  operations  are  allied  to  each  other,  and  there- 
fore I bring  them  under  one  observation.  They  are 
more  allied  to  our  rational  nature  than  those  mentioned 
in  the  last  observation,  and  therefore  are  considered  by 
themselves. 

It  is  impossible  to  distinguish  the  different  attributes 
belonging  to  the  same  subject,  without  judging  that 
they  are  really  different  and  distinguishable,  and  that 
they  have  that  relation  to  the  subject  which  logicians 
express  by  saying  that  they  may  be  predicated  of  it. 
We  cannot  generalize,  without  judging  that  the  same 
attribute  does  or  may  belong  to  many  individuals.  It 
has  been  shown,  that  our  simplest  general  notions  are 
formed  by  these  two  operations  of  distinguishing  and 
generalizing;  judgment  therefore  is  exercised  in  form- 
ing the  simplest  general  notions.  In  those  that  are  more 
complex^  and  which  have  been  shown  to  be  formed  by 
combining  the  more  simple,  there  is  another  act  of  the 
judgment  required  ; for  such  combinations  are  not 
made  at  random,  but  for  an  end;  and  judgment  is  em- 
ployed in  fitting  them  to  that  end.  We  form  com- 
plex general  notions  for  conveniency  of  arranging  our 
thoughts  in  discom'se  and  reasoning  ; and  therefore,  of 
an  infinite  number  of  combinations  that  might  be  formed, 
we  choose  only  those  that  are  useful  and  necessarv- 
99 


338 


JUDGMENT. 


That  judgment  must  be  employed  in  dividing^  as  well 
as  in  distinguishing,  appears  evident.  It  is  one  thing 
to  divide  a subject  properly,  another  to  cut  it  in  pieces. 
Hoc  non  est  dividere^  sed  frangere  rem^  said  Cicero, 
when  he  censured  an  improper  division  of  Epicurus. 
Eeason  has  discovered  rules  of  division,  which  have 
been  known  to  logicians  more  than  two  thousand 
years. 

There  are  rules  likewise  of  definition  of  no  less  an- 
tiquity and  authority.  A man  may  no  doubt  divide  or 
define  properly  without  attending  to  the  rules,  or  even 
without  knowing  them.  But  this  can  only  be,  when  he 
judgment  to  perceive  that  to  be  right  in  a particular 
case,  which  the  rule  determines  to  be  right  in  all  cases. 

I add,  in  general,  that,  without  some  degree  of  judg- 
ment, we  can  form  no  accurate  and  distinct  notions  of 
things ; so  that  one  province  of  judgment  is,  to  aid  us 
in  forming  clear  and  distinct  conceptions  of  things, 
which  are  the  only  fit  materials  for  reasoning. 

This  will  probably  appear  to  be  a paradox  to  philoso- 
phers who  have  always  considered  the  formation  of 
ideas  of  every  kind  as  belonging  to  simple  apprehen- 
sion ; and  that  the  sole  province  of  judgment  is  to  put 
them  together  in  affirmative  or  negative  propositions  : 
and  therefore  it  requires  some  confirmation. 

1.  I think  it  necessarily  follows,  from  what  has  been 
already  said  in  this  observation.  For  if,  without  some 
degree  of  judgment,  a man  can  neither  distinguish,  nor 
divide,  nor  define,  nor  form  any  general  notion,  simple 
or  complex,  he  surely,  without  some  degree  of  judgment, 
cannot  have  in  his  mind  the  materials  necessary  to  rea- 
soning. 

There  cannot  be  any  proposition  in  language  which 
does  not  involve  some  general  conception.  The  propo- 
sition, that  I exists  which  Descartes  thought  the  first  of 
all  truths,  and  the  foundation  of  all  knowledge,  cannot 
be  conceived  without  the  conception  of  existence^  one 
of  the  most  abstract  general  conceptions. 

A man  cannot  believe  his  own  existence,  or  the  ex- 
istence of  any  thing  he  sees  or  remembers,  until  he  has 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


339 


so  much  judgment  as  to  distinguish  things  that  really 
exist  from  things  which  are  only  conceived.  He  sees 
a man  six  feet  high  ; he  conceives  a man  sixty  feet 
high  ; he  judges  the  first  object  to  exist,  because  he  sees 
it;  the  second  he  does  not  judge  to  exist,  because  he 
only  conceives  it.  Now,  I would  ask  whether  he  can 
attribute  existence  to  the  first  object,  and  not  to  the 
second,  without  knowing  what  existence  means.  It  is 
impossible. 

In  every  other  proposition,  the  predicate  at  least  must 
be  a general  notion,  a predicable  and  a universal  being 
one  and  the  same.  Besides  this,  every  proposition 
either  affirms  or  denies.  And  no  man  can  have  a dis- 
tinct conception  of  a proposition,  who  does  not  under- 
stand distinctly  the  meaning  of  affirming  or  denying : 
but  these  are  very  general  conceptions,  and,  as  was  be- 
fore observed,  are  derived  from  judgment,  as  their  source 
and  origin. 

I am  sensible  that  a strong  objection  may  be  made 
to  this  reasoning,  and  that  it  may  seem  to  lead  to  an 
absurdity,  or  a contradiction.  It  may  be  said,  that 
every  judgment  is  a mental  affirmation  or  negation.  If, 
therefore,  some  previous  exercise  of  judgment  be  neces- 
sary to  understand  what  is  meant  by  affirmation  or  ne- 
gation, the  exercise  of  judgment  must  go  before  any 
judgment,  which  is  absurd.  In  like  manner,  every 
judgment  may  be  expressed  by  a proposition,  and  a 
proposition  must  be  conceived  before  we  can  judge  of 
it.  If,  therefore,  we  cannot  conceive  the  meaning  of  a 
proposition  without  a previous  exercise  of  judgment,  it 
follows  that  judgment  must  be  previous  to  the  concep- 
tion of  any  proposition,  and,  at  the  same  time,  that  the 
conception  of  a proposition  must  be  previous  to  all 
judgment,  which  is  a contradiction. 

The  reader  may  please  to  observe,  that  I have  limited 
what  I have  said  to  “ distinct  conceptions'^  and  “ some 
degree  of  judgment  ” ; and  it  is  by  this  means  I hope  to 
avoid  this  labyrinth  of  absurdity  and  contradiction. 
The  faculties  of  conception  and  judgment  have  an  in- 
fancy and  a maturity,  as  man  has.  What  I have  said  is 


340 


JUDGMENT. 


limited  to  their  mature  state.  I believe  in  their  infant 
state  they  are  very  weak  and  indistinct ; and  that,  by 
imperceptible  degrees,  they  grow  to  maturity,  each 
giving  aid  to  the  other,  and  receiving  aid  from  it.  But 
which  of  them  first  began  this  friendly  intercourse  is 
beyond  my  ability  to  determine.  It  is  like  the  question 
concerning  the  bird  and  the  egg.  In  the  present  state 
of  things,  it  is  true  that  every  bird  comes  from  an  egg, 
and  every  egg  from  a bird ; and  each  may  be  said  to  be 
previous  to  the  other.  But  if  we  go  back  to  the  origin 
of  things,  there  must  have  been  some  bird  that  did  not 
come  from  an  egg,  or  some  egg  that  did  not  come  from 
any  bird. 

In  like  manner,  in  the  mature  state  of  man,  distinct 
conception  of  a proposition  supposes  some  previous  ex- 
ercise of  judgment,  and  distinct  judgment  supposes  dis- 
tinct conception.  Each  may  truly  be  said  to  come 
from  the  other,  as  the  bird  from  the  egg,  and  the  egg 
from  the  bird.  But  if  we  .trace  back  this  succession  to 
its  origin,  — that  is,  to  the  first  proposition  that  was 
ever  conceived  by  the  man,  and  the  first  judgment  he 
ever  formed,  — I determine  nothing  about  them,  nor  do 
I know  in  what  order,  or  how,  they  were  produced.* 


* On  the  manner  in  which  the  human  intellect  begins  to  develop  itself, 
M.  Cousin  expresses  himself  thus : — “ Primitively  nothing  is  abstract, 
nothing  is  general ; every  thing  is  particular,  every  thing  is  concrete.  The 
understanding  does  not  begin  with  these  formulas  ; There  is  no  modification 
ivithout  its  subject ; There  is  no  body  ivithout  space.  But  a modification  being 
given,  it  conceives  a particular  subject  of  this  modification  ; a body  being 
given,  it  conceives  that  this  body  is  in  a space ; a particular  succession 
being  given,  it  conceives  that  this  particular  succession  is  in  a deter- 
minate time.  It  is  so  with  all  our  primitive  conceptions  ; they  are  all  par- 
ticular, determined,  concrete.  Our  primitive  conceptions,  moreover,  pre- 
sent two  distinct  characteristics ; some  are  contingent.,  others  are  necessary. 
Under  the  eye  of  consciousness  there  may  be  a sensation  of  pleasure  or  of 
pain,  which  I perceive  as  actually  existing ; but  this  sensation  may  vary, 
change,  disappear.  Hence  very  soon  may  arise  the  conviction,  that 
this  sensible  phenomenon  which  I notice  is  indeed  real,  but  that  it  may 
exist  or  may  not  exist,  and  therefore  I may  feel  it  or  not  feel  it.  This  is 
a characteristic  which  philosophers  have  designated  as  contingent.  But 
when  I conceive  that  a body  is  in  space,  if  I endeavour  to  conceive  the 
contrary,  — that  a body  may  be  without  space,  — I cannot  succeed.  This 
conception  of  space  is  a conception  which  philosophers  have  designated  by 
the  term  necessary. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


341 


The  necessity  of  some  degree  of  judgment  to  clear 
and  distinct  conceptions  of  things  may,  I think,  be 


“ But  whence  do  all  our  conceptions,  contingent  or  necessary,  come  ? 
From  the  faculty  of  conceiving,  which  is  in  us,  by  whatever  name  you  call 
this  faculty  of  which  we  are  all  conscious,  — mind,  reason,  thought,  under- 
standing, or  intelligence.  The  operations  of  this  faculty,  our  conceptions, 
are  essentially  affirmative,  — if  not  orally,  yet  mentally.  To  deny,  even,  is 
to  affirm  ; for  it  is  to  affirm  the  contrary  of  what  had  been  first  affirmed. 
To  doubt,  also,  is  to  affirm ; for  it  is  to  affirm  uncertainty.  Besides,  we 
evidently  do  not  commence  by  doubt  or  negation,  but  by  affirmation.  Now 
to  affirm,  in  any  way,  is  to  judge.  If,  then,  every  intellectual  operation  re- 
solves itself  into  an  operation  of  judgment,  all  our  conceptions,  whether 
contingent  or  necessary,  resolve  themselves  into  judgments  contingent  or 
necessary ; and  all  our  primitive  operations  being  concrete  and  synthetic, 
it  follows  that  all  the  primitive  judgments,  supposed  by  these  operations, 
are  also  exercised  under  this  form. 

“ When  the  mind  translates  itself  into  language,  the  primary  expressions 
of  its  judgments  are,  like  the  judgments  themselves,  concrete  and  synthetic. 
Faithful  images  of  the  development  of  the  mind,  languages  begin,  not  by 
words^  but  by  phrases^  by  propositions  very  complex.  A primitive  propo- 
sition is  a whole,  corresponding  to  the  natural  synthesis  by  which  the 
mind  begins.  These  primitive  propositions  are  by  no  means  abstract 
propositions,  such  as  these  : — There  is  no  quality  without  a subject ; There  is 
no  body  without  space  containing  it ; and  the  like : but  they  are  all  particular, 
such  as,  — I exist ; This  body  exists  ; Such  a body  is  in  that  space ; God  exists. 
These  propositions  are  such  as  refer  to  a particular  and  determinate  object, 
which  is  either  self^  or  body.,  or  God.  But  after  having  expressed  its 
primitive,  concrete,  and  synthetic  propositions,  the  mind  operates  upon 
these  judgments  by  abstraction;  it  neglects  that  which  is  concrete  in  them 
to  consider  only  the  form  of  them,  — for  example,  the  character  of  neces- 
sity with  which  many  of  them  are  invested,  and  which,  when  disengaged 
and  developed,  gives,  instead  of  the  concrete  propositions,  / ; These 

bodies  are  in  such  a space,  &c.,  the  abstract  propositions.  There  can  be  no 
modification  without  a subject ; There^can  be  no  body  without  space  ; There  can 
he  no  succession  without  time,  &c.  The  general  was  at  first  enveloped  in  the 
particular ; then,  from  the  complexity  of  the  primitive  fact,  you  disengage 
the  general  from  the  particular  and  you  express  it  by  itself. 

“ We  do  not  begin  by  propositions,  but  by  judgments ; the  judgments 
do  not  come  from  the  propositions,  but  the  propositions  come  from  the 
judgments,  which  themselves  come  from  the  faculty  of  judging,  which  is 
grounded  in  the  original  capacity  of  the  mind.  A fortiori,  then,  we  do  not 
begin  by  ideas ; for  ideas  are  given  us  in  the  propositions.  Take,  for  ex- 
ample, the  idea  of  space.  It  is  not  given  us  by  itself,  but  in  this  complete 
proposition.  There  is  no  body  without  space,  which  proposition  is  only  a form 
of  a judgment.  Take  away  the  proposition,  which  could  not  be  made 
without  the  judgment,  and  you  have  not  the  ideas ; but  as  soon  as  lan- 
guage permits  you  to  translate  your  judgments  into  propositions,  then  you 
can  consider  separately  the  different  elements  of  these  propositions,  that  is 
to  say,  ideas,  separately  from  each  other. 

“ To  speak  strictly,  there  are  in  nature  no  propositions,  either  concrete 
or  abstract,  particular  or  general,  and  still  less  are  there  ideas  in  nature. 
What  is  there  in  nature  ? Besides  bodies  there  is  nothing  except  minds, 

29* 


342 


JUDGMENT. 


illustrated  by  this  similitude.  An  artisan,  suppose  a 
carpenter,  cannot  work  in  his  art  without  tools,  and 
these  tools  must  be  made  by  art.  The  exercise  of  the 
art,  therefore,  is  necessary  to  make  the  tools,  and  the 
tools  are  necessary  to  the  exercise  of  the  art.  There  is 
the  same  appearance  of  contradiction  as  in  what  I 
have  advanced  concerning  the  necessity  of  some  degree 
of  judgment  in  order  to  form  clear  and  distinct  con- 
ceptions of  things.  These  are  the  tools  we  must  use 
in  judging  and  in  reasoning,  and  without  them  must 
make  very  bungling  work ; yet  these  tools  cannot  be 
made  without  some  exercise  of  judgment. 

2.  The  necessity  of  some  degree  of  judgment  in 
forming  accurate  and  distinct  notions  of  things  will 
further  appear,  if  we  consider  attentively  what  notions 
we  can  form  without  any  aid  of  judgment,  (1.)  of  the 
objects  of  sense,  (2.)  of  the  operations  of  our  own  minds, 
or  (3.)  of  the  relations  of  things. 

(1.)  To  begin  with  the  objects  of  sense.  It  is  ac- 
knowledged on  all  hands,  that  the  first  notions  we  have 
of  sensible  objects  are  got  by  the  external  senses  only, 
and  probably  before  judgment  is  brought  forth  ; but 
these  first  notions  are  neither  simple^  nor  are  they  accu- 
rate  and  distinct^  — rudis  indigestaque  moles.  Before  we 
can  have  any  distinct  notion  of  this  mass,  it  must  be 
analyzed ; the  heterogeneous  parts  must  be  separated 
in  our  conception,  and  the  simple  elements,  which  be- 
fore lay  hid  in  the  common  mass,  must  first  be  distin- 
guished, and  then  put  together  into  one  whole.  In  this 


and  among  these,  that  which  is  ourselves^  which  conceives  and  knows  di- 
rectly things, — minds  and  bodies.  And  in  the  order  of  minds  what  is 
there  innate  ? Nothing  hut  the  mind  itself,  the  understanding,  the  faculty 
of  knowing.  The  understanding^  as  Leibnitz  has  profoundly  said,  is  innate 
to  itself:  the  development  of  the  understanding  is  equally  innate,  in  this 
sense,  that  it  cannot  but  take  place  when  the  understanding  is  once  given, 
with  the  power  which  is  proper  to  it,  and  the  conditions  of  its  development 
supplied.  There  are  no  innate  ideas,  any  more  than  innate  propositions  ; 
but  there  is  a capacity,  faculty,  or  power,  innate  in  the  understanding,  that 
acts  and  projects  itself  in  primitive  judgments,  which,  when  language 
comes  in,  express  themselves  in  propositions,  and  these  propositions,  de- 
composed by  abstraction  and  analysis,  engender  distinct  ideas.”  — Elements 
of  Psychology,  Chap.  VII.  — Ed. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


343 


way  it  is  that  we  form  distinct  notions  even  of  the  ob- 
jects of  sense;  but  this  analysis  and  composition,  by 
habit,  becomes  so  easy,  and  is  performed  so  readily, 
that  we  are  apt  to  overlook  it,  and  to  impute  the  dis- 
tinct notion  we  have  formed  of  the  object  to  the  senses 
alone  ; and  this  we  are  the  more  prone  to  do,  because, 
when  once  we  have  distinguished  the  sensible  qualities 
of  the  object  from  one  another,  the  sense  gives  testi- 
mony to  each  of  them. 

You  perceive,  for  instance,  an  object  white,  round, 
and  a foot  in  diameter : I grant  that  you  perceive  all 
these  attributes  of  the  object  by  sense  ; but  if  you  had 
not  been  able  to  distinguish  the  color  from  the  figure, 
and  both  from  the  magnitude,  your  senses  would  only 
have  given  you  one  complex  and  confused  notion  of  all 
these  mingled  together.  A man  who  is  able  to  say 
with  understanding,  or  to  determine  in  his  own  mind, 
that  this  object  is  white,  must  have  distinguished 
whiteness  from  other  attributes.  If  he  has  not  made 
this  distinction,  he  does  not  understand  what  he  says. 

Suppose  a cube  of  brass  to  be  presented  at  the  same 
time  to  a child  of  a year  old  and  to  a man.  The  regu- 
larity of  the  figure  will  attract  the  attention  of  both ; 
both  have  the  senses  of  sight  and  of  tcruch  in  equal 
perfection ; and  therefore,  if  any  thing  be  discovered  in 
this  object  by  the  man  which  cannot  be  discovered  by 
the  child,  it  must  be  owing,  not  to  the  senses,  but  to 
some  other  faculty  which  the  child  has  not  yet  attained. 
Firsts  then,  the  man  can  easily  distinguish  the  body 
from  the  surface  which  terminates  it ; this  the  child 
cannot  do.  Secondly^  the  man  can  perceive  that  this 
surface  is  made  up  of  six  planes  of  the  same  figure  and 
magnitude ; the  child  cannot  discover  this.  Thirdly^ 
the  man  perceives  that  each  of  these  planes  has  four 
equal  sides  and  four  equal  angles,  and  that  the  oppo- 
site sides  of  each  plane,  and  the  opposite  planes,  are 
parallel. 

It  will  surely  be  allowed  that  a man  of  ordinary  judg- 
ment may  observe  all  this  in  a cube  which  he  makes  an 
object  of  contemplation  and  takes  time  to  consider ; 


344 


JUDGMENT. 


that  he  may  give  the  name  of  a square  to  a plane 
terminated  by  four  equal  sides  and  four  equal  angles, 
and  the  name  of  a cube  to  a solid  terminated  by  six 
equal  squares  ; all  this  is  nothing  else  but  analyzing 
the  figure  of  the  object  presented  to  his  senses  into  its 
simplest  elements,  and  again  compounding  it  of  those 
elements.  By  this  analysis  and  composition  two  effects 
are  produced.  1.  From  the  one  complex  object  which 
his  senses  presented,  though  one  of  the  most  simple 
the  senses  can  present,  he  educes  many  simple  and  dis- 
tinct notions  of  right  lines,  angles,  plane  surface,  solid, 
equality,  parallelism ; notions  which  the  child  has  not 
yet  faculties  to  attain.  2.  When  he  considers  the  cube 
as  compounded  of  these  elements,  put  together  in  a 
certain  order,  he  has  then,  and  not  before,  a distinct 
and  scientific  notion  of  a cube.  The  child  neither  con- 
ceives those  elements,  nor  in  what  order  they  must  be 
put  together,  so  as  to  make  a perfect  cube ; and  there- 
fore has  no  accurate  notion  of  a cube,  which  can  make 
it  a subject  of  reasoning. 

Hence  it  is,  that  when  any  vehement  passion  or 
emotion  hinders  the  cool  application  of  judgment^  we 
get  no  distinct  notion  of  an  object,  even  though  the 
sense  be  long  directed  to  it.  A man  who  is  put  into  a 
panic  by  thinking  he  sees  a ghost,  may  stare  at  it  long 
without  having  any  distinct  notion  of  it ; it  is  his  un- 
derstanding and  not  his  sense  that  is  disturbed  by  his 
horror.  If  he  can  lay  that  aside,  judgment  immediately 
enters  upon  its  office,  and  examines  the  length  and 
breadth,  the  color  and  figure  and  distance  of  the  object. 
Of*  these,  while  his  panic  lasted,  he  had  no  distinct 
notion,  though  his  eyes  were  open  all  the  time.  When 
the  eye  of  sense  is  open,  but  that  of  judgment  shut  by 
a panic,  or  by  any  violent  emotion  that  engrosses  the 
mind,  we  see  things  confusedly,  and  probably  much  in 
the  same  manner  that  brutes  and  perfect  idiots  do,  and 
infants  before  the  use  of  judgment. 

There  are,  therefore,  notions  of  the  objects  of  sense 
which  are  gross  and  indistinct,  and  there  are  others  that 
are  distinct  and  scientific.  The  former  may  be  got 


TS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


345 


from  the  senses  alone,  but  the  latter  cannot  be  obtained 
without  some  degree  of  judgment. 

The  clear  and  accurate  notions  which  geometry  pre- 
sents to  us  of  a point,  a right  line,  an  angle,  a square, 
a circle,  of  ratios  direct  and  inverse,  and  others  of  that 
kind,  can  find  no  admittance  into  a mind  that  has  not 
some  degree  of  judgment.  They  are  not  properly  ideas 
of  the  senses,  nor  are  they  got  by  compounding  ideas 
of  the  senses ; but  by  analyzing  the  ideas  or  notions 
we  get  by  the  senses  into  their  simplest  elements,  and 
again  combining  these  elements  into  various,  accurate, 
and  elegant  forms,  which  the  senses  never  did  nor  can 
exhibit. 

(2.)  Having  said  so  much  of  the  notions  we  get  from 
the  senses  alone  of  the  objects  of  sense,  let  us  next 
consider  what  notions  we  can  have  from  consciousness 
alone  of  the  operations  of  our  minds. 

Mr.  Locke  very  properly  calls  consciousness  an  in- 
ternal sense.  It  gives  the  like  immediate  knowledge  of 
things  in  the  mind,  that  is,  of  our  own  thoughts  and 
feelings,  as  the  senses  give  us  of  things  external.  There 
is  this  difference,  however,  that  an  external  object  may 
be  at  rest,  and  the  sense  may  be  employed  about  it  for 
some  time.  But  the  objects  of  consciousness  are  never 
at  rest ; the  stream  of  thought  flows  like  a river,  with- 
out stopping  a moment ; the  whole  train  of  thought 
passes  in  succession  under  the  eye  of  consciousness, 
which  is  always  employed  about  the  present.  But  is 
it  consciousness  that  analyzes  complex  operations,  dis- 
tinguishes their  different  ingredients,  and  combines 
them  in  distinct  parcels  under  general  names  ? This 
surely  is  not  the  work  of  consciousness,  nor  can  it  be 
performed  without  reflection,  recollecting  and  judging 
of  what  we  were  conscious  of  and  distinctly  remem- 
ber. This  reflection  does  not  appear  in  children.  Of 
all  the  powers  of  the  mind,  it  seems  to  be  of  the  latest 
growth,  whereas  consciousness  is  coeval  with  the  ear- 
liest. 

Mr.  Locke  has  restricted  the  word  reflection  to  that 
which  is  employed  about  the  operations  of  our  minds, 


346 


JUDGMENT, 


without  any  authority,  as  I think,  from  custom,  the 
arbiter  of  language ; for  surely  I may  reflect  upon  what 
I have  seen  or  heard,  as  well  as  upon  what  I have 
thought.  The  word,  in  its  proper  and  common  mean- 
ing, is  equally  applicable  to  objects  of  sense  and  to 
objects  of  consciousness.*  He  has  likewise  confounded 
reflection  with  consciousness,  and  seems  not  to  have 
been  aware  that  they  are  different  powers,  and  appear 
at  very  different  periods  of  life. 

(3.)  I proposed,  in  the  third  place,  to  consider  our 
notions  of  the  relations  of  things  : and  here  I think, 
that,  without  judgment,  we  cannot  have  any  notion  of 
relations. 

There  are  two  ways  in  which  we  get  the  notion  of 
relations. 

The  first  is  by  comparing  the  related  objects,  when 
we  have  before  had  the  conception  of  both.  By  this 
comparison,  we  perceive  the  relation,  either  immedi- 
ately, or  by  a process  of  reasoning.  That  my  foot  is 
longer  than  my  finger,  I perceive  immediately ; and 
that  three  is  the  half  of  six.  This  immediate  percep- 
tion is  immediate  and  intuitive  judgment.  That  the 
angles  at  the  base  of  an  isosceles  triangle  are  equal,  I 
perceive  by  a process  of  reasoning,  in  which  it  will  be 
acknowledged  there  is  judgment. 

Another  way  in  which  we  get  the  notion  of  relations 
(which  seems  not  to  have  occurred  to  Mr.  Locke)  is, 
when,  by  attention  to  one  of  the  related  objects,,  we 
perceive  or  judge  that  it  must,  from  its  nature,  have  a 
certain  relation  to  something  else,  which  before,  per- 
haps, we  never  thought  of ; and  thus  our  attention  to 
one  of  the  related  objects  produces  the  notion  of  its  cor- 
relate,, and  of  a certain  relation  between  them.  Thus, 
when  I attend  to  color,  figure,  weight,  I cannot  help 
judging  these  to  be  qualities  which  cannot  exist  with- 


* Here,  as  before,  Reid  errs  in  what  he  says  of  reflection.  Conscious- 
ness and  reflection  cannot  be  analyzed  into  different  powers.  Reflection., 
in  Locke’s  meaning  of  the  word  (and  this  is  the  more  correct),  is  only  con- 
sciousness, concentrated  hy  an  act  of  the  will  on  the  phenomena  of  mind.,  — i.  e. 
internal  attention;  in  Reid’s,  what  is  it  but  attention  in  general  ? — H. 


ITS  NATURE  AND  PROVINCE. 


347 


out  a subject;  that  is,  something  which  is  colored, 
figured,  heavy.  If  I had  not  perceived  such  things  to 
be  qualities,  I should  never  have  had  any  notion  of 
their  subject,  or  of  their  relation  to  it.  Also,  by  attend- 
ing to  the  operations  of  thinking,  memory,  reasoning, 
we  perceive  or  judge  that  there  must  be  something 
which  thinks,  remembers,  and  reasons,  which  we  call 
the  mind.  When  we  attend  to  any  change  that  hap- 
pens in  nature,  judgment  informs  us  that  there  must  be 
a cause  of  this  change,  which  had  power  to  produce 
it ; and  thus  we  get  the  notions  of  cause  and  effect^  and 
of  the  relation  between  them.  When  we  attend  to  body, 
we  perceive  that  it  cannot  exist  without  space  ; hence 
we  get  the  notion  of  space  (which  is  neither  an  object 
of  sense  nor  of  consciousness),  and  of  the  relation 
which  bodies  have  to  a certain  portion  of  unlimited 
space,  as  their  place. 

I apprehend,  therefore,  that  all  our  notions  of  rela- 
tion may  more  properly  be  ascribed  to  judgment  as 
their  source  and  origin,  than  to  any  other  power  of  the 
mind.  We  must  first  perceive  relations  by  our  judg- 
ment, before  we  can  conceive  them  without  judging  of 
them  ; as  we  must  first  perceive  colors  by  sight,  before 
we  can  conceive  them  without  seeing  them. 

III.  Lockers  Distinction  between  Knowledge  and  Judg- 
ment rejected.]  I take  it  to  be  a peculiarity  of  Mr. 
Locke,  that  he  makes  knowledge  and  judgment  distinct 
faculties  of  the  mind.  His  words  are  [Essay^  Book  IV. 
Chap.  XIV.  §§  3,  4) : — “ The  faculty  which  God  has 
given  to  man  to  supply  the  want  of  clear  and  certain 
knowledge,  where  that  cannot  be  had,  is  judgment; 
whereby  the  mind  takes  its  ideas  to  agree  or  disagree, 
or,  which  is  the  same,  any  proposition  to  be  true  or 
false,  without  perceiving  a demonstrative  evidence  in 
the  proofs.  Thus,  the  mind  has  two  faculties,  conver- 
sant about  truth  and  falsehood.  Firsts  Knowledge, 
whereby  it  certainly  perceives,  and  is  undoubtedly  sat- 
isfied of  the  agreement  or  disagreement  of  any  ideas. 
Secondly^  Judgment,  which  is  the  putting  ideas  together, 


348 


JUDGMENT. 


or  separating  them  from  one  another  in  the  mind,  when 
their  certain  agreement  or  disagreement  is  not  per- 
ceived, but  presumed  to  be  so.” 

Knowledge^  I think,  sometimes  signifies  things  known ; 
sometimes  that  act  of  the  . mind  by  which  we  know 
them.  And  in  like  manner  opinion  sometimes  signifies 
things  believed ; sometimes  the  act  of  the  mind  by 
which  we  believe  them.  But  judgment  is  the  faculty 
which  is  exercised  in  both  these  acts  of  the  mind.  In 
knowledge,  we  judge  without  doubting ; in  opinion, 
with  some  mixture  of  doubt.  But  I know  no  authority, 
besides  that  of  Mr.  Locke,  for  calling  knowledge  a 
faculty^  any  more  than  for  calling  opinion  a faculty. 
Neither  do  I think  that  knowledge  is  confined  within 
the  narrow  limits  which  Mr.  Locke  assigns  to  it ; be- 
cause the  far  greater  part  of  what  all  men  call  human 
knowledge  is  in  things  which  admit  of  neither  intuitive 
nor  demonstrative  proof. 

I have  all  along  used  the  word  judgment  in  a more 
extended  sense  than  Mr.  Locke  does  in  the  passage 
above  mentioned.  I understand  by  it  that  operation 
of  mind  by  which  we  determine,  concerning  any  thing 
that  may  be  expressed  by  a proposition,  whether  it  be 
true  or  false.  Every  proposition  is  either  true  or  false  ; 
so  is  every  judgment.  A proposition  may  be  simply 
conceived  without  judging  of  it.  But  when  there  is 
not  only  a conception  of  the  proposition,  but  a mental 
affirmation  or  negation,  an  assent  or  dissent  of  the 
understanding,  whether  weak  or  strong,  that  is  judg- 
ment. 

I think  that,  since  the  days  of  Aristotle,  logicians, 
and  other  writers,  for  the  most  part,  have  taken  the 
word  in  this  sense,  though  it  has  other  meanings,  which 
there  is  no  danger  of  confounding  with  this.  We  may 
take  the  authority  of  Dr.  Watts,  as  a logician,  as  a 
man  who  understood  English,  and  who  had  a just 
esteem  of  Mr.  Locke’s  Essay.  Logic^  Introduction  : — 
‘‘  Judgment  is  that  operation  of  the  mind,  wherein  we 
join  two  or  more  ideas  together  by  one  affirmation  or 
negation : that  is,  we  either  affirm  or  deny  this  to  be 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


349 


that  So  this  tree  is  high ; that  horse  is  not  swift ; the 
mind  of  man  is  a thmking  being ; mere  matter  has  no 
thought  belonging  to  it ; God  is  just ; good  men  are 
often  miserable  in  this  world ; a righteous  governor  will 
make  a difference  betwixt  the  evil  and  the  good ; which 
sentences  are  the  effect  of  judgment,  and  are  called 
propositions.’’  And,  Part  IL  Chap.  II.  Sect.  IX. : — 
“ The  evidence  of  sense  is,  when  we  frame  a proposi- 
tion according  to  the  dictate  of  any  of  our  senses.  So 
we  judge,  that  grass  is  green ; that  a trumpet  gives  a 
pleasant  sound;  that  fire  burns  wood;  water  is  soft; 
and  iron  hardP 

In  this  meaning,  judgment  extends  to  every  kind  of 
evidence,  probable  or  certain^  and  to  every  degree  of 
assent  or  dissent.  It  extends  to  all  knowledge  as  well 
as  to  all  opinion : with  this  difference  only,  that  in 
knowledge  it  is  more  firm  and  steady,  like  a house 
founded  upon  a rock ; in  opinion  it  stands  upon  a 
weaker  foundation,  and  is  more  liable  to  be  shaken  and 
overturned. 

These  differences  about  the  meaning  of  words  are 
not  mentioned  as  if  truth  were  on  one  side,  and  error 
on  the  other,  but  as  an  apology  for  deviating,  in  this 
instance,  from  the  phraseology  of  Mr.  Locke,  which  is 
for  the  most  part  accurate  and  distinct ; and  because 
attention  to  the  different  meanings  that  are  put  upon 
words  by  different  authors  is  the  best  way  to  prevent 
our  mistaking  verbal  differences  for  real  differences  of 
opinion. 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  COMMON  SENSE. 

I.  Different  Significations  of  the  Term  Sense  in  Philo- 
sophical and  Popular  Language,]  The  word  sense^  in 
common  language,  seems  to  have  a different  meaning 
30 


350 


JUDGMENT. 


from  that  which  it  has  in  the  writings  of  philosophers ; 
and  those  different  meanings  are  apt  to  be  confounded, 
and  to  occasion  embarrassment  and  error.  Not  to  go 
back  to  ancient  philosophy  upon  this  point,  modern 
philosophers  consider  sense  as  a power  that  has  nothing 
to  do  with  judgment.  Sense  they  consider  as  the 
power  by  which  we  receive  certain  ideas  or  impressions 
from  objects ; and  judgment  as  the  power  by  which 
we  compare  those  ideas^  and  perceive  their  necessary 
agreements  and  disagreements. 

The  external  senses  give  us  the  idea  of  color,  figure, 
sound,  and  other  qualities  of  body,  primary  or  sec- 
ondary. Mr.  Locke  gave  the  name  of  internal  sense  to 
consciousness,  because  by  it  we  have  the  ideas  of 
thought,  memory,  reasoning,  and  other  operations  of 
our  own  minds.  Dr.  Hutcheson,  of  Glasgow,  conceiv- 
ing that  we  have  simple  and  original  ideas  which  can- 
not be  imputed  either  to  the  external  senses  or  to  con- 
sciousness, introduced  other  internal  senses  ; such  as 
the  sense  of  harmony^  the  sense  of  beauty,)  and  the  moral 
sense.  Ancient  philosophers  also  spoke  of  internal 
senses,  of  which  memory  was  accounted  one. 

But  all  these  senses,  whether  external  or  internal, 
have  been  represented  by  philosophers  as  the  means  of 
furnishing  our  minds  with  ideas,  without  including  any 
kind  of  judgment.  Dr.  Hutcheson  defines  a sense  to 
be  “ a determination  of  the  mind  to  receive  any  idea 
from  the  presence  of  an  object  independent  on  our  will.” 

“ By  this  term  [sense]  philosophers  in  general  have 
denominated  those  faculties,  in  consequence  of  which 
we  are  liable  to  feelings  relative  to  ourselves  only,  and 
from  which  they  have  not  pretended  to  draw  any  con- 
clusions concerning  the  nature  of  things  ; whereas  truth 
is  not  relative,  but  absolute  and  real.”  — Dr.  Priestley’s 
Examination  of  Dr,  Reid,  &c.,  p.  123. 

On  the  contrary,  in  common  language,  sense  always 
implies  judg7nent,  A man  of  sense  is  a man  of  judg- 
ment. Good  sense  is  good  judgment.  Nonsense  is 
what  is  evidently  contrary  to  right  judgment.  Com- 
mon sense  is  that  degree  of  judgment  which  is  com- 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


351 


mon  to  men  with  whom  we  can  converse  and  transact 
business. 

Seeing  and  hearing  by  philosophers  are  called  senses, 
because  we  have  ideas  by  them  ; by  the  vulgar  they 
are  called  senses,  because  we  judge  by  them.  We 
judge  of  colors  by  the  eye  ; of  sounds  by  the  ear ; of 
beauty  and  deformity  by  taste  ; of  right  and  wrong  in 
conduct  by  our  moral  sense  or  conscience. 

Sometimes  philosophers,  who  represent  it  as  the  sole 
province  of  sense  to  furnish  us  with  ideas,  fall  una- 
wares into  the  popular  opinion,  that  they  are  judging 
faculties.  Thus  Locke,  Book  IV.  Chap.  XL  § 2 : — 
“ And  of  this  (that  the  quality  or  accident  of  color 
really  exists,  and  has  a being  without  me),  the  greatest 
assurance  I can  possibly  have,  and  to  which  my  fac- 
ulties can  attain,  is  the  testimony  of  my  eyes,  which 
are  the  proper  and  sole  judges  of  this  thing.” 

This  popular  meaning  of  the  word  sense  is  not 
peculiar  to  the  English  language.  The  corresponding 
words  in  Greek,  Latin,  and  I believe  in  all  the  Euro- 
pean languages,  have  the  same  latitude.  The  Latin 
words  sentire^  sententia^  sensaj  sensus^  from  the  last  of 
which  the  English  word  sense  is  borrowed,  express  judg- 
ment or  opinion,  and  are  applied  indifferently  to  objects 
of  external  sense,  of  taste,  of  morals,  and  of  the  under- 
standing. 

I cannot  pretend  to  assign  the  reason  why  a word, 
which  is  no  term  of  art,  which  is  familiar  in  common 
conversation,  should  have  so  different  a meaning  in 
philosophical  writings.  I shall  only  observe,  that  the 
philosophical  meaning  corresponds  perfectly  with  the 
account  which  Mr.  Locke  and  other  modern  philoso- 
phers give  of  judgment.  For  if  the  sole  province  of 
the  senses,  external  and  internal,  be  to  furnish  the  mind 
with  the  ideas  about  which  we  judge  and  reason,  it 
seems  to  be  a natural  consequence,  that  the  sole  prov- 


* What  does  sensa  mean  ? Is  it  an  erratum^  or  does  he  refer  to  sensa^  — 
once  only,  I believe,  employed  by  Cicero,  and  interpreted  by  Nonius  Mar- 
cellus  as  quce  sentiuntur  ? — H. 


352 


JUDGMENT. 


ince  of  judgment  should  be  to  compare  those  ideas, 
and  to  perceive  their  necessary  relations. 

These  two  opinions  seem  to  be  so  connected,  that 
one  may  have  been  the  cause  of  the  other.  I appre- 
hend, however,  that,  if  both  be  true,  there  is  no  room 
left  for  any  knowledge  or  judgment,  either  of  the  real 
existence  of  contingent  things,  or  of  their  contingent 
relations. 

To  return  to  the  popular  meaning  of  the  word  sense, 
I believe  it  would  be  much  more  difficult  to  find  good 
authors  who  never  use  it  in  that  meaning,  than  to  find 
such  as  do.  We  may  take  Mr.  Pope  as  good  authority 
for  the  meaning  of  an  English  word.  He  uses  it  often, 
and  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Earl  of  Burlington  has  made 
a little  descant  upon  it. 

“ Oft  have  you  hinted  to  your  brother  peer 
A certain  truth,  which  many  buy  too  dear ; 

Something  there  is  more  needful  than  expense, 

And  something  previous  e’en  to  taste,  — ’t  is  sense. 

Good  sense,  which  only  is  the  gift  of  Heaven  ; 

And  though  no  science,  fairly  worth  the  seven ; 

A light,  which  in  yourself  you  must  perceive, 

Jones  and  Le  Notre  have  it  not  to  give.” 


II.  Meaning  of  the  Term  Common  Sense,]  This  in- 
ward light  or  sense  is  given  by  Heaven  to  different  per- 
sons in  different  degrees.  There  is  a certain  degree  of 
it  which  is  necessary  to  our  being  subjects  of  law  and 
government,  capable  of  managing  our  own  affairs,  and 
answerable  for  our  conduct  towards  others : this  is 
called  common  sense^  because  it  is  common  to  all  men 
whom  we  can  transact  business  with,  or  call  to  account 
for  their  conduct. 

The  laws  of  all  civilized  nations  distinguish  those 
who  have  this  gift  of  Heaven  from  those  who  have  it 
not.  The  last  may  have  rights  which  ought  not  to  be 
violated,  but,  having  no  understanding  in  themselves  to 
direct  their  actions,  the  laws  appoint  them  to  be  guided 
by  the  understanding  of  others.  It  is  easily  discerned 
by  its  effects  in  men’s  actions,  in  their  speeches,  and 
even  in  their  looks ; and  when  it  is  made  a question. 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


353 


whether  a man  has  this  natural  gift  or  not,  a judge  or 
a jury,  upon  a short  conversation  with  him,  can,  for  the 
most  part,  determine  the  question  with  great  assurance. 

The  same  degree  of  understanding  which  makes  a 
man  capable  of  acting  with  common  prudence  in  the 
conduct  of  life,  makes  him  capable  of  discovering  what 
is  true  and  what  is  false  in  matters  that  are  self-evident, 
and  which  he  distinctly  apprehends.  All  knowledge, 
and  all  science,  must  be  built  upon  principles  that  are 
self-evident ; and  of  such  principles,  every  man  who 
has  common  sense  is  a competent  judge,  when  he  con- 
ceives them  distinctly.  Hence  it  is,  that  disputes  very 
often  terminate  in  an  appeal  to  common  sense.  While 
the  parties  agree  in  the  first  principles  on  which  their 
arguments  are  grounded,  there  is  room  for  reasoning ; 
but  when  one  denies  what  to  the  other  appears  too 
evident  to  need  or  to  admit  of  proof,  reasoning  seems 
to  be  at  an  end ; an  appeal  is  made  to  common  sense, 
and  each  party  is  left  to  enjoy  his  own  opinion. 

There  seems  to  be  no  remedy  for  this,  nor  any  way 
left  to  discuss  such  appeals,  unless  the  decisions  of 
common  sense  can  be  brought  into  a code,  in  which 
all  reasonable  men  shall  acquiesce.  This,  indeed,  if  it 
were  possible,  would  be  very  desirable,  and  would  sup- 
ply a desideratum  in  logic ; and  why  should  it  be 
thought  impossible  that  reasonable  men  should  agree 
in  things  that  are  self-evident? 

All  that  is  intended  in  this  chapter  is  to  explain  the 
meaning  of  common  sense,  that  it  may  not  be  treated, 
as  it  has  been  by  some,  as  a new  principle,  or  as  a 
word  without  any  meaning.  I have  endeavoured  to 
show,  that  sense,  in  its  most  common,  and  therefore  its 
most  proper  meaning,  signifies  judgment,  though  phi- 
losophers often  use  it  in  another  meaning.  From  this 
it  is  natural  to  think,  that  common  sense  should  mean 
common  judgment ; and  so  it  really  does. 

What  the  precise  limits  are  which  divide  common 
judgment  from  what  is  beyond  it,  on  the  one  hand,  and 
from  what  falls  short  of  it,  on  the  other,  may  be  diffi- 
cult to  determine ; and  men  may  agree  in  the  meaning 
30^ 


354 


JUDGMENT. 


of  the  word  who  have  different  opinions  about  those 
limits,  or  who  even  never  thought  of  fixing  them.  This 
is  as  intelligible  as  that  all  Englishmen  should  mean 
the  same  thing  by  the  county  of  York,  though  perhaps 
not  a hundredth  part  of  them  can  point  out  its  precise 
limits.  Indeed,  it  seems  to  me  that  common  sense  is  as 
unambiguous  a word,  and  as  well  understood,  as  the 
county  of  York,  We  find  it  in  innumerable  places  in 
good  writers  ; we  hear  it  on  innumerable  occasions  in 
conversation  ; and,  as  far  as  I am  able  to  judge,  always 
in  the  same  meaning.  And  this  is  probably  the  reason 
why  it  is  so  seldom  defined  or  explained. 

Dr.  Johnson,  in  the  authorities  he  gives  to  show  that 
the  word  sense  signifies  understandmg^  soundness  of 
faculties^  strength  of  natural  reason,^  quotes  Dr.  Bentley 
for  what  may  be  called  a definition  of  common  sense, 
though  probably  not  intended  for  that  purpose,  but 
mentioned  accidentally  : — “ God  hath  endowed  man- 
kind with  power  and  abilities,  which  we  call  natural 
light  and  reason,  and  common  sense.” 

It  is  true,  that  common  sense  is  a popular,  and  not 
a scholastic  word  ; and  by  most  of  those  who  have 
treated  systematically  of  the  powers  of  the  understand- 
ing, it  is  only  occasionally  mentioned,  as  it  is  by  other 
writers.  But  I recollect  two  philosophical  writers  who 
are  exceptions  to  this  remark.  One  is  Buffier,  who 
treated  largely  of  common  sense,  as  a principle  of 
knowledge,  above  fifty  years  ago.*  The  other  is  Bishop 


* “Buffier’s  Traiti  des  Premieres  Vhiiez  was  first  published  in  1717,  his 
Elemens  de  MUaphysique  in  1724.  If  we  except  Lord  Herbert’s  treatise 
De  Veritate,  these  works  exhibit  the  first  regular  and  comprehensive 
attempt  to  found  philosophy  on  certain  primary  truths,  given  in  certain 
primary  sentiments  or  feelings.”  In  his  Supplementary  Dissertations^  Note 
A,  § 6,  Sir  W.  Hamilton  subjoins  a succinct  exposition  of  Buffier’s  doc- 
trine, and  concludes  the  article  by  warning  his  readers  against  the  misrep- 
resentations of  the  anonymous  English  translator  of  the  treatise  on  First 
Truths.  “ Not  only,”  as  he  tells  us,  “ have  these  never  been  exposed,  but 
Mr.  Stewart  has  bestowed  on  that  individual  an  adventitious  importance, 
by  lauding  his  ‘ acuteness  and  intelligence,’  while  acquiescing  in  his  ‘ severe 
but  just  animadversions  ’ on  Dr.  Beattie.  — Elements,  Part  II.  Chap.  I. 
Sect.  III. 

“ The  translator  to  his  version,  which  appeared  in  1780,  has  annexed  an 
elaborate  Preface,  the  sole  object  of  which  is  to  inveigh  against  Keid, 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


355 


Berkeley, "who,  I think,  has  laid  as  much  stress  upon 
common  sense,  in  opposition  to  the  doctrines  of  phi- 

Beattie,  and  Oswald,  — more  especially  the  last  two,  — for  at  once  stealing 
and  spoiling  the  doctrine  of  the  learned  Jesuit. 

“ In  regard  to  the  spoiling^  the  translator  is  the  only  culprit.  According 
to  him  Buffier’s  '•common  sense  is  a disposition  of  mind  not  natural,  but 
acquired  by  age  and  time.’  (pp.  iv.,  xxxiv.)  ‘ Those  first  truths  which 
are  its  object  require  experience  and  meditation  to  be  conceived,  and  the 
judgments  thence  derived  are  the  result  of  exercising  reason.’  (p.  v.) 

‘ The  use  of  reason  is  reasoning  ’ ; and  ‘ common  sense  is  that  degree  of  un- 
derstanding in  all  things  to  which  the  generality  of  mankind  are  capable 
of  attaining  by  the  exertion  of  their  rational  faculty.’  (p.  xvii.)  In  fact, 
Buffier’s  first  truths,  on  his  translator’s  showing,  are  last  truths  ; for  when 
‘ by  time  we  arrive  at  the  knowledge  of  an  infinitude  of  things,  and  by  the 
use  of  reason  (i.  e.  by  reasoning)  form  our  judgment  on  them,  those  judg- 
ments are  then  justly  to  he  considered  as  first  truths''  !!!  (p.  xviii.)  But  how, 
it  will  be  asked,  does  he  give  any  color  to  so  unparalleled  a perversion '? 
By  the  very  easy  process  of,  — 1**,  throwing  out  of  account,  or  perverting, 
what  his  author  does  say ; — 2°,  interpolating  what  his  author  not  only 
does  not  say,  but  what  is  in  the  very  teeth  of  his  assertions  ; and  3*^,  by 
founding  on  these  perversions  and  interpolations  as  on  the  authentic  words 
of  his  author. 

“ As  to  the  plagiarism^  I may  take  this  opportunity  of  putting  down, 
once  and  for  ever,  this  imputation,  although  the  character  of  the  man 
might  have  well  exempted  Reid  from  all  suspicion  of  so  unworthy  an  act. 
It  applies  only  to  the  Inquiry ; and  there  the  internal  evidence  is  almost  of 
itself  sufficient  to  prove  that  Reid  could  not,  prior  to  that  publication,  have 
been  acquainted  with  Buffier’s  treatise.  The  strongest,  indeed  the  sole 
presumption,  arises  from  the  employment,  by  both  philosophers,  of  the 
term  common  sense^  which,  strange  to  say,  sounded  to  many  in  this  country 
as  singular  and  new ; whilst  it  was  even  commonly  believed,  that,  before 
Reid,  Buffier  was  the  first,  indeed  the  only  philosopher,  who  had  taken 
notice  of  this  principle,  as  one  of  the  genuine  sources  of  our  knowledge. 
After  the  testimonies  now  adduced,  and  to  be  adduced,  it  would  be  the 
apex  of  absurdity  to  presume  that  none  but  Buffier  could  have  suggested 
to  Reid  either  the  principle  or  its  designation.  Here  are  given  forty-eight 
authorities,  ancient  and  modern,  for  the  philosophical  employment  of  the 
term  common  sense^  previous  to  Reid^  and  from  any  of  these  Reid  may  be 
said  to  have  borrowed  it  with  equal  justice  as  from  Buffier ; but,  taken 
together,  they  concur  in  proving  that  the  expression,  in  the  application  in 
question,  was  one  in  general  use,  and  free  as  the  air  to  all  and  each  who 
chose  thus  to  employ  it. 

“ But,  in  fact,  what  has  not  been  noticed,  we  know,  from  an  incidental 
statement  of  Reid  himself,  — and  this,  be  it  noticed,  prior  to  the  charge  of 
plagiarism,  — that  he  only  became  acquainted  with  the  treatise  of  Buffier 
after  the  publication  of  his  own  Inquiry.  For  in  his  Account  of  Aristotle's 
Logic.,  written  and  published  some  ten  years  subsequently  to  that  work,  he 
says,  — ‘ I have  lately  met  with  a very  judicious  treatise  written  by  Father 
Buffier,’  &c.,  Chap.  VI.  Sect.  II.  Compare,  also,  Intellectual  Powers  [the 
passage  to  which  this  note  is  appended].  In  this  last  work,  however,  pub- 
lished after  the  translation  of  Buffier,  though  indirectly  defending  the  less 
manifestly  innocent  partners  in  the  accusation  from  the  charge  advanced, 
his  self-respect  prevents  him  from  saying  a single  word  in  his  own  vindi- 
cation.” — Ed. 


356 


JUDGMENT. 


losophers,  as  any  philosopher  that  has  come  after 
him. 

Men  rarely  ask  what  common  sense  is;  because 
every  man  believes  himself  possessed  of  it,  and  would 
take  it  for  an  imputation  upon  his  understanding  to  be 
thought  unacquainted  with  it.  Yet  I remember  two 
very  eminent  authors  who  have  put  this  question ; and 
it  is  not  improper  to  hear  their  sentiments  upon  a sub- 
ject so  frequently  mentioned,  and  so  rarely  canvassed. 

It  is  well  known,  that  Lord  Shaftesbury  gave  to  one 
of  his  treatises  the  title  of  Sensus  Communis ; an  Essay 
on  the  Freedom  of  Wit  and  Humor^  in  a Letter  to  a 
Friend;  in  which  he  puts  his  friend  in  mind  of  a free 
conversation  with  some  of  their  friends  on  the  subjects 
of  morality  and  religion.  Amidst  the  different  opinions 
started  and  maintained  with  great  life  and  ingenuity, 
one  or  other  would  every  now  and  then  take  the  liberty 
to  appeal  to  common  sense.  Every  one  allowed  the 
appeal ; no  one  would  offer  to  call  the  authority  of  the 
court  in  question,  till  a gentleman,  whose  good  under- 
standing was  never  yet  brought  in  doubt,  desired  the 
company  very  gravely  that  they  would  tell  him  what 
common  sense  was. 

“ If,”  said  he,  “ by  the  word  sense^  we  were  to  under- 
stand opinion  and  judgment,  and  by  the  word  common^ 
the  generality,  or  any  considerable  part  of  mankind,  it 
would  be  hard  to  discover  where  the  subject  of  com- 
mon sense  could  lie ; for  that  which  was  according  to 
the  sense  of  one  part  of  mankind  was  against  the  sense 
of  another : and  if  the  majority  were  to  determine 
common  sense,  it  would  change  as  often  as  men 
changed.  That,  in  religion,  common  sense  was  as 
hard  to  determine  as  catholic  or  orthodox.  What  to 
one  was  absurdity,  to  another  was  demonstration.  In 
policy,  if  plain  British  or  Dutch  sense  were  right, 
Turkish  and  French  must  certainly  be  wrong.  And  as 
mere  nonsense  as  passive  obedience  seemed,  we  found 
it  to  be  the  common  sense  of  a great  party  amongst 
ourselves,  a greater  party  in  Europe,  and  perhaps  the 
greatest  party  in  all  the  world  besides.  As  for  morals, 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


357 


the  difference  was  still  wider ; for  even  the  philosophers 
could  never  agree  in  one  and  the  same  system.  And 
some,  even  of  our  most  admired  modern  philosophers, 
had  fairly  told  us,  that  virtue  and  vice  had  no  other 
law  or  measure  than  mere  fashion  and  vogue.” 

This  is  the  substance  of  the  gentleman’s  speech, 
which,  I apprehend,  explains  the  meaning  of  the  word 
perfectly,  and  contains  all  that  has  been  said,  or  can  be 
said,  against  the  authority  of  common  sense,  and  the 
propriety  of  appeals  to  it.  As  there  is  no  mention  of 
any  answer  immediately  made  to  this  speech,  we  might 
be  apt  to  conclude,  that  the  noble  author  adopted  the 
sentiments  of  the  intelligent  gentleman  whose  speech 
he  recites.  But  the  contrary  is  manifest,  from  the  title 
of  Sensus  Communis  given  to  his  Essay,  from  his  fre- 
quent use  of  the  word,  and  from  the  whole  tenor  of 
the  Essay. 

The  author  appears  to  have  a double  intention  in 
that  Essay,  corresponding  to  the  double  title  prefixed 
to  it.  One  intention  is,  to  justify  the  use  of  wit,  hu- 
mor, and  ridicule,  in  discussing  among  friends  the 
gravest  subjects.  “ I can  very  well  suppose,”  says  he, 
“ men  may  be  frighted  out  of  their  wits  ; but  I have 
no  apprehension  they  should  be  laughed  out  of  them. 
I can  hardly  imagine,  that,  in  a pleasant  way,  they 
should  ever  be  talked  out  of  their  love  for  society,  or 
reasoned  out  of  humanity  and  common  sense.” 

The  other  intention,  signified  by  the  title  Sensus 
Communis^  is  carried  on  hand  in  hand  with  the  first, 
and  is,  to  show  that  common  sense  is  not  so  vague  and 
uncertain  a thing  as  it  is  represented  to  be  in  the  skep- 
tical speech  before  recited.  “ I will  try,”  says  he,  ‘‘  what 
certain  knowledge  or  assurance  of  things  may  be  re- 
covered in  that  very  way  (to  wit,  of  humor),  by  which 
all  certainty,  you  thought,  w^as  lost,  and  an  endless 
skepticism  introduced.” 

He  gives  some  criticisms  upon  the  expression  sensus 
communis  in  Juvenal,  Horace,  and  Seneca ; and  after 
showing,  in  a facetious  way,  throughout  the  treatise, 
that  the  fundamental  principles  of  morals,  of  politics, 


358 


JUDGMENT. 


of  criticism,  and  of  every  branch  of  knowledge,  are  the 
dictates  of  common  sense,  he  sums  up  the  whole  in 
these  words:  — “ That  some  moral  and  philosophical 
truths  there  are  so  evident  in  themselves,  that  it  would 
be  easier  to  imagine  half  mankind  run  mad,  and  joined 
precisely  in  the  same  species  of  folly,  than  to  admit 
any  thing  as  truth,  which  should  be  advanced  against 
such  natural  knowledge,  fundamental  reason,  and  com- 
mon sense.’’  And,  on  taking  leave,  he  adds,  — ‘‘  And 
now,  my  friend,  should  you  find  I had  moralized  in  any 
tolerable  manner  according  to  common  sense,  and  with- 
out canting,  I should  be  satisfied  with  my  perform- 
ance.” 

Another  eminent  writer  who  has  put  the  question 
what  common  sense  is,  is  Fenelon,  the  famous  Arch- 
bishop of  Cambray.  That  ingenious  and  pious  author, 
having  had  an  early  prepossession  in  favor  of  the  Car- 
tesian philosophy,  made  an  attempt  to  establish,  on 
a sure  foundation,  the  metaphysical  arguments  which 
Descartes  had  invented  to  prove  the  being  of  the  Deity. 
For  this  purpose,  he  begins  with  the  Cartesian  doubt. 
He  proceeds  to  find  out  the  truth  of  his  own  existence, 
and  then  to  examine  wherein  the  evidence  and  certainty 
of  this  and  other  such  primary  truths  consisted.  This, 
according  to  Cartesian  principles,  he  places  in  the  clear- 
ness and  distinctness  of  the  ideas.  On  the  contrary, 
he  places  the  absurdity  of  the  contrary  propositions  in 
their  being  repugnant  to  his  clear  and  distinct  ideas. 

To  illustrate  this,  he  gives  various  examples  of  ques- 
tions manifestly  absurd  and  ridiculous,  which  every 
man  of  common  understanding  would  at  first  sight 
perceive  to  be  so,  and  then  go^s  on  to  this  purpose : — 
“ What  is  it  that  makes  these  questions  ridiculous  ? 
Wherein  does  this  ridicule  precisely  consist  ? It  will 
perhaps  be  replied,  that  it  consists  in  this,  that  they 
shock  common  sense.  But  what  is  this  same  common 
sense  ? Is  it  not  the  first  notions  that  all  men  have 
equally  of  the  same  things  ? This  common  sense,  which 
is  always  and  in  all  places  the  same ; which  prevents 
inquiry ; which  makes  inquiry  in  some  cases  ridiculous ; 


OF  COMMON  SENSE, 


359 


which,  instead  of  inquiring,  makes  a man  laugh  whether 
he  will  or  not ; which  puts  it  out  of  a man’s  power  to 
doubt;  this  sense,  which  only  waits  to  be  consulted, — 
which  shows  itself  at  the  first  glance,  and  immediately 
discovers  the  evidence  or  the  absurdity  of  a question, — 
is  not  this  the ‘same  that  I call  my  ideas  ? 

“ Behold,  then,  those  ideas  or  general  notions,  which 
it  is  not  in  my  power  either  to  contradict  or  examine, 
and  by  which  I examine  and  decide  in  every  case,  in- 
somuch that  I laugh  instead  of  answering,  as  often  as 
any  thing  is  proposed  to  me  which  is  evidently  con- 
trary to  what  these  immutable  ideas  represent.” 

I shall  only  observe  upon  this  passage,  that  the  in- 
terpretation it  gives  of  Descartes’s  criterion  of  truth, 
whether  just  or  not,  is  the  most  intelligible  and  the 
most  favorable  I have  met  with. 

I beg  leave  to  mention  one  passage  from  Cicero,  and 
to  add  two  or  three  from  late  writers,  which  show’  that 
this  word  has  not  become  obsolete,  or  changed  its 
meaning.  De  Oratore^  Lib.  III.  50.  — “ Omnes  enim 
tacito  quodarn  sensu,  sine  ulla  arte  aut  ratione,  in  arti- 
bus  ac  rationibus,  recta  ac  prava  dijudicant.  Idque 
cum  faciant  in  picturis,  et  in  signis,  et  in  aliis  operibus, 
ad  quorum  intelligentiam  a natura  minus  habent  in- 
strumenti,  turn  multo  ostendunt  magis  in  verborum, 
numerorum,  vocumque  judicio  ; quod  ea  sint  in  com- 
munibus  infixa  sensibus ; neque  earum  rerum  quem- 
quam  funditus  natura  voluit  expertem.” 

Hume’s  Essays  and  Treatises^  Vol.  I.  p.  5.  — “ But  a 
philosopher  who  proposes  only  to  represent  the  common 
sense  of  mankind  in  more  beautiful  and  more  engaging 
colors,  if ‘by  accident  he  commits  a mistake,  goes  no 
further,  but,  renewing  his  appeal  to  common  sense  and 
the  natural  sentiments  of  the  mind,  returns  into  the 
right  path,  and  secures  himself  from  any  dangerous 
illusion.” 

Hume’s  Inquiry  concerning  the  Principles  of  Morals^ 
p.  2.  — “ Those  who  have  refused  the  reality  of  moral 
distinctions  may  be  ranked  among  the  disingenuous 
disputants.  The  only  way  of  converting  an  antagonist 


360 


JUDGMENT. 


of  this  kind  is  to  leave  him  to  himself : for,  finding  that 
nobody  keeps  up  the  controversy  with  him,  it  is  proba- 
ble he  will  at  last,  of  himself,  from  mere  weariness, 
come  over  to  the  side  of  common  sense  and  reason.” 

Priestley’s  Institutes^  Preliminary  Essay,  Vol.  1.  p.  27. 

— Because  common  sense  is  a sufficient  guard  against 
many  errors  in  religion,  it  seems  to  have  been  taken  for 
granted,  that  that  common  sense  is  a sufficient  in- 
structor also,  whereas  in  fact,  without  positive  instruc- 
tion, men  would  naturally  have  been  mere  savages  with 
respect  to  religion  ; as,  without  similar  instruction,  they 
would  be  savages  with  respect  to  the  arts  of  life  and 
the  sciences.  Common  sense  can  only  be  compared 
to  a judge  ; but  what  can  a judge  do  without  evi- 
dence and  proper  materials  from  which  to  form  a judg- 
ment ?” 

Priestley’s  Examination  of  Dr,  Reid,,  &c.,  p.  127.  — 
“ But  should  we,  out  of  complaisance,  admit  that  what 
has  hitherto  been  called  judgment  may  be  called  sense, 
it  is  making  too  free  with  the  established  signification 
of  words  to  call  it  common  sense,  which,  in  common 
acceptation,  has  long  been  appropriated  to  a very  differ- 
ent thing,  viz.,  to  that  capacity  for  judging  of  common 
things  that  persons  of  middling  capacities  are  capable 
of.”  Again,  p.  129.  — “I  should  therefore  expect,  that, 
if  a man  was  so  totally  deprived  of  common  sense  as 
not  to  be  able  to  distinguish  truth  from  falsehood  in 
one  case,  he  would  be  equally  incapable  of  distinguish- 
ing it  in  another.” 

From  this  cloud  of  testimonies,  to  which  hundreds 
might  be  added,  I apprehend  that  whatever  censure  is 
thrown  upon  those  who  have  spoken  of  common  sense 
as  a principle  of  knowledge,  or  who  have  appealed  to  it 
in  matters  that  are  self-evident,  will  fall  light,  when 
there  are  so  many  to  share  in  it.  Indeed,  the  authority 
of  this  tribunal  is  too  sacred  and  venerable,  and  has 
prescription  too  long  in  its  favor,  to  be  now  wisely 
called  in  question.  Those  who  are  disposed  to  do 
so  may  remember  the  shrewd  saying  of  Mr.  Hobbes, 

— “When  reason  is  against  a man,  a man  will  be 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


361 


against  reason.’^  This  is  equally  applicable  to  common 
sense.* 


* In  the  fifth  section  of  the  same  Dissertation  referred  to  in  the  last  note, 
Sir  W.  Hamilton  defines  with  clearness  and  precision  the  various  accep- 
tations of  the  term  common  sense^  only  two  or  three  of  which  need  here  be 
noticed.  Sometimes  “ it  denotes  the  complement  of  those  cognitions  or  convic- 
tions which  we  receive  from  nature ; which  all  men  profess  in  common  ; and  by 
which  they  test  the  truth  of  knowledge  and  the  morality  of  actions.  This  is  the 
meaning  in  which  the  expression  is  now  emphatically  employed  in  philoso- 
phy, and  which  may  be,  therefore,  called  its  philosophical  signification.  As 
authorities  for  its  use  in  this  relation,  Reid  has  adduced  legitimate  exam- 
ples from  Bentley,  Shaftesbury,  Fenelon,  Bufiier,  and  Hume.  The  others 
which  he  quotes  from  Cicero  and  Priestley  can  hardly  be  considered  as 
more  than  instances  of  the  employment  of  the  words ; for  the  former,  in 
the  particular  passage  quoted,  does  not  seem  to  mean  by  sensus  communis 
more  than  the  faculty  of  apprehending  sensible  relations  which  all  possess ; 
and  the  latter  explicitly  states,  that  he  uses  the  words  in  the  meaning  which 
we  are  hereafter  to  consider.  Mr.  Stewart,  Elements^  Part  II.  Chap.  I. 
Sect  IV.,  to  the  examples  of  Reid  adds  only  a single,  and  that  not  an  un- 
ambiguous instance,  from  Bayle.  It  therefore  still  remains  to  show  that  in 
this  signification  its  employment  is  not  only  of  authorized  usage,  but,  in 
fact,  one  long  and  universally  established.  This  is  done  in  the  series  of 
testimonies  I shall  adduce  in  a subsequent  part  of  this  note  [from  Hesiod 
to  De  la  Mennais,  in  all  one  hundred  and  six  witnesses],  — principally,  in- 
deed, to  prove  that  the  doctrine  of  common  sense.,  notwithstanding  many 
schismatic  aberrations,  is  the  one  catholic  and  perennial  philosophy,  but 
which  also  concur  in  showing  that  this,  too,  is  the  name  under  which  that 
doctrine  has  for  two  thousand  years  been  most  familiarly  known,  at  least 
in  the  Western  world.  Of  these,  Lucretius,  Cicero,  Horace,  Seneca,  Ter- 
tullian,  Arnobius,  and  St.  Augustine  exhibit  the  expression  as  recognized 
in  the  language  and  philosophy  of  ancient  Rome ; while  some  fifty  others 
prove  its  scientific  and  colloquial  usage  in  every  country  of  modern  Eu- 
rope.” 

According  to  another  acceptation  of  the  term  common  sense,  “ it  denotes 
such  an  ordinary  complemeyit  of  intelligence,  that,  if  a person  be  deficient  therein, 
he  is  accounted  mad  or  foolish.  Sensus  communis  is  thus  used  in  Phaedrus, 
Lib.  I.  7 ; but  Horace,  Serm.,  Lib.  I.  3,  and  Juvenal,  Sat.  VIII.  73,  are 
erroneously,  though  usually,  interpreted  in  this  signification.  In  modern 
Latinity  (as  in  Milton  Contra  Salmasium,  Cap.  VIII.),  and  in  most  of  the 
vulgar  languages,  the  expression  in  this  meaning  is  so  familiar,  that  it 
would  be  idle  to  adduce  examples.  Sir  James  Mackintosh,  Dissertations, 
(S&c.,  p.  387  of  the  collected  edition,  imagines,  indeed,  that  this  is  the  only 
meaning  of  common  sense ; and  on  this  ground  censures  Reid  for  the  adop- 
tion of  the  term  ; and  even  Mr.  Stewart’s  objections  to  it  seem  to  proceed 
on  the  supposition,  that  this  is  the  proper  or  more  accredited  signification. 
See  Elements,  Part  II.  Chap.  I.  Sect.  II. ; and  Life  of  Reid,  Sect.  II.  This 
is  wrong ; but  Reid  himself,  it  must  be  acknowledged,  does  not  sufficiently 
distinguish  between  this  and  the  last-mentioned  acceptation ; as  may  be 
seen  from  the  tenor  of  his  chapter  on  Common  Sense,  but  especially  from 
the  concluding  chapter  of  the  Inquiry. 

Again,  when  common  sense  is  used  with  emphasis  on  the  substantive  and 
not  on  the  adjective,  it  often,  in  popular  language.  “ expresses  native  prac- 


362 


JUDGMENT. 


III.  Relation  of  Reason  and  Common  Sense  to  each 
other,\  It  is  absurd  to  conceive  that  there  can  be  any 
opposition  between  reason  and  common  sense.  It  is, 
indeed,  the  first-born  of  reason,  and,  as  they  are  com- 
monly joined  together  in  speech  and  in  writing,  they 
are  inseparable  in  their  nature. 

We  ascribe  to  reason  two  offices,  or  two  degrees. 
The  first  is  to  judge  of  things  self-evident ; the  second 
to  draw  conclusions  that  are  not  self-evident  from  those 
that  are.  The  first  of  these  is  the  province,  and  the 
sole  province,  of  common  sense ; and  therefore  it  co- 
incides with  reason  in  its  whole  extent,  and  is  only 
another  name  for  one  branch  or  one  degree  of  reason. 
Perhaps  it  may  be  said.  Why,  then,  should  you  give  it 
a particular  name,  since  it  is  acknowledged  to  be  only 
a degree  of  reason  ? It  would  be  a sufficient  answer  to 
this.  Why  do  you  abolish  a name  which  is  to  be  found 
in  the  language  of  all  civilized  nations,  and  has  ac- 
quired a right  by  prescription  ? Such  an  attempt  is 
equally  foolish  and  ineffectual.  Every  wise  man  will 
be  apt  to  think,  that  a name  which  is  found  in  all  lan- 
guages as  far  back  as  we  can  trace  them,  is  not  without 
some  use. 

But  there  is  an  obvious  reason  why  this  degree  of 
reason  should  have  a name  appropriated  to  it;  and  that 
is,  that  in  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  no  other  degree 
of  reason  is  to  be  found.  It  is  this  degree  that  entitles 
them  to  the  denomination  of  reasonable  creatures.  It 
is  this  degree  of  reason,  and  this  only,  that  makes  a 
man  capable  of  managing  his  own  affairs,  and  answer- 
able  for  his  conduct  towards  others.  There  is,  there- 
fore, the  best  reason  why  it  should  have  a name  appro- 
priated to  it. 


tical  intelligence^  natural  prudence^  mother  wit^  tact  in  behaviour^  acuteness  in  the 
observation  of  character^  ^c.,  in  contrast  to  habits  of  acquired  learning^  or  of 
speculation  away  from  the  affairs  of  life.  I recollect  no  unambiguous  exam- 
ples of  the  phrase,  in  this  precise  acceptation,  in  any  ancient  author.  In 
modern  languages,  and  more  particularly  in  French  and  English,  it  is  of 
ordinary  occurrence.  Thus,  Voltaire’s  saying,  ‘ Le  sens  commun  n’est 
pas  si  commun  ’ ; — which,  I may  notice,  was  stolen  from  Buffier,  il/eto- 
physique.,  § 69.”  — Ed. 


OF  COMMON  SENSE. 


363 


These  two  degrees  of  reason  differ  in  other  respects, 
which  would  be  sufficient  to  entitle  them  to  distinct 
names. 

The  first  is  purely  the  gift  of  Heaven.  And  where 
Heaven  has  not  given  it,  no  education  can  supply  the 
want.  The  second  is  learned  by  practice  and  rules^ 
when  the  first  is  not  wanting.  A man  who  has  com- 
mon sense  may  be  taught  to  reason.  But  if  he  has  not 
that  gift,  no  teaching  will  make  him  able  either  to 
judge  of  first  principles  or  to  reason  from  them. 

I have  only  this  further  to  observe,  that  the  province 
of  common  sense  is  more  extensive  in  refutation  than  in 
confirmation.  A conclusion  drawn  by  a train  of  just 
reasoning  from  true  principles  cannot  possibly  contra- 
dict any  decision  of  common  sense,  because  truth  will 
always  be  consistent  with  itself.  Neither  can  such  a 
conclusion  receive  any  confirmation  from  common 
sense,  because  it  is  not  within  its  jurisdiction. 

But  it  is  possible,  that,  by  setting  out  from  false  prin- 
ciples, or  by  an  error  in  reasoning,  a man  may  be  led 
to  a conclusion  that  contradicts  the  decisions  of  com- 
mon sense.  In  this  case,  the  conclusion  is  within  the 
jurisdiction  of  common  sense,  though  the  reasoning 
on  which  it  was  grounded  be  not ; and  a man  of  com- 
mon sense  may  fairly  reject  the  conclusion,  without 
being  able  to  show  the  error  of  the  reasoning  that  led 
to  it.  Thus,  if  a mathematician,  by  a process  of  in- 
tricate demonstration,  in  which  some  false  step  was 
made,  should  be  brought  to  this  conclusion,  that  two 
quantities,  which  are  equal  to  a third,  are  not  equal  to 
each  other,  a man  of  common  sense,'  without  pretend- 
ing to  be  a judge  of  the  demonstration,  is  well  entitled 
to  reject  the  conclusion,  and  to  pronounce  it  absurd.* 


* In  Jouffroy’s  Milanges  PhilosopMques  there  is  an  article,  De  la  Philoso- 
phie  et  da  Sens  Commun  (translated  by  Mr.  Ripley,  in  his  Philosophical 
Miscellanies^  Vol.  I.  p.  305  et  seq.)^  in  which  he  marks  with  some  distinct- 
ness their  relation  to  each  other. 

“ Before  their  accession  to  philosophy,  philosophers,  in  their  capacity  as 
men,  bore  within  them  the  light  of  common  sense  ; they  made  use  of  it  in 
their  judgments  and  in  their  conduct;  and  whatever  may  be  the  result  of 
their  scientific  labors,  it  is  not  perceived  that  they  renounce  common  sense 


364 


JUDGMENT. 


CHAPTER  III. 


OF  FIEST  PRINCIPLES  IN  GENERAL. 

I.  Nature^  Necessity^  and  Use  of  First  Principles,] 
One  of  the  most  important  distinctions  of  our  judg- 
ments is,  that  some  of  them  are  intuitive^  others  ground^ 
ed  on  argument. 

It  is  not  in  our  power  to  judge  as  we  will.  The 
judgment  is  carried  along  necessarily  by  the  evidence, 
real  or  seeming,  which  appears  to  us  at  the  time.  But 
in  propositions  that  are  submitted  to  our  judgment 

in  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life,  or  that  they  are  any  more  converted  to  their 
own  doctrines  than  the  great  mass  of  mankind.  They  avow  in  practice, 
not  only  the  existence,  but  the  superiority,  of  the  solutions  of  common 
sense.  What,  then,  do  they  seek  ? What  is  the  purpose  of  their  endeav- 
ours ? Let  us  attempt  to  explain  it. 

“ The  solutions  of  common  sense  are  not  established  in  any  explicit  man- 
ner^ and  in  a positive  form^  in  the  human  mind.  Ask  the  first  man  you 
meet,  what  idea  he  has  formed  of  the  Good,  or  what  he  thinks  concerning 
the  nature  of  things  ; — he  will  not  know  what  you  say.  If  you  attempt 
to  explain  to  him  the  meaning  of  those  two  questions,  at  least  unless  you 
use  all  the  skill  of  Socrates,  he  will  find  it  hard  to  comprehend  you.  But 
undertake  to  call  in  question,  with  the  Stoics,  that  pleasure  is  a good,  or  to 
deny,  with  the  spiritualists,  the  existence  of  matter;  — you  will  see  him 
laugh  at  your  folly,  and  exhibit  the  most  unconquerable  conviction  with 
regard  to  those  two  points.  It  will  be  the  same  with  every  other  question. 
Common  sense,  therefore,  is  an  opinion  of  undoubted  reality ; but  men  are 
governed  by  it  almost  unconsciously  ; its  existence  is  proved  by  the  single 
fact,  that  they  judge  and  act  as  if  they  possessed  it.  Taken  as  a whole,  it 
is  obscure ; no  one  can  give  account  of  it ; but  when  a particular  case 
occurs,  it  is  manifested  at  once  by  a clear  and  positive  application  ; it  then 
returns  into  the  shade. . It  is  perceived  in  every  judgment,  in  every  deter- 
mination ; but,  except  in  its  application,  it  is  as  if  it  were  not ; and  it  is 
jjrecisely  this  obscurity  which  makes  it  insufficient  for  thinking  men.  Reflection 
cannot  be  satisfied  with  this  species  of  inspiration,  the  characteristic  of 
which  is  to  be  ignorant  of  itself,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  this  igno- 
rance. The  elite  of  humanity  is  not  satisfied  with  these  obscure  glimpses, 
these  vague  persuasions  : it  seeks  to  comprehend  what  every  body  believes ; 
it  wishes  to  obtain  clear  solutions  of  the  great  questions  that  concern 
man ; and  with  it  commences  philosophy.  To  philosophize  is  to  com- 
prehend ; to  comprehend  is  not  to  know,  but  to  verify  what  we  knew  be- 
fore. How  could  we  wish  to  comprehend,  if  we  were  ignorant  of  what 
we  wished  to  comprehend  ? ” 

To  the  same  effect,  but  more  pointedly.  Sir  W.  Hamilton,  Note  A,  § 3 : 
— “ Nor  is  it  true,  that  the  argument  from  common  sense  denies  the  decision 
to  the  judgment  of  philosophers,  and  accords  it  to  the  verdict  of  the  vul- 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


365 


there  is  this  great  difference  ; some  are  of  such  a nature 
that  a man  of  ripe  understanding  may  apprehend  them 
distinctly,  and  perfectly  understand  their  meaning  with- 
out finding  himself  under  any  necessity  of  believing 
them  to  be  true  or  false,  probable  or  improbable.  The 
judgment  remains  in  suspense,  until  it  is  inclined  to 
one  side  or  another  by  reasons  or  arguments. 

But  there  are  other  propositions  which  are  no  sooner 
understood  than  they  are  believed.  The  judgment  fol- 
lows the  apprehension  of  them  necessarily,  and  both 
are  equally  the  work  of  nature,  and  the  result  of  our 
original  powers.  There  is  no  searching  for  evidence, 
no  weighing  of  arguments  ; the  proposition  is  not  de- 
duced or  inferred  from  another ; it  has  the  light  of  truth 


gar.  Nothing  can  be  more  erroneous.  We  admit,  nay,  we  maintain,  as 
D’Alembert  well  expresses  it,  that  ‘ the  truth  in  metaphysics,  like  the  truth 
in  matters  of  taste,  is  a truth  of  which  all  minds  have  the  germ  within 
themselves ; to  which,  indeed,  the  greater  number  pay  no  attention,  but 
which  they  can  recognize  the  moment  it  is  pointed  out  to  them.  But  if, 
in  this  sort,  we  are  able  to  understand^  all  are  not  able  to  instruct.  The 
merit  of  conveying  easily  to  others  true  and  simple  notions  is  much  greater 
than  is  commonly  supposed ; for  experience  proves  how  rarely  this  is  to 
be  met  with.  Sound  metaphysical  ideas  are  common  truths,  which  every 
one  apprehends,  but  which  few  have  the  talent  to  develop.  So  difficult  is 
it  on  any  subject  to  make  our  own  what  belongs  to  every  one.’  M6langes^ 
Tome  IV.  § 6.  Or,  to  employ  the  words  of  the  ingenious  Lichtenberg,  — 
‘ Philosophy,  twist  the  matter  as  we  may,  is  always  a sort  of  chemistiy 
(Scheidekunst).  The  peasant  employs  all  the  principles  of  abstract  phi- 
losophy, only  invelopedj  latent.,  engaged.,  as  the  men  of  physical  science 
express  it;  the  philosopher  exhibits  the  pure  principle.’  Hinterlassene 
Sc.hr  if  ten.,  Vol.  II.  p.  67. 

It  must  be  recollected,  also,  that,  in  appealing  to  the  consciousness  of 
mankind  in  general,  we  only  appeal  to  the  consciousness  of  those  not  dis- 
qualified to  pronounce  a decision.  ‘ In  saying  (to  use  the  words  of  Aris- 
totle) simply  and  without  qualification,  that  this  or  that  is  a known  truth., 
we  do  not  mean  that  it  is  in  fact  recognized  by  all,  but  only  by  such  as  are 
of  a sound  understanding ; just  as,  in  saying  absolutely  that  a thing  is  whole- 
some, we  must  be  held  to  mean,  to  such  as  are  of  a hale  constitution.’ 
Top.,  Lib.  VI.  Cap.  IV.  § 7.  — We  may,  in  short,  say  of  the  true  philoso- 
pher what  Erasmus,  in  an  epistle  to  Hutton,  said  of  Sir  Thomas  More : — 
‘ Nemo  minus  ducitur  vulgi  judicio ; sed  rursus  nemo  minus  abest  a sensu 
communi'  ” See  also  the  Appendix  to  this  volume. 

Compare  Beattie’s  Essay  on  the  Nature  and  Immutability  of  Truth,  Part 
I.  Chap.  II. ; Oswald’s  Appeal  to  Common  Sense,  Vol.  I.  passim  ; Priestley’s 
Examination  of  Dr.  Reidls  Inquiry,  &c. ; Cogan’s  Ethical  Questions,  Specu- 
lation V. ; Galluppi,  Lettere  Filosofiche  (translated  into  French  by  M. 
Peisse,  Lettres  Philosophiques,  Paris,  1844),  Let.  XI.;  Blackivood's  Mag- 
azine  for  August,  1847.  — Ed. 


366 


JUDGMENT. 


in  itself,  and  has  no  occasion  to  borrow  it  from  an- 
other. 

Propositions  of  the  last  kind,  when  they  are  used  in 
matters  of  science,  have  commonly  been  called  axioms; 
and,  on  whatever  occasion  they  are  used,  are  called  first 
principles^  principles  of  common  sense^  common  notions^ 
self-evident  truths,  Cicero  calls  them  naturce  judicia,, 
judicia  communibus  hominum  sensibus  infixa.  Lord 
Shaftesbury  expresses  them  by  the  words,  natural 
knowledge^  fundamental  reason^  and  common  sense,"*" 


* For  the  nomenclature  of  first  principles,  see  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  Note 
A,  § 5.  His  remarks  on  two  or  three  of  the  appellations  which  have  re- 
cently grown  into  favor  are  here  given. 

“ 1.  Instinctive  beliefs^  cognitions^  judgments^  &c. 

“ Priestley  {Examination^  &c.,  passim)  has  attempted  to  ridicule  Reid’s 
use  of  the  terms  instinct  and  instinctive^  in  this  relation,  as  an  innovation, 
not  only  in  philosophy,  but  in  language  ; and  Sir  James  Mackintosh  (Dis- 
sertations^ p.  388)  considers  the  term  instinct  not  less  improper  than  the 
term  common  sense.  As  to  the  impropriety,  though,  like  most  other  psy- 
chological terms,  these  are  not  unexceptionable,  they  are,  however,  less  so 
than  many,  nay,  than  most,  others.  An  instinct  is  an  agent  which  performs 
blindly  and  ignorantly  a work  of  intelligence  and  knowledge.  The  terms 
instinctive  beliefs  instinctive  judgment.,  instinctive  cognition,  are  therefore  ex- 
pressions not  ill  adapted  to  characterize  a belief,  judgment,  cognition, 
which,  as  the  result  of  no  anterior  consciousness,  is,  like  the  products  of 
animal  instinct,  the  intelligent  effect  of  (as  far  as  we  are  concerned)  an 
unknown  cause.  In  like  manner,  we  can  hardly  find  more  suitable  ex- 
pressions to  indicate  those  incomprehensible  spontaneities  themselves,  of 
which  the  primary  facts  of  consciousness  are  the  manifestations,  than 
rational  or  intellectual  instincts.  In  fact,  if  reason  can  justly  be  called  a de- 
veloped feeling,  it  may,  with  no  less  propriety,  be  called  an  illuminated  in- 
stinct ; — in  the  words  of  Ovid, 

‘ Et  quod  nunc  ratio,  impetus  ante  fuit.’ 

As  to  an  innovation  either  in  language  or  philosophy,  this  objection  only 
betrays  the  ignorance  of  the  objector.  Mr.  Stewart  (Essays,  Ess.  II. 
Chap.  II.)  adduces  Boscovich  and  D’Alembert  as  authorities  for  the  em- 
ployment of  the  terms  instinct  and  instinctive  in  Reid’s  signification.  But, 
before  Reid,  he  might  have  found  them  thus  applied  by  Cicero,  Scaliger, 
Bacon,  Herbert,  Descartes,  Rapin,  Pascal,  Poiret,  Barrow,  Leibnitz,  Mu- 
sa*us,  Eeuerlin,  Hume,  Bayer,  Karnes,  Reimarus,  and  a host  of  others ; 
while  subsequent  to  the  Inquiry  into  the  Human  Mind,  besides  Beattie,  Os- 
wald, Campbell,  Ferguson,  among  our  Scottish  lihilosophers,  we  have, 
with  Hemsterhuis  in  Holland,  in  Germany  Tetens,  Jacobi,  Bouterwek, 
Neeb,  Koppen,  Ancillon,  and  many  other  metaphysicians  who  have  adopted 
and  defended  the  expressions. 

“ 2.  A priori  truths,  principles,  cognitions,  notions,  judgments,  &c. 

“ The  term  a priori,  by  the  influence  of  Kant  and  his  school,  is  now  very 
generally  employed  to  characterize  those  elements  of  knowledge  which  are 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


367 


I hold  it  to  be  certain,  and  even  demonstrable,  that 
all  knowledge  got  by  reasoning  must  be  built  upon  first 
principles. 

This  is  as  certain  as  that  every  house  must  have  a 
foundation.  The  power  of  reasoning,  in  this  respect, 
resembles  the  mechanical  powers  or  engines  ; it  must 
have  a fixed  point  to  rest  upon,  otherwise  it  spends  its 
force  in  the  air,  and  produces  no  effect. 

When  we  examine,  in  the  way  of  analysis,  the  evi- 
dence of  any  proposition,  either  we  find  it  self-evident. 


not  obtained  a posteriori^  — are  not  evolved  out  of  experience  as  factitious 
generalizations  ; but  which  are  native  to,  are  potentially  in,  the  mind  ante- 
cedent to  the  act  of  experience,  on  occasion  of  which  (as  constituting  its 
subjective  conditions)  they  are  first  actually  elicited  into  consciousness. 
These,  like  many,  indeed  most  others  of  his  technical  expressions,  are  old 
words  applied  in  a new  signification.  Previously  to  Kant,  the  terms  a 
priori  and  a posteriori  were,  in  a sense  which  descended  from  Aristotle, 
properly  and  usually  employed,  the  former  to  denote  a reasoning  from 
cause  to  effect,  the  latter,  a reasoning  from  effect  to  cause.  The  term  a 
priori  came,  however,  in  modern  times,  to  be  extended  to  any  abstract 
reasoning  from  a given  notion  to  the  conditions  which  such  notion  in- 
volved ; hence,  for  example,  the  title  a priori  bestowed  on  the  ontological 
and  cosmological  arguments  for  the  existence  of  the  Deity.  The  latter  of 
these,  in  fact,  starts  from  experience,  — from  the  observed  contingency  of 
the  world,  — in  order  to  construct  the  supposed  notion  on  which  it  founds. 
Clarke’s  cosmological  demonstration,  called  a priori^  is  therefore,  so  far, 
properly  an  argument  a posteriori. 

“ 3.  Transcendental  truths.,  principles.,  cognitions.,  judgments.,  &c. 

“ In  the  schools,  transcendentalis  and  transcendens  were  convertible  ex- 
psessions,  employed  to  mark  a term  or  notion  which  transcended,  that  is, 
which  rose  above,  and  thus  contained  under  it,  the  categories,  or  summa 
genera,  of  Aristotle.  Such,  for  example,  is  being,  of  which  the  ten  cate- 
gories are  only  subdivisions.  Kant,  according  to  his  wont,  twisted  these 
old  terms  into  a new  signification.  First  of  all,  he  distinguished  them 
from  each  other.  Transcendent  {transcendens)  he  employed  to  denote  wliat 
is  wholly  beyond  experience,  being  given  neither  as  an  a posteriori  nor  a 
priori  element  of  cognition,  — what,  therefore,  transcends  every  category 
of  thought.  Transcendental  (transcendentalis)  he  applied  to  signify  the  a 
priori  or  necessary  cognitions,  which,  though  manifested  in,  as  affording 
the  conditions  of,  experience,  transcend  the  sphere  of  that  contingent  or 
adventitious  knowledge  which  we  acquire  by  experience.  Transcendental 
is  not,  therefore,  what  transcends,  but  what  in  fact  constitutes,  a category 
of  thought.  This  term,  though  probably  from  another  quarter,  has  found 
favor  with  Mr.  Stewart ; who  proposes  to  exchange  the  expression  prin- 
ciples of  common  sense,  for,  among  other  names,  that  of  transcendental 
truths.^'’ 

The  designation  by  which  Mr.  Stewart  prefers,  on  the  whole,  to  dis- 
tinguish primary  truths  is  either  fundamental  laws  of  human  belief  or  pri- 
mary elements  of  human  reason.  Elements,  Part  II.  Chap.  I.  — Ed. 


368 


JUDGMENT. 


or  it  rests  upon  one  or  more  propositions  that  support 
it.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the  propositions 
that  support  it ; and  of  those  that  support  them,  as  far 
back  as  we  can  go.  But  we  cannot  go  back  in  this 
track  to  infinity.  Where,  then,  must  this  analysis 
stop  ? It  is  evident  that  it  must  stop  only  when  we 
come  to  propositions  which  support  all  that  are  built 
upon  them,  but  are  themselves  supported  by  none,  that 
is,  to  self-evident  propositions. 

Let  us  next  consider  a synthetical  proof  of  any  kind, 
where  we  begin  with  the  premises,  and  pursue  a train 
of  consequences,  until  we  come  to  the  last  conclusion, 
or  thing  to  be  proved.  Here  we  must  begin,  either 
with  self-evident  propositions,  or  with  such  as  have 
been  already  proved.  When  the  last  is  the  case,  the 
proof  of  the  propositions  thus  assumed  is  a part  of 
our  proof ; and  the  proof  is  deficient  without  it.  Sup- 
pose, then,  the  deficiency  supplied,  and  the  proof  com- 
pleted, is  it  not  evident  that  it  must  set  out  with  self- 
evident  propositions,  and  that  the  whole  evidence  must 
rest  upon  them  ? So  that  it  appears  to  be  demonstra- 
ble, that,  without  first  principles^  analytical  reasoning' 
could  have  no  end^  and  synthetical  reasoning  could  have 
no  beginning  ; and  that  every  conclusion  got  by  reason- 
ing must  rest  with  its  whole  weight  upon  first  princi- 
ples^ as  the  building  does  upon  its  foundation. 

It  would  doubtless  contribute  greatly  to  the  stabil- 
ity of  human  knowledge,  and  consequently  to  the  im- 
provement of  it,  if  the  first  principles  upon  ivhich  the 
various  parts  of  it  are  grounded  ivere  pointed  out  and 
ascertained. 

We  have  ground  to  think  so  from  facts,  as  well  as 
from  the  nature  of  the  thing.  There,  are  two  branches 
of  human  knowledge  in  which  this  method  has  been 
followed,  — to  wit,  mathematics  and  natural  philoso- 
phy : in  mathematics,  as  far  back  as  we  have  books. 
It  is  in  this  science  only,  that,  for  more  than  two  thou- 
sand years  since  it  began  to  be  cultivated,  we  find  no 
sects,  no  contrary  systems,  and  hardly  any  disputes ; 
or,  if  there  have  been  disputes,  they  have  ended  as  soon 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


369 


as  the  animosity  of  parties  subsided,  and  have  never 
been  again  revived.  The  science,  once  firmly  estab- 
lished upon  the  foundation  of  a few  axioms  and  defi- 
nitions, as  upon  a rock,  has  grown  from  age  to  age,  so 
as  to  become  the  loftiest  and  the  most  solid  fabric  that 
human  reason  can  boast. 

Natural  philosophy,  till  less  than  two  hundred  years 
ago,  remained  in  the  same  fluctuating  state  with  the 
other  sciences.  Every  new  system  pulled  up  the  old 
by  the  roots.  The  system-builders,  indeed,  were  always 
willing  to  accept  of  the  aid  of  first  principles,  when 
they  were  of  their  side ; but  finding  them  insufficient 
to  support  the  fabric  which  their  imagination  had 
raised,  they  were  only  brought  in  as  auxiliaries,  and  so 
intermixed  with  conjectures  and  with  lame  inductions, 
that  their  systems  were  like  Nebuchadnezzar’s  image, 
whose  feet  were  partly  of  iron  and  partly  of  clay. 

Lord  Bacon  first  delineated  the  only  solid  founda- 
tion on  which  natural  philosophy  can  be  built : and 
Sir  Isaac  Newton  reduced  the  principles  laid  down  by 
Bacon  into  three  or  four  axioms,  which  he  calls  regulce 
philosophandi.  From  these,  together  with  the  phenom- 
ena observed  by  the  senses,  which  he  likewise  lays 
down  as  first  principles,  he  deduces,  by  strict  reasoning, 
the  propositions  contained  in  the  third  book  of  his 
Principia^  and  in  his  Optics;  and  by  this  means  has 
raised  a fabric  in  those  two  branches  of  natural  philoso- 
phy, which  is  not  liable  to  be  shaken  by  doubtful  dis- 
putation, but  stands  immovable  upon  the  basis  of  self- 
evident  principles.* 

We  may  observe,  by  the  way,  that  the  reason  why 
logicians  have  been  so  unanimous  in  determining  the 
rules  of  reasonings  from  Aristotle  down  to  this  day, 
seems  to  be,  that  they  were  by  that  great  genius  raised, 
in  a scientific  manner,  from  a few  definitions  and 
axioms.  It  may  further  be  observed,  that  when  men 
differ  about  a deduction,  whether  it  follows  from  cer- 
tain premises,  this  I think  is  always  owing  to  their  dif- 


Compare  Stewart’s  Elements^  Part  II.  Chap.  I. 


370 


JUDGMENT. 


fering  about  some  first  principle.  I shall  explain  this 
by  an  example.  Suppose  that,  from  a thing  having 
begun  to  exist,  one  man  infers  that  it  must  have  had  a 
cause  ; another  man  does  not  admit  the  inference. 
Here  it  is  evident  that  the  first  takes  it  for  a self-evident 
principle,  that  every  thing  which  begins  to  exist  must 
have  a cause.  The  other  does  not  allow  this  to  be  self- 
evident.  Let  them  settle  this  point,  and  the  dispute 
will  be  at  an  end. 

Thus  I think  it  appears,  that  in  matters  of  science,  if 
the  terms  be  properly  explained,  the  first  principles 
upon  which  the  reasoning  is  grounded  be  laid  down 
and  exposed  to  examination,  and  the  conclusions  regu- 
larly deduced  from  them,  it  might  be  expected  that  men 
of  candor  and  capacity,  who  love  truth,  and  have  pa- 
tience to  examine  things  coolly,  might  come  to  una- 
nimity with  regard  to  the  force  of  the  deductions,  and 
that  their  differences  might  be  reduced  to  those  they 
may  have  about  first  principles. 

11.  Means  of  determining  what  ought  to  be  admitted 
as  First  Principles.^  We  are  next  to  consider  whether 
nature  has  left  us  destitute  of  means  whereby  the  candid 
and  honest  part  of  mankind  may  be  brought  to  unanimity 
ivhen  they  happen  to  differ  about  first  principles. 

When  men  differ  about  things  that  are  taken  to  be 
first  principles,  or  self-evident  truths,  reasoning  seems 
to  be  at  an  end.  Each  party  appeals  to  common 
sense ; and  if  one  man’s  common  sense  gives  one  de- 
termination, another  man’s  a contrary  determination, 
there  would  seem,  at  first  sight,  to  be  no  remedy  but  to 
leave  every  man  to  enjoy  his  own  opinion.  It  is  in 
vain  to  reason  with  a man  who  denies  the  first  princi- 
ples on  which  the  reasoning  is  grounded.  Thus,  it 
would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  the  proof  of  a proposition 
in  Euclid  to  a man  who  denies  the  axioms.  Indeed, 
we  ought  never  to  reason  with  men  who  deny  first 
principles /rom  obstinacy  and  unwillingness  to  yield  to 
reason. 

But  is  it  not  possible,  that  men  who  really  love  truths 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


371 


and  are  open  to  conviction^  may  differ  about  first  princi- 
ples ? 

I think  it  is  possible,  and  that  it  cannot,  without 
great  want  of  charity,  be  denied  to  be  possible. 

When  this  happens,  every  man  who  believes  that 
there  is  a real  distinction  between  truth  and  error,  and 
that  the  faculties  which  God  has  given  us  are  not  in 
their  nature  fallacious,  must  be  convinced  that  there  is 
a defect,  or  a perversion  of  judgment,  on  the  one  side  or 
the  other.  A man  of  candor  and  humility  will,  in  such 
a case,  very  naturally  suspect  his  own  judgment,  so  far 
as  to  be  desirous  to  enter  into  a serious  examination 
even  of  what  he  has  long  held  as  a first  principle.  He 
will  think  it  not  impossible  that,  although  his  heart  be 
upright,  his  judgment  may  have  been  perverted,  by 
education,  by  authority,  by  party  zeal,  or  by  some  other 
of  the  common  causes  of  error,  from  the  influence  of 
which  neither  parts  nor  integrity  exempt  the  human 
understanding. 

In  such  a state  of  mind,  so  amiable,  and  so  becom- 
ing every  good  man,  has  nature  left  him  destitute  of 
any  rational  means  by  which  he  may  be  enabled,  either 
to  correct  his  iud^ment  if  it  be  wrong,  or  to  confirm  it 
if  it  be  right  ? 

I hope  it  is  not  so.  I hope  that,  by  the  means  which 
nature  has  furnished,  controversies  about  first  principles 
may  be  brought  to  an  issue,  and  that  the  real  lovers  of 
truth  may  come  to  unanimity  with  regard  to  them.  It 
is  true,  that,  in  other  controversies,  the  process  by  which 
the  truth  of  a proposition  is  discovered,  or  its  falsehood 
detected,  is  by  showing  its  necessary  connection  with 
first  principles,  or  its  repugnancy  to  them.  It  is  true, 
likewise,  that,  when  the  controversy  is  whether  a propo 
sition  be  itself  a first  principle,  this  process  cannot  be 
applied.  The  truth,  therefore,  in  controversies  of  this 
kind,  labors  under  a peculiar  disadvantage.  But  it  has 
advantages  of  another  kind  to  compensate  this. 

For,  in  the  first  place,  in  such  controversies,  every 
man  is  a competent  judge  ; and  therefore  it  is  difficult  to 
impose  upon  mankind. 


372 


JUDGMENT. 


To  judge  of  first  principles  requires  no  more  than  a 
sound  mind  free  from  prejudice,  and  a distinct  concep- 
tion of  the  question.  The  learned  and  the  unlearned, 
the  philosopher  and  the  day-laborer,  are  upon  a level, 
and  will  pass  the  same  judgment,  when  they  are  not 
misled  by  some  bias,  or  taught  to  renounce  their  under- 
standing from  some  mistaken  religious  principle. 

In  matters  beyond  the  reach  of  common  understand- 
ing, the  many  are  led  by  the  few,  and  willingly  yield  to 
their  authority.  But  in  matters  of  common  sense,  the 
few  must  yield  to  the  many,  when  local  and  temporary 
prejudices  are  removed.  No  man  is  now  moved  by  the 
subtile  arguments  of  Zeno  against  motion,  though  per- 
haps he  knows  not  how  to  answer  them. 

The  ancient  skeptical  system  furnishes  a remarkable 
instance  of  this  truth.  That  system,  of  which  Pyrrho 
was  reputed  the  father,  was  carried  down,  through  a 
succession  of  ages,  by  very  able  and  acute  philosophers, 
who  taught  men  to  believe  nothing  at  all,  and  esteemed 
it  the  highest  pitch  of  human  wisdom  to  withhold  as- 
sent from  every  proposition  whatsoever.  It  was  sup- 
ported with  very  great  subtilty  and  learning,  as  we  see 
from  the  writings  of  Sextus  Empiricus,  the  only  author 
of  that  sect  whose  writings  have  come  down  to  our 
age. 

Yet,  as  this  system  was  an  insult  upon  the  common 
sense  of  mankind,  it  died  away  of  itself ; and  it  would 
be  in  vain  to  attempt  to  revive  it.  The  modern  skep- 
ticism, I mean  that  of  Mr.  Hume,  is  very  different  from 
the  ancient,  otherwise  it  would  not  have  been  allowed 
a hearing ; and,  when  it  has  lost  the  grace  of  novelty, 
it  will  die  away  also,  though  it  should  never  be  re- 
futed. 

Secondly^  we  may  observe,  that  opinions  which  con- 
tradict first  principles  are  distinguished  from  other  er- 
rors by  this,  — that  they  are  not  only  false^  but  absurd; 
and,  to  discountenance  absurdity,  nature  has  given  us 
a particular  emotion,  — to  wit,  that  of  ridicule^  — which 
seems  intended  for  this  very  purpose  of  putting  out  of 
countenance  what  is  absurd,  either  in  opinion  or  prac- 
tice. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


373 


This  weapon,  when  properly  applied,  cuts  with  as 
keen  an  edge  as  argument.  Nature  has  furnished  us 
with  the  first  to  expose  absurdity,  as  with  the  last  to 
refute  error.  Both  are  well  fitted  for  their  several 
offices,  and  are  equally  friendly  to  truth,  when  properly 
used.  Both  may  be  abused  to  serve  the  cause  of  error ; 
but  the  same  degree  of  judgment  which  serves  to  detect 
the  abuse  of  argument  in  false  reasoning,  serves  to  de- 
tect the  abuse  of  ridicule  when  it  is  wrongly  directed. 
Some  have  from  nature  a happier  talent  for  ridicule 
than  others ; and  the  same  thing  holds  with  regard  to 
the  talent  of  reasoning.  But  it  must  be  acknowledged, 
that  the  emotion  of  ridicule,  even  when  most  natural, 
may  be  stifled  by  an  emotion  of  a contrary  nature,  and 
cannot  operate  till  that  is  removed.  Thus,  if  the  notion 
of  sanctity  is  annexed  to  an  object,  it  is  no  longer  a 
laughable  matter  ; and  this  visor  must  be  pulled  off  be- 
fore it  appears  ridiculous.  Hence  we  see,  that  notions 
which  appear  most  ridiculous  to  all  who  consider  them 
coolly  and  indifferently  have  no  such  appearance  to 
those  who  never  thought  of  them  but  under  the  impres- 
sion of  religious  awe  and  dread.  And  even  where  re- 
ligion is  not  concerned,  the  novelty  of  an  opinion  to 
those  who  are  too  fond  of  novelties ; the  gravity  and 
solemnity  with  which  it  is  introduced  ; the  opinion  we 
have  entertained  of  the  author  ; its  apparent  connection 
with  principles  already  embraced,  or  subserviency  to 
interests  which  we  have  at  heart ; and,  above  all,  its 
being  fixed  in  our  minds  at  that  time  of  life  when  we 
receive  implicitly  what  we  are  taught,  — may  cover  its 
absurdity,  and  fascinate  the  understanding  for  a time. 

But  if  ever  we  are  able  to  view  it  naked,  and  stripped 
of  those  adventitious  circumstances  from  which  it  bor- 
rowed its  importance  and  authority,  the  natural  emotion 
of  ridicule  will  exert  its  force.  An  absurdity  can  be  en- 
tertained by  men  of  sense  no  longer  than  it  wears  a 
mask.  When  any  man  is  found  who  has  the  skill  or 
the  boldness  to  pull  off  the  mask,  it  can  no  longer  bear 
the  light ; it  slinks  into  dark  corners  for  a while,  and 
then  is  no  more  heard  of  but  as  an  obiect  of  ridicule. 

32 


374 


JUDGMENT. 


Thus  I conceive  that  first  principles,  which  are  really 
the  dictates  of  common  sense,  and  directly  opposed  to 
absurdities  in  opinion,  will  always,  from  the  constitu- 
tion of  human  nature,  support  themselves,  and  gain 
rather  than  lose  ground  among  mankind. 

It  may  be  observed,  thirdly^  that  although  it  is  con- 
trary to  the  nature  of  first  principles  to  admit  of  direct 
or  apodictical  proof ; yet  there  are  certain  ways  of  rea- 
soning even  about  them^  by  which  those  that  are  just 
and  solid  may  be  confirmed^  and  those  that  are  false  may 
be  detected. 

It  may  here  be  proper  to  mention  some  of  the  topics 
from  which  we  may  reason  in  matters  of  this  kind. 

First,  It  is  a good  argument  ad  hominem^  if  it  can 
be  shown,  that  a first  principle  which  a man  rejects 
stands  upon  the  same  footing  with  others  which  he 
admits ; for,  when  this  is  the  case,  he  must  be  guilty 
of  an  inconsistency  who  holds  the  one  and  rejects  the 
other. 

Thus  the  faculties  of  consciousness,  of  memory,  of 
external  sense,  and  of  reason,  are  all  equally  the  gifts 
of  nature.  No  good  reason  can  be  assigned  for  receiv- 
ing the  testimony  of  one  of  them,  which  is  not  of  equal 
force  with  regard  to  the  others.  The  greatest  skeptics 
admit  the  testimony  of  consciousness,  and  allow  that 
what  it  testifies  is  to  be  held  as  a first  principle.  If, 
therefore,  they  reject  the  immediate  testimony  of  sense, 
or  of  memory,  they  are  guilty  of  an  inconsistency. 

Secondly,  A first  principle  may  admit  of  a proof  ad 
absurdum. 

In  this  kind  of  proof,  which  is  very  common  in 
mathematics,  we  suppose  the  contradictory  proposition 
to  be  true.  We  trace  the  consequences  of  that  suppo- 
sition in  a train  of  reasoning  ; and  if  we  find  any  of  its 
necessary  consequences  to  be  manifestly  absurd,  we 
conclude  the  supposition  from  which  it  followed  to  be 
false  ; and  therefore  its  contradictory  to  be  true.  There 
is  hardly  any  proposition,  especially  of  those  that  may 
claim  the  character  of  first  principles,  that  stands  alone 
and  unconnected.  It  draws  many  others  along  with  it 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


375 


in  a chain  that  cannot  be  broken.  He  that  takes  it  up 
must  bear  the  burden  of  all  its  consequences  ; and  if 
that  is  too  heavy  for  him  to  bear,  he  must  not  pretend 
to  take  it  up. 

Thirdly,  I conceive  that  the  consent  of  ages  and  na- 
tions^ of  the  learned  and  unlearned^  ought  to  have  great 
authority  with  regard  to  first  principles,  where  every 
man  is  a competent  judge. 

Our  ordinary  conduct  in  life  is  built  upon  first  prin- 
ciples, as  well  as  our  speculations  in  philosophy,  and 
every  motive  to  action  supposes  some  belief.  When 
we  find  a general  agreement  among  men  in  principles 
that  concern  human  life,  this  must  have  great  authority 
with  every  sober  mind  that  loves  truth.  Still,  it  will  be 
said.  What  has  authority  to  do  in  matters  of  opinion  ? 
Is  truth  to  be  determined  by  most  votes  ? Or  is  au- 
thority to  be  again  raised  out  of  its  grave  to  tyrannize 
over  mankind  ? 

Authority,  though  a very  tyrannical  mistress  to  pri- 
vate judgment,  may  yet,  on  some  occasions,  be  a useful 
handmaid ; this  is  all  she  is  entitled  to,  and  this  is  all 
I plead  in  her  behalf.  The  justice  of  this  plea  will 
appear  by  putting  a case  in  a science,  in  which,  of 
all  sciences,  authority  is  acknowledged  to  have  least 
weight. 

Suppose  a mathematician  has  made  a discovery  in 
that  science,  which  he  thinks  important ; that  he  has 
put  his  demonstration  in  just  order  ; and,  after  examin- 
ing it  with  an  attentive  eye,  has  found  no  flaw  in  it.  I 
would  ask.  Will  there  not  be  still  in  his  breast  some 
diffidence,  some  jealousy  lest  the  ardor  of  invention 
may  have  made  him  overlook  some  false  step  ? This 
must  be  granted.  He  commits  his  demonstration  to 
the  examination  of  a mathematical  friend,  whom  he  es- 
teems a competent  judge,  and  waits  with  impatience 
the  issue  of  his  judgment.  Here  I would  ask  again, 
whether  the  verdict  of  his  friend,  according  as  it  is 
favorable  or  unfavorable,  will  not  greatly  increase  or 
diminish  his  confidence  in  his  own  judgment.  Most 
certainly  it  will,  and  it  ought.  If  the  judgment  of  his 


876 


JUDGMENT. 


friend  agree  with  his  own,  especially  if  it  be  confirmed 
by  two  or  three  able  judges,  he  rests  secure  of  his  dis- 
covery without  further  examination  ; but  if  it  be  unfa- 
vorable, he  is  brought  back  into  a kind  of  suspense, 
until  the  part  that  is  suspected  undergoes  a new  and  a 
more  rigorous  examination. 

I hope  what  is  supposed  in  this  case  is  agreeable  to 
nature,  and  to  the  experience  of  candid  and  modest 
men  on  such  occasions  ; yet  here  we  see  a man’s  judg- 
ment, even  in  a mathematical  demonstration,  conscious 
of  some  feebleness  in  itself,  seeking  the  aid  of  authority 
to  support  it,  greatly  strengthened  by  that  authority, 
and  hardly  able  to  stand  erect  against  it,  without  some 
new  aid. 

Now,  in  a matter  of  common  sense,  every  man  is  no 
less  a competent  judge,  than  a mathematician  is  in  a 
mathematical  demonstration ; and  there  must  be  a 
great  presumption  that  the  judgment  of  mankind,  in 
such  a matter,  is  the  natural  issue  of  those  faculties 
which  God  has  given  them.  Such  a judgment  can  be 
erroneous  only  when  there  is  some  cause  of  the  error^ 
as  general  as  the  error  is.  When  this  can  be  shown  to 
be  the  case,  I acknowledge  it  ought  to  have  its  due 
weight.  But  to  suppose  a general  deviation  from  truth 
among  mankind  in  things  self-evident,  of  which  no 
cause  can  be  assigned,  is  highly  unreasonable. 

Perhaps  it  may  be  thought  impossible  to  collect  the 
general  opinion  of  men  upon  any  point  whatsoever ; 
and,  therefore,  that  this  authority  can  serve  us  in  no 
stead  in  examining  first  principles.  But  I apprehend, 
that,  in  many  cases,  this  is  neither  impossible  nor  diffi- 
cult. 

Who  can  doubt  whether  men  have  universally  be- 
lieved the  existence  of  a material  world  ? Who  can 
doubt  whether  men  have  universally  believed,  that  every 
change  that  happens  in  nature  must  have  a cause  ? 
Who  can  doubt  whether  men  have  universally  believed 
that  there  is  a right  and  a wrong  in  human  conduct,  — 
some  things  that  merit  blame,  and  others  that  are  en- 
titled to  approbation  ? The  universality  of  these  opin- 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


377 


ions,  and  of  many  such  that  might  be  named,  is  suf- 
ficiently evident,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  human  con- 
duct, as  far  as  our  acquaintance  reaches,  and  from  the 
history  of  all  ages  and  nations  of  which  we  have  any 
records. 

There  are  other  opinions  that  appear  to  be  universal, 
from  what  is  common  in  the  structure  of  all  languages. 
Language  is  the  express  image  and  picture  of  human 
thoughts  ; and  from  the  picture  we  may  draw  some 
certain  conclusions  concerning  the  original.  We  find 
in  all  languages  the  same  parts  of  speech ; we  find 
nouns,  substantive  and  adjective ; verbs,  active  and 
passive,  in  their  various  tenses,  numbers,  and  moods. 
Some  rules  of  syntax  are  the  same  in  all  languages. 

Now,  what  is  common  in  the  structure  of  languages 
indicates  a uniformity  of  opinion  in  those  things  upon 
which  that  structure  is  grounded.  The  distinction  be- 
tween substances  and  the  qualities  belonging  to  them, 
between  thought  and  the  being  that  thinks,  between 
thought  and  the  objects  of  thought,  is  to  be  found  in 
the  structure  of  all  languages  ; and  therefore  systems 
of  philosophy,  which  abolish  those  distinctions,  wage 
war  with  the  common  sense  of  mankind. 

We  are  apt  to  imagine,  that  those  who  formed  lan- 
guages were  no  metaphysicians ; but  the  first  principles 
of  all  sciences  are  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  and 
lie  open  to  all  men  ; and  every  man,  who  has  con- 
sidered the  structure  of  language  in  a philosophical 
light,  will  find  infallible  proofs  that  those  who  have 
framed  it,  and  those  who  use  it  with  understanding, 
have  the  power  of  making  accurate  distinctions,  and  of 
forming  general  conceptions,  as  well  as  philosophers. 
Nature  has  given  those  powers  to  all  men,  and  they 
can  use  them  when  their  occasions  require  it ; but  they 
leave  it  to  the  philosophers  to  give  names  to  them,  and 
to  descant  upon  their  nature.  • In  like  manner,  nature 
has  given  eyes  to  all  men,  and  they  can  make  good 
use  of  them  ; but  the  structure  of  the  eye,  and  the 
theory  of  vision,  are  the  business  of  philosophers. 

Fourthly,  Opinions  that  appear  so  early  in  the  minds 

32^ 


378 


JUDGMENT. 


of  men,  that  they  cannot  be  the  effect  of  education^  or  of 
false  reasonings  have  a good  claim  to  be  considered  as 
first  principles.  Thus  the  belief  we  have,  that  the  per- 
sons about  us  are  living  and  intelligent  beings,  is  a 
belief  for  which,  perhaps,  we  can  give  some  reason, 
when  we  are  able  to  reason ; but  we  had  this  belief 
before  we  could  reason,  and  before  we  could  learn  it  by 
instruction.  It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  an  immediate 
effect  of  our  constitution. 

Fifthly*  The  last  topic  I shall  mention  is,  when  an 
opinion  is  so  necessary  in  the  conduct  of  lifCs  thats  icith- 
out  the  belief  of  it,  a man  must  be  led  into  a thousand 
absurdities  in  practices  such  an  opinion,  when  we  can 
give  no  other  reason  for  it,  may  safely  be  taken  for  a 
first  principle. 

Thus  I have  endeavoured  to  show,  that,  although 
first  principles  are  not  capable  of  direct  proof,  yet  dif- 
ferences that  may  happen  with  regard  to  them  among 
men  of  candor  are  not  without  remedy ; that  nature  has 
not  left  us  destitute  of  means  by  which  we  may  dis- 
cover errors  of  this  kind ; and  that  there  are  ways  of 
reasoning,  with  regard  to  first  principles,  by  which 
those  that  are  truly  such  may  be  distinguished  from 
vulgar  errors  or  prejudices.* 


* On  the  means  of  discriminating  and  determining  first  principles,  which 
is  one  of  the  most  difficult  points  in  the  philosophy  of  common  sense,  Sir 
W.  Hamilton,  in  Note  A,  § 4,  expresses  himself  thus  : — “ These  charac- 
ters, I think,  may  be  reduced  to  four:  — P,  their  incomprehensibility;  2®, 
their  simplicity ; 3°,  their  necessity  and  absolute  universality ; 4”,  their  com- 
parative evidence  and  certainty. 

“ 1 . In  reference  to  the  first ; — a conviction  is  incomprehensible  when 
there  is  merely  given  us  in  consciousness  That  its  object  is  (ort  eWt)  ; 
and  when  we  are  unable  to  comprehend  through  a higher  notion  or  belief, 
Why.  or  How  it  is  (6tort  ecrrt).  When  we  are  able  to  comprehend  why 
or  how  a thing  is,  the  belief  of  the  existence  of  that  thing  is  not  a primary 
datum  of  consciousness,  but  a subsumption  under  the  cognition  or  belief 
which  affords  its  reason. 

“ 2.  As  to  the  second;  — it  is  manifest,  if  a cognition  or  belief  be  made 
up  of,  and  can  be  explicated  into,  a plurality  of  cognitions  or  beliefs,  that, 
as  a compound,  it  cannot  be  original. 

“ 3.  Touching  the  third  ; — necessity  and  universality  may  be  regarded 
as  coincident.  For  when  a belief  is  necessary,  it  is,  eo  ipso,  universal ; and 
that  a belief  is  universal  is  a certain  index  that  it  must  be  necessary.  See 
Leibnitz,  Nouveaux  Essais,  Lib.  I.  § 4.  To  prove  the  necessity,  the  uni- 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


879 


III.  Enumeration  of  the  First  Principles  of  Contin- 
gent Truths,]  The  truths  that  fall  within  the  compass 
of  human  knowledge,  whether  they  be  self-evident,  or 
deduced  from  those  that  are  self-evident,  may  be  re- 


versality  must,  however,  be  absolute  ; for  a relative  universality  indicates 
no  more  than  custom  and  education,  howbeit  the  subjects  themselves  may 
deem  that  they  follow  only  the  dictates  of  nature.  As  St.  Jerome  has  it, 
— Unaquceque  gens  hoc  legem  naturoe  putat^  quod  didicit. 

“ It  is  to  be  observed  that  the  necessity  here  spoken  of  is  of  two  kinds. 
There  is  one  necessity,  when  we  cannot  construe  it  to  our  minds  as  pos- 
sible, that  the  deliverance  of  consciousness  should  not  be  true.  This  log- 
ical impossibility  occurs  in  the  case  of  what  are  called  necessary  truths,  — 
truths  of  reason  or  intelligence  ; as  in  the  law  of  causality^  the  law  of  substance^ 
and  still  more  in  the  laws  of  identity^  contradiction^  and  excluded  middle. 
There  is  another  necessity,  when  it  is  not  unthinkable  that  the  deliverance 
of  consciousness  may  possibly  be  false,  but,  at  the  same  time,  when  we 
cannot  but  admit  that  this  deliverance  is  of  such  or  such  a purport.  This 
is  seen  in  the  case  of  what  are  called  contingent  truths^  or  truths  of  fact. 
Thus,  for  example,  I can  theoretically  suppose  that  the  external  object  I 
am  conscious  of  in  perception  may  be,  in  reality,  nothing  but  a mode  of 
mind  or  self  I am  unable,  however,  to  think  that  it  does  not  appear  to 
m^ — that  consciousness  does  not  compel  me  to  regard  it  — as  a mode  of 
matter  or  not-self  And  such  being  the  case,  I cannot  practically  believe 
the  supposition  I am  able  speculatively  to  maintain.  For  I cannot  believe 
this  supposition  without  believing  that  the  last  ground  of  all  belief  is  not 
to  be  believed  ; which  is  self-contradictory.  ‘ Nature,’  says  Pascal,  ‘ con- 
founds the  Pyrrhonist  ’ ; and,  among  similar  confessions,  those  of  Hume, 
of  Fichte,  of  Hommel,  may  suffice  for  an  acknowledgment  of  the  impos- 
sibility which  the  skeptic,  the  idealist,  the  fatalist,  finds  in  practically  be- 
lieving the  scheme  which  he  views  as  theoretically  demonstrated. 

“ 4.  The  fourth  and  last  character  of  our  original  beliefs  is  their  com- 
parative evidence  and  certainty.  This,  along  with  the  third,  is  well  stated 
by  Aristotle,  — ‘ What  appears  to  all,  that  we  affirm  to  he ; and  he  who 
rejects  this  belief  will  assuredly  advance  nothing  better  deserving  of  credence.' 
And  again  ; — ‘If  we  know  and  believe  through  certain  original  princi- 
ples, we  must  know  and  believe  these  with  paramount  certainty,  for  the 
very  reason  that  we  know  and  believe  all  else  through  them.’  And  such 
are  the  truths  in  regard  to  which  the  Aphrodisian  says,  — ‘ Though  some 
men  may  verbally  dissent,  all  men  are  in  their  hearts  agreed.’  This  con- 
stitutes the  first  of  Buffier’s  essential  qualities  of  primary  truths,  which  is, 
as  he  expresses  it,  ‘ to  be  so  clear,  that,  if  we  attempt  to  prove  or  to  dis- 
prove them,  this  can  be  done  only  by  propositions  which  are  manifestly 
neither  more  evident  nor  more  certain.'  ” 

Compare  Buffier’s  First  Truths,  Part  I.  Chap.  VII. ; Stewart’s  Elements, 
Part  II.  Chap.  I ; Coleridge’s  Aids  to  Reflection,  comment  on  the  eighth 
of  his  Aphorisms  on  Spiritual  Religion  ; Jacques,  Sur  le  Sens  Commun, 
comme  Principe  et  comme  Mithode  Philosophique,  passim,  published  in  Mem. 
de  I' Acad.  Royale  des  Sciences  Mor.  et  Pol.,  Tome  I.,  Savants  Etrangers ; 
Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  Part  I.  Book  I. ; Mill’s 
System  of  Logic,  Book  II.  Chap.  V.  Most  of  these  authorities  treat  ex- 
clusively of  the  first  principles  of  necessary  truths.  — Ed. 


380 


JUDGMENT. 


duced  to  two  classes.  They  are  either  necessary  and 
immutable  truths^  whose  contrary  is  impossible  ; or  they 
are  contingent  and  mutable^  depending  upon  some  effect 
of  will  and  power,  which  had  a beginning,  and  may 
have  an  end. 

That  a cone  is  the  third  part  of  a cylinder  of  the 
same  base  and  the  same  altitude,  is  a necessary  truth. 
It  dep^ends  not  upon  the  will  and  power  of  any  being. 
It  is  immutably  true,  and  the  contrary  impossible.  That 
the  sun  is  the  centre,  about  which  the  earth,  and  the 
other  planets  of  our  system,  perform  their  revolutions, 
is  a truth  ; but  it  is  not  a necessary  truth.  It  depends 
upon  the  power  and  will  of  that  Being  who  made  the 
sun  and  all  the  planets,  and  who  gave  them  those 
motions  that  seemed  best  to  him. 

As  the  minds  of  men  are  occupied  much  more  about 
truths  that  are  contingent  than  about  those  that  are 
necessary,  I shall  first  endeavour  to  point  out  the  prin- 
ciples of  the  former  kind.  If  the  enumeration  should 
appear  to  some  redundant,  to  others  deficient,  and  to 
others  both  ; if  things  which  I conceive  to  be  first  prin- 
ciples should  to  others  appear  to  be  vulgar  errors,  or  to 
be  truths  which  derive  their  evidence  from  other  truths, 
and  therefore  not  first  principles ; in  these  things  every 
man  must  judge  for  himself. 

1.  Firsts  then,  I hold,  as  a first  principle,  the  existence 
of  every  thing  of  which  I am  conscious. 

Consciousness  is  an  operation  of  the  understanding 
of  its  own  kind,  and  cannot  be  logically  defined.  The 
objects  of  it  are  our  present  pains,  our  pleasures,  our 
hopes,  our  fears,  our  desires,  our  doubts,  our  thoughts 
of  every  kind ; in  a word,  all  the  passions,  and  all  the 
actions  and  operations  of  our  own  minds,  while  they 
are  present.  We  may  remember  them  when  they  are 
past ; but  we  are  conscious  of  them  only  while  they 
are  present. 

When  a man  is  conscious  of  pain,  he  is  certain  of 
its  existence ; when  he  is  conscious  that  he  doubts,  or 
believes,  he  is  certain  of  the  existence  of  those  oper- 
ations. But  the  irresistible  conviction  he  has  of  the 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


381 


reality  of  those  operations  is  not  the  effect  of  reason- 
ing; it  is  immediate  and  intuitive.  The  existence, 
therefore,  of  Those  passions  and  operations  of  our 
minds,  of  which  we  are  conscious,  is  a first  principle, 
which  Nature  requires  us  to  believe  upon  her  authority. 

If  I am  asked  to  prove  that  I cannot  be  deceived  by 
consciousness,  — to  prove  that  it  is  not  a fallacious 
sense,  — I can  find  no  proof.  I cannot  find  any  ante- 
cedent truth  from  which  it  is  deduced,  or  upon  which 
its  evidence  depends.  It  seems  to  disdain  any  such 
derived  authority,  and  to  claim  my  assent  in  its  own 
right.  If  any  man  could  be  found  so  frantic  as  to 
deny  that  he  thinks,  while  he  is  conscious  of  it,  I may 
wonder,  I may  laugh,  or  I may  pity  him,  but  I cannot 
reason  the  matter  with  him.  We  have  no  common 
principles  from  which  we  may  reason,  and  therefore 
can  never  join  issue  in  an  argument. 

This,  I think,  is  the  only  principle  of  common  sense 
that  has  never  directly  been  called  in  question.*  It 
seems  to  be  so  firmly  rooted  in  the  minds  of  men,  as  to 
retain  its  authority  with  the  greatest  skeptics.  Mr. 
Hume,  after  annihilating  body  and  mind,  time  and 
space,  action  and  causation,  and  even  his  own  mind, 
acknowledges  the  reality  of  the  thoughts,  sensations, 
and  passions  of  which  he  is  conscious. 

No  philosopher  has  attempted  by  any  hypothesis  to 
account  for  this  consciousness  of  our  own  thoughts, 
and  the  certain  knowledge  of  their  real  existence  which 
accompanies  it.  By  this  they  seem  to  acknowledge, 
that  this  at  least  is  an  original  power  of  the  mind ; a 
power  by  which  we  not  only  have  ideas,  but  original 
judgments,  and  the  knowledge  of  real  existence. 

I cannot  reconcile  this  immediate  knowledge  of  the 
operations  -of  our  own  minds  with  Mr.  Locke’s  theory, 
that  all  knowledge  consists  in  perceiving  the  agreement 
and  disagreement  of  ideas.  What  are  the  ideas,  from 


* It  could  not  possibly  be  called  in  question.  For,  in  doubting  the  fact 
of  his  consciousness,  the  skeptic  must  at  least  affirm  the  fact  of  his  doubt ; 
but  to  affirm  a doubt  is  to  affirm  the  consciousness  of  it ; the  doubt  would, 
therefore,  be  self-contradictory,  — i.  e.  annihilate  itself.  — H. 


382 


JUDGMENT. 


whose  comparison  the  knowledge  of  our  own  thoughts 
results  ? Or  what  are  the  agreements  or  disagree- 
ments which  convince  a man  that  he  isr  in  pain  when 
he  feels  it.* 

2.  Another  first  principle,  I think,  is,  that  the  thoughts 
of  which  I am  conscious  are  the  thoughts  of  a being 
which  I call  myself,  my  mind,  my  person. 

The  thoughts  and  feelings  of  which  we  are  con- 
scious are  continually  changing,  and  the  thought  of  this 
moment  is  not  the  thought  of  the  last  ; but  some- 
thing which  I call  myself  remains  under  this  change  of 
thought.  This  self  has  the  same  relation  to  all  the  suc- 
cessive thoughts  I am  conscious  of;  they  are  all  my 
thoughts  ; and  every  thought  which  is  not  my  thought 
must  be  the  thought  of  some  other  person. 

If  any  man  asks  a proof  of  this,  I confess  I can  give 
none  ; there  is  an  evidence  in  the  proposition  itself 
which  I am  unable  to  resist.  Shall  I think,  that 
thought  can  stand  by  itself  without  a thinking  being  ? 
or  that  ideas  can  feel  pleasure  or  pain  ? My  nature 
dictates  to  me  that  it  is  impossible.  And  that  nature 
has  dictated  the  same  to  all  men  appears  from  the 
structure  of  all  languages  : for  in  all  languages  men 
have  expressed  thinking,  reasoning,  willing,  loving, 
hating,  by  personal  verbs,  which  from  their  nature  re- 
quire a person  who  thinks,  reasons,  wills,  loves,  or 
hates.  From  w’hich  it  appears,  that  men  have  been 
taught  by  nature  to  believe  that  thought  requires  a 
thinker,  reason  a reasoner,  and  love  a lover.f 


* See  M.  Cousin’s  criticism  on  Locke’s  theory  of  knowledge,  showing 
its  inadequacy  in  respect  to  all  immediate  or  ultimate  cognitions,  and  all 
cognitions  of  real  existences  of  whatever  kind.  Elements  of  Psychology. 
Chap.  VIIL  and  IX.  — Ed. 

t This  is  precisely  what  Descartes  intended  by  his  celebrated  enthy- 
mem,  Cogito,  ergo  sum^  — so  often  objected  to  by  Reid  and  others,  and  so 
feebly  and  hesitatingly  defended  by  Stewart,  Essays,  Ess.  I.  Chap.  I.  M. 
Cousin,  in  his  Fragments  Philosophiques,  3d  ed.,  Tome  I.  p.  334  et  seq.,  has 
set  the  question  in  its  true  light ; — “ Before  Spinoza  and  Reid,  Gassendi 
had  attacked  the  enthymem  of  Descartes.  ‘ The  proposition,  I think, 
therefore  I am,  supposes,’  says  Gassendi,  ‘this  major, — That  which  thinks 
exists;  and  consequently  involves  a begging  of  the  question.’  To  this 
Descartes  replies: — ‘I  do  not  beg  the  question,  for  I do  not  suppose 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


383 


Here  we  must  leave  Mr.  Hume,  who  conceives  it  to 
be  a vulgar  error,  that,  besides  the  thoughts  we  are  con- 
scious of,  there  is  a mind  which  is  the  subject  of  those 
thoughts.  If  the  mind  be  any  thing  else  than  impres- 
sions and  ideas,  it  must  be  a word  without  a meaning. 
The  mind,  therefore,  according  to  this  philosopher,  is  a 
word  which  signifies  a bundle  of  perceptions  ; or,  when 
he  defines  it  more  accurately,  “ it  is  that  succession  of 
related  ideas  and  impressions,  of  which  we  have  an  in- 
timate memory  and  consciousness.’’ 


any  major.  I maintain  that  the  proposition,  I thinlc.^  therefore  I exist., 
is  a particular  truth  which  is  introduced  into  the  mind  without  recourse  to 
any  more  general  truth,  and  independently  of  any  logical  deduction.  It  is 
not  a prejudice,  but  a natural  judgment,  which  at  once  and  irresistibly 
strikes  the  intelligence.’  ‘The  notion  of  existence,’  says  he,  in  reply  to 
the  objections,  ‘ is  a primitive  notion,  not  obtained  by  any  syllogism,  but 
evident  in  itself ; and  the  mind  discovers  it  by  intuition.’  Reasoning  does 
not  logically  deduce  existence  from  thought ; but  the  mind  cannot  think 
without  knowing  itself,  because  being  is  given  in  and  under  thought ; — 
Cogito.,  ergo  sum.  The  certainty  of  thinking  does  not  go  before  the  certain- 
ty of  existence  ; the  former  contains  and  develops  the  latter  ; they  are  two 
contemporaneous  verities  blended  in  one  fundamental  verity.  The  funda- 
mental complex  verity  is  the  sole  principle  of  the  Cartesian  philosophy.” 

But  Reid  would  still  object,  “ Why  not  begin  with  some  fact  of  the  senses, 
as  well  as  with  some  fact  of  consciousness,  inasmuch  as  both  rest  on  the 
same  evidenced’  — They  do  not  rest  on  the  same  evidence ; for,  as  has 
been  repeatedly  intimated  before,  doubting  the  consciousness  is  the  only 
doubt  which  is  absolutely  self-contradictory,  which  annihilates  itself,  and 
which,  therefore,  not  only  cannot  be  defended,  but  cannot  be  entertained. 
Descartes,  following  a method  of  the  merits  of  which  we  do  not  now  speak, 
was  in  quest  of  some  fact  or  principle  which  he  could  not  possibly  doubt 
even  in  speculation,  and  such  a fact  or  principle  he  found  in  the  testimony 
of  consciousness  alone.  This,  therefore,  he  not  only  made  his  point  of  de- 
parture, but  the  point  d’appui  of  his  whole  system,  professing  to  accept 
nothing  but  the  facts  of  consciousness  and  what  these  facts  either  contain 
or  presuppose.  In  the  same  spirit  one  of  the  early  English  followers  of 
Descartes  wrote  ; — “ If  we  reflect  but  upon  our  own  souls,  how  manifestly 
do  the  species  [notions]  of  reason,  freedom,  perception,  and  the  like,  offer 
themselves  to  us,  whereby  we  may  know  a thousand  times  more  distinctly 
what  our  souls  are  than  what  our  bodies  are.  For  the  former  we  know  by 
an  immediate  converse  with  ourselves,  and  a distinct  sense  of  their  opera- 
tions ; whereas  all  our  knowledge  of  the  body  is  little  better  than  merely 
historical,  which  we  gather  up  by  scraps  and  piecemeal  from  more  doubt- 
ful and  uncertain  experiments  which  we  make  of  them  : but  the  notions 
which  we  have  of  a mind,  i.  e.  something  within  us  that  thinks,  apprehends, 
reasons,  and  discourses,  are  so  clear,  and  distinct  from  all  those  notions 
which  we  fasten  upon  a body,  that  we  can  easily  conceive  that,  if  all  body- 
being in  the  world  were  destroyed,  yet  we  might  then  as  well  subsist  as 
now  we  do.”  — Smith’s  Select  Discourses,  Disc.  IV.  Chap.  VI.  — En. 


384 


JUDGMENT. 


I am,  therefore,  that  succession  of  related  ideas  and 
impressions  of  which  I have  the  intimate  memory  and 
consciousness.  But  who  is  the  I that  has  this  memory 
and  consciousness  of  a succession  of  ideas  and  impres- 
sions ? Why,  it  is  nothing  but  that  succession  itself. 
Hence  I learn,  that  this  succession  of  ideas  and  impres- 
sions intimately  remembers,  and  is  conscious  of  itself. 
I would  wish  to  be  further  instructed,  whether  the  im- 
pressions remember  and  are  conscious  of  the  ideas,  or 
the  ideas  remember  and  are  conscious  of  the  impres- 
sions, or  if  both  remember  and  are  conscious  of  both  ? 
and  whether  the  ideas  remember  those  that  come  after 
them,  as  well  as  those  that  were  before  them  ? These 
are  questions  naturally  arising  from  this  system,  that 
have  not  yet  been  explained. 

This,  however,  is  clear,  that  this  succession  of  ideas 
and  impressions  not  only  remembers  and  is  conscious, 
but  that  it  judges,  reasons,  affirms,  denies  ; nay,  that  it 
eats  and  drinks,  and  is  sometimes  merry  and  some- 
times sad.  If  these  things  can  be  ascribed  to  a succes- 
sion of  ideas  and  impressions,  in  a consistency  with 
common  sense,  I should  be  very  glad  to  know  what  is 
nonsense. 

The  scholastic  philosophers  have  been  wittily  ridi- 
culed, by  representing  them  as  disputing  upon  this 
question,  — Num.  clmncera  bombinans  in  vacuo  possit 
comedere  secundas  intentiones  ? And  I believe  the  wit 
of  man  cannot  invent  a more  ridiculous  question.  But, 
if  Mr.  Hume’s  philosophy  be  admitted,  this  question 
deserves  to  be  treated  more  gravely  ; for  if,  as  we  learn 
from  this  philosophy,  a succession  of  ideas  and  impres- 
sions may  eat,  and  drink,  and  be  merry,  I see  no  good 
reason  why  a chimera,  which,  if  not  the  same,  is  of  kin 
to  an  idea,  may  not  chew  the  cud  upon  that  kind  of 
food  which  the  schoolmen  call  second  intentions* 


* All  this  criticism  of  Hume  proceeds  on  the  erroneous  hypothesis  that 
he  was  a dogmatist.  He  was  a skeptic.,  — that  is,  he  accepted  the  principles 
asserted  by  the  prevalent  dogmatism  ; and  only  showed  that  such  and  such 
conclusions  were,  on  these  principles,  inevitable.  The  absurdity  was  not 
Hume’s,  but  Locke’s.  This  is  the  kind  of  criticism,  however,  with  which 
Hume  is  generally  assailed.  — H. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


385 


3.  Another  first  principle  I take  to  be,  that  those 
things  did  really  happen  ivhich  I distinctly  remember. 
This  has  one  of  the  surest  marks  of  a first  principle ; 
for  no  man  ever  pretended  to  prove  it,  and  yet  no  man 
in  his  wits  calls  it  in  question.  The  testimony  of 
memory,  like  that  of  consciousness,  is  immediate  ; it 
claims  our  assent  upon  its  own  authority.* 

Suppose  that  a learned  counsel,  in  defence  of  a client 
against  the  concurring  testimony  of  witnesses  of  credit, 
should  insist  upon  a new  topic  to  invalidate  the  testi- 
mony. “ Admitting,”  says  he,  the  integrity  of  the 
witnesses,  and  that  they  distinctly  remember  what  they 
have  given  in  evidence,  it  does  not  follow  that  the 
prisoner  is  guilty.  It  has  never  been  proved  that  the 
most  distinct  memory  may  not  be  fallacious.  Show 
me  any  necessary  connection  between  that  act  of  the 
mind  which  we  call  memory,  and  the  past  existence  of 
the  event  remembered.  No  man  has  ever  offered  a 
shadow  of  argument  to  prove  such  a connection  ; yet 
this  is  one  link  of  the  chain  of  proof  against  the 
prisoner ; and  if  it  have  no  strength,  the  whole  proof 
falls  to  the  ground.  Until  this,  therefore,  be  made  evi- 
dent, until  it  can  be  proved,  that  we  may  safely  rest 
upon  the  testimony  of  memory  for  the  truth  of  past 
events,  no  judge  or  jury  can  justly  take  away  the  life 
of  a citizen  upon  so  doubtful  a point.” 

I believe  we  may  take  it  for  granted,  that  this  argu- 
ment from  a learned  counsel  would  have  no  other  effect 
upon  the  judge  or  jury,  than  to  convince  them  that  he 
was  disordered  in  his  judgment.  Counsel  is  allowed 
to  plead  every  thing  for  a client  that  is  fit  to  persuade 
or  to  move  ; yet  I believe  no  counsel  ever  had  the  bold- 
ness to  plead  this  topic.  And  for  what  reason  ? For 
no  other  reason,  surely,  but  because  it  is  absurd.  Now, 
what  is  absurd  at  the  bar  is  so  in  the  philosopher’s 


* The  datum  of  memory  does  not  stand  upon  the  same  ground  as  the 
datum  of  simple  consciousness.  In  so  far  as  memory  is  consciousness,  it 
cannot  be  denied.  We  cannot,  without  contradiction,  deny  the  fact  of 
memory  as  a present  consciousness ; but  we  may,  without  contradiction, 
suppose  that  the  past  given  therein  is  only  an  illusion  of  the  present.  — H. 


386 


JUDGMENT. 


chair.  What  would  be  ridiculous,  if  delivered  to  a jury 
of  honest,  sensible  citizens,  is  no  less  so  when  delivered 
gravely  in  a philosophical  dissertation. 

4.  Another  first  principle  is  our  own  personal  identity 
and  continued  existence^  as  far  back  as  we  remember  any 
thing  distinctly. 

This  we  know  immediately,  and  not  by  reasoning. 
It  seems,  indeed,  to  be  a part  of  the  testimony  of  mem- 
ory. Every  thing  we  remember  has  such  a relation  to 
ourselves,  as  to  imply  necessarily  our  existence  at  the 
time  remembered.  And  there  cannot  be  a more  palpa- 
ble absurdity  than  that  a man  should  remember  what 
happened  before  he  existed.  He  must  therefore  have 
existed  as  far  back  as  he  remembers  any  thing  dis- 
tinctly, if  his  memory  be  not  fallacious.  This  princi- 
ple, therefore,  is  so  connected  with  the  last  mentioned, 
that  it  may  be  doubtful  whether  both  ought  not  to  be 
included  in  one.  Let  every  one  judge  of  this  as  he 
sees  reason.  The  proper  notion  of  identity,  and  the 
opinions  of  Mr.  Locke  on  this  subject,  have  been  con- 
sidered before  under  the  head  of  Memory. 

5.  Another  first  principle,  I think,  is,  that  vm  have 
some  degree  of  power  over  our  actions^  and  the  deter- 
minations of  our  will. 

All  power  must  be  derived  from  the  Fountain  of 
power  and  of  every  good  gift.  Upon  his  good  pleasure 
its  continuance  depends,  and  it  is  always  subject  to  his 
control.  Beings  to  whom  God  has  given  any  degree 
of  power,  and  understanding  to  direct  them  to  the 
proper  use  of  it,  must  be  accountable  to  their  Maker. 
But  those  who  are  intrusted  with  no  power  can  have 
no  account  to  make  ; for  all  good  conduct  consists  in 
the  right  use  of  power  ; all  bad  conduct  in  the  abuse  of 
it.  To  call  to  account  a being  who  never  was  intrusted 
with  any  degree  of  power,  is  an  absurdity  no  less  than 
it  would  be  to  call  to  an  account  an  inanimate  being. 
We  are  sure,  therefore,  if  we  have  any  account  to  make 
to  the  Author  of  our  being,  that  we  must  have  some 
degree  of  power,  which,  as  far  as  it  is  properly  used, 
entitles  us  to  his  approbation  ; and,  when  abused,  ren- 
ders us  obnoxious  to  his  divspleasure. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


387 


It  is  not  easy  to  say  in  what  way  we  first  get  the 
notion  or  idea  of  power.  It  is  neither  an  object  of  sense 
nor  of  consciousness.  We  see  events,  one  succeeding 
another ; but  we  see  not  the  power  by  which  they  are 
produced.  We  are  conscious  of  the  operations  of  our 
minds  ; but  power  is  not  an  operation  of  mind.  If  we 
had  no  notions  but  such  as  are  furnished  by  the  exter- 
nal senses  and  by  consciousness,  it  seems  to  be  impos- 
sible that  we  should  ever  have  any  conception  of  power. 
Accordingly,  Mr.  Hume,  who  has  reasoned  the  most 
accurately  upon  this  hypothesis,  denies  that  we  have 
any  idea  of  power,  and  clearly  refutes  the  account 
given  by  Mr.  Locke  of  the  origin  of  this  idea. 

But  it  is  in  vain  to  reason  from  an  hypothesis  against 
a fact,  the  truth  of  which  every  man  may  see  by  attend- 
ing to  his  own  thoughts.  It  is  evident,  that  all  men, 
very  early  in  life,  not  only  have  an  idea  of  power,  but 
a conviction  that  they  have  some  degree  of  it  in  them- 
selves ; for  this  conviction  is  necessarily  implied  in 
many  operations  of  mind,  which  are  familiar  to  every 
man,  and  without  which  no  man  can  act  the  part  of  a 
reasonable  being. 

First.  It  is  implied  in  every  act  of  volition.  Voli- 
tion, it  is  plain,”  says  Mr.  Locke,  “ is  an  act  of  the 
mind,  knowingly  exerting  that  dominion  which  it  takes 
itself  to  have  over  any  part  of  the  man,  by  employing  it 
in,  or  withholding  it  from,  any  particular  action.”  Ev- 
ery volition  therefore  implies  a conviction  of  power  to 
do  the  action  willed.  A man  may  desire  to  make  a 
visit  to  the  moon,  or  to  the  planet  Jupiter  ; but  nothing 
but  insanity  could  make  him  will  to  do  so.  And  if 
even  insanity  produced  this  effect,  it  must  be  by  making 
him  think  it  to  be  in  his  power. 

Secondly.  This  conviction  is  implied  in  all  delibera- 
tion; for  no  man  in  his  wits  deliberates  whether  he 
shall  do  what  he  believes  not  to  be  in  his  power. 

Thirdly.  The  same  conviction  is  implied  in  every  res- 
olution or  purpose  formed  in  consequence  of  deliberation. 
A man  may  as  well  form  a resolution  to  pull  the  moon 
out  of  her  sphere,  as  to  do  the  most  insignificant  action 


388 


JUDGMENT. 


which  he  believes  not  to  be  in  his  power.  The  same 
thing  may  be  said  of  every  promise  or  contract  wherein 
a man  plights  his  faith  ; for  he  is  not  an  honest  man 
who  promises  what  he  does  not  believe  he  has  power  to 
perform. 

As  these  operations  imply  a belief  of  some  degree  of 
power  in  ourselves,  so  there  are  others  equally  common 
and  familiar,  which  imply  a like  belief  with  regard  to 
others.  When  we  impute  to  a man  any  action  or 
omission,  as  a ground  of  approbation  or  of  blame,  we 
must  believe  he  had  power  to  do  otherwise.  The 
same  is  implied  in  all  advice,  exhortation,  command, 
and  rebuke,  and  in  every  case  in  which  we  rely  upon 
his  fidelity  in  performing  any  engagement,  or  executing 
any  trust. 

It  is  not  more  evident  that  mankind  have  a convic- 
tion of  the  existence  of  a material  world,  than  that  they 
have  the  conviction  of  some  degree  of  power  in  them- 
selves, and  in  others,  every  one  over  his  own  actions, 
and  the  determinations  of  his  will,  — a conviction  so 
early,  so  general,  and  so  interwoven  with  the  whole  of 
human  conduct,  that  it  must  be  the  natural  effect  of 
our  constitution,  and  intended  by  the  Author  of  our  be- 
ing to  guide  our  actions.  It  resembles  our  conviction 
of  the  existence  of  a material  world  in  this  respect  also, 
that  even  those  who  reject  it  in  speculation  find  them- 
selves under  a necessity  of  being  governed  by  it  in 
their  practice  ; and  thus  it  will  always  happen  when 
philosophy  contradicts  first  principles.* 

6.  Another  first  principle  is,  that  the  natural  faculties^ 
by  ivhich  we  distinguish  truth  from  error ^ are  not  falla- 
cious. 

If  any  man  should  demand  a proof  of  this,  it  is  im- 
possible to  satisfy  him.  For  suppose  it  should  be 
mathematically  demonstrated,  this  would  signify  noth- 
ing in  this  case  ; because,  to  judge  of  a demonstration. 


* This  subject  is  discussed  by  Ileid  more  at  length  in  his  Essays  on  the 
Active  Powers  of  Man^  Ess.  I.  See  also  Stewart’s  Philosophy  of  the  Active 
and  Moral  Powers^  Walker’s  edition,  Book  II.  Chap.  VI. ; Cousin’s  Elements 
of  Psychology^  Chap.  IV. ; and  Bowen’s  Lowell  Lectures^  Lect.  IV.  — Ed. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


389 


a man  must  trust  his  faculties,  and  take  for  granted 
the  very  thing  in  question.  If  a man’s  honesty  were 
called  in  question,  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  refer  it  to 
the  man’s  own  word  whether  he  be  honest  or  not.  The 
same  absurdity  there  is  in  attempting  to  prove,  by  any 
kind  of  reasoning,  probable  or  demonstrative,  that  our 
reason  is  not  fallacious,  since  the  very  point  in  question 
is  whether  reasoning  may  be  trusted. 

Descartes  certainly  made  a false  step  in  this  matter  ; 
for  having  suggested  this  doubt  among  others,  — that 
whatever  evidence  he  might  have  from  his  conscious- 
ness, his  senses,  his  memory,  or  his  reason,  yet  possibly 
some  malignant  being  had  given  him  those  faculties  on 
purpose  to  impose  upon  him  ; and,  therefore,  that  they 
are  not  to  be  trusted  without  a proper  voucher,  — to 
remove  this  doubt  he  endeavours  to  prove  the  being  of 
a Deity  who  is  no  deceiver : whence  he  concludes,  that 
the  faculties  he  had  given  him  are  true  and  worthy  to 
be  trusted. 

It  is  strange  that  so  acute  a reasoner  did  not  per- 
ceive, that  in  this  reasoning  there  is  evidently  a begging 
of  the  question.  For  if  our  faculties  be  fallacious,  why 
may  they  not  deceive  us  in  this  reasoning  as  well  as  in 
others  ? And  if  they  are  to  be  trusted  in  this  instance 
without  a voucher,  why  not  in  others  ? Every  kind  of 
reasoning  for  the  veracity  of  our  faculties  amounts  to 
no  more  than  taking  their  own  testimony  for  their  ve- 
racity, and  this  we  must  do  implicitly,  until  God  give 
us  new  faculties  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  old  ; and 
the  reason  why  Descartes  satisfied  himself  with  so  weak 
an  argument  for  the  truth  of  his  faculties  most  probably 
was,  that  he  never  seriously  doubted  of  it. 

If  any  truth  can  be  said  to  be  prior  to  all  others  in 
the  order  of  nature,  this  seems  to  have  the  best  claim  ; 
because  in  every  instance  of  assent,  whether  upon  in- 
tuitive, demonstrative,  or  probable  evidence,  the  truth 
of  our  faculties  is  taken  for  granted,  and  is,  as  it  were, 
one  of  the  premises  on  which  our  assent  is  grounded.* 


There  is  a presumption  in  favor  of  the  veracity  of  the  primary  data 

83* 


890 


JUDGMENT. 


How,  then,  come  we  to  be  assured  of  this  fundamen- 
tal truth  on  which  all  others  rest?  Perhaps  evidence^ 
as  in  many  other  respects  it  resembles  lights  so  in  this 
also, — that  as  light,  which  is  the  discoverer  of  all  visi- 
ble objects,  discovers  itself  at  the  same  time,  so  evi- 
dence, which  is  the  voucher  for  all  truth,  vouches  for 
itself  at  the  same  time.  This,  however,  is  certain,  that 
such  is  the  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  that  evi- 
dence discerned  by  us  forces  a corresponding  degree  of 
assent.  And  a man  who  perfectly  understood  a just 
syllogism,  without  believing  that  the  conclusion  follows 
from  the  premises,  would  be  a greater  monster  than  a 
man  born  without  hands  or  feet. 

We  are  born  under  a necessity  of  trusting  to  our  rea- 
soning and  judging  powers  ; and  a real  belief  of  their 
being  fallacious  cannot  be  maintained  for  any  consider- 
able time  by  the  greatest  skeptic,  because  it  is  doing 
violence  to  our  constitution.  It  is  like  a man’s  walk- 
ing upon  his  hands,  a feat  which  some  men  upon  occa- 
sion can  exhibit ; but  no  man  ever  made  a long  journey 
in  this  manner.  Cease  to  admire  his  dexterity,  and  he 
will,  like  other  men,  betake  himself  to  his  legs. 

We  may  here  take  notice  of  a property  of  the  princi- 
ple under  consideration,  that  seems  to  be  common  to  it 
with  many  other  first  principles,  and  which  can  hardly 
be  found  in  any  principle  that  is  built  solely  upon  rea- 
soning ; and  that  is,  that  in  most  men  it  produces  its 
effect  without  ever  being  attended  to^  or  made  an  object 
of  thought.  No  man  ever  thinks  of  this  principle,  unless 
when  he  considers  the  grounds  of  skepticism  ; yet  it  in- 
variably governs  his  opinions.  When  a man  in  the 
common  course  of  life  gives  credit  to  the  testimony  of 
his  senses,  his  memory,  or  his  reason,  he  does  not  put 
the  question  to  himself,  whether  these  faculties  may  de- 
ceive him ; yet  the  trust  he  reposes  in  them  supposes 
an  inward  conviction,  that,  in  that  instance  at  least, 
they  do  not  deceive  him. 


of  consciousness.  This  can  only  be  rebutted  by  showing  that  these  facts 
are  contradictory.  Skepticism  attempts  to  show  this  on  the  principles 
which  dogmatism  postulates.  — H. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


39i 


It  is  another  property  of  this  and  of  many  first  prin- 
ciples, that  they  force  in  particular  instances  more 

powerfully  than  when  they  are  turned  into  a general  prop- 
osition. Many  skeptics  have  denied  every  general  prin- 
ciple of  science,  excepting,  perhaps,  the  existence  of  our 
present  thoughts  ; yet  these  men  reason,  and  refute,  and 
prove,  they  assent  and  dissent  in  particular  cases.  They 
use  reasoning  to  overturn  ail  reasoning,  and  judge  that 
they  ought  to  have  no  judgment,  and  see  clearly  that 
they  are  blind.  Many  have  in  general  maintained  that 
the  senses  are  fallacious,  yet  there  never  was  found  a 
man  so  skeptical  as  not  to  trust  his  senses  in  particular 
instances,  when  his  safety  required  it ; and  it  may  be 
observed  of  those  who  have  professed  skepticism,  that 
their  skepticism  lies  in  generals,  while  in  particulars 
they  are  no  less  dogmatical  than  others.* 

7.  Another  first  principle  I take  to  be,  that  certain 
features  of  the  countenance^  sounds  of  the  voice.,  and  ges- 
tures of  the  body.,  indicate  certain  thoughts  and  disposi- 
tions of  mind. 

That  many  operations  of  the  mind  have  their  natural 
signs  in  the  countenance,  voice,  and  gesture,  I suppose 
every  man  will  admit.  Omnis  enim  motus  animi,  says 
Cicero,  suum  quemdam  habet  a naturd  vultum.,  et  vocem^ 
et  gestum.  The  only  question  is,  whether  we  under- 
stand the  signification  of  those  signs  by  the  constitu- 
tion of  our  nature,  by  a kind  of  natural  perception 
similar  to  the  perceptions  of  sense  ; or  whether  we  grad- 
ually learn  the  signification  of  such  signs  from  expe- 
rience, as  we  learn  that  smoke  is  a sign  of  fire,  or  that 
the  freezing  of  water  is  a sign  of  cold.  I take  the  first 
to  be  the  truth. 

It  seems  to  me  incredible,  that  the  notions  men  have 
of  the  expression  of  features,  voice,  and  gesture  are  en- 
tirely the  fruit  of  experience.  Children,  almost  as  soon 
as  born,  may  be  frighted  and  thrown  into  fits  by  a 
threatening  or  angry  tone  of  voice.  I knew  a man  who 


* Compare  Introduction  to  Ethics,  Lect.  IX.;  and  Javary,  Dela 

Certitude,  passim.  — Ed. 


392 


JUDGMENT. 


could  make  an  infant  cry,  by  whistling  a melancholy 
tune  in  the  same  or  in  the  next  room ; and  again,  by 
altering  his  key,  and  the  strain  of  his  music,  could  make 
the  child  leap  and  dance  for  joy. 

It  is  not  by  experience  surely  that  we  learn  the  ex- 
pression of  music  ; for  its  operation  is  commonly  strong- 
est the  first  time  we  hear  it.  One  air  expresses  mirth 
and  festivity  ; so  that,  when  we  hear  it,  it  is  with  diffi- 
culty we  can  forbear  to  dance.  Another  is  sorrowful 
and  solemn.  One  inspires  with  tenderness  and  love ; 
another  with  rage  and  fury. 

“ Hear  how  Timotheus’  varied  lays  surprise, 

And  bid  alternate  passions  all  and  rise  ; 

While,  at  each  change,  the  son  of  Lybian  Jove 
Now  burns  with  glory,  and  then  melts  with  love. 

Now  his  fierce  eyes  with  sparkling  fury  glow, 

Now  sighs  steal  out,  and  tears  begin  to  flow. 

Persians  and  Greeks  like  turns  of  nature  found, 

And  the  world’s  victor  stood  subdued  by  sound.” 

The  countenance  and  gesture  have  an  expression  no 
less  strong  and  natural  than  the  voice.  The  first  time 
one  sees  a stern  and  fierce  look,  a contracted  brow,  and 
a menacing  posture,  he  concludes  that  the  person  is  in- 
flamed with  anger.  Shall  we  say,  that,  previous  to  ex- 
perience, the  most  hostile  countenance  has  as  agreeable 
an  appearance  as  the  most  gentle  and  benign  ? This 
surely  would  contradict  all  experience  ; for  we  know 
that  an  angry  countenance  will  fright  a child  in  the 
cradle.  Who  has  not  observed,  that  children,  very 
early,  are  able  to  distinguish  what  is  said  to  them  in 
jest  from  what  is  said  in  earnest,  by  the  tone  of  the 
voice,  and  the  features  of  the  face  ? They  judge  by 
these  natural  signs,  even  when  they  seem  to  contradict 
the  artificial. 

If  it  were  by  experience  that  we  learn  the  meaning 
of  features,  and  sound,  and  gesture,  it  might  be  ex- 
pected that  we  should  recollect  the  time  when  we  first 
learnt  those  lessons,  or  at  least  some  of  such  a multi- 
tude. Those  who  give  attention  to  the  operations  of 
children  can  easily  discover  the  time  when  they  have 
their  earliest  notices  from  experience,  — such  as  that 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


393 


flame  will  burn,  or  that  knives  will  cut.  But  no  man 
is  able  to  recollect  in  himself,  or  to  observe  in  others, 
the  time  when  the  expression  of  the  face,  voice,  and 
gesture  was  learned. 

Nay,  I apprehend  that  it  is  impossible  that  this 
should  be  learned  from  experience.  When  we  see  the 
sign,  and  see  the  thing  signified  always  conjoined  with 
it,  experience  may  be  the  instructor,  and  teach  us  how 
that  sign  is  to  be  interpreted.  But  how  shall  expe- 
rience instruct  us  when  we  see  the  sign  only,  — when 
the  thing  signified  is  invisible  ? Now  this  is  the  case 
here  ; the  thoughts  and  passions  of  the  mind,  as  well  as 
the  mind  itself,  are  invisible,  and  therefore  their  connec- 
tion with  any  sensible  sign  cannot  be  first  discovered 
by  experience ; there  must  be  some  earlier  source  of  this 
knowledge. 

Nature  seems  to  have  given  to  men  a faculty  or 
sense  by  which  this  connection  is  perceived.  And  the 
operation  of  this  sense  is  very  analogous  to  that  of  the 
external  senses.  When  I grasp  an  ivory  ball  in  my 
hand,  I feel  a certain  sensation  of  touch.  In  the  sensa- 
tion there  is  nothing  external,  nothing  corporeal.  The 
sensation  is  neither  round  nor  hard  ; it  is  an  act  or  feel- 
ing of  the  mind,  from  which  I cannot,  by  reasoning,  in- 
fer the  existence  of  any  body.  But,  by  the  constitution 
of  my  nature,  the  sensation  carries  along  with  it  the 
conception  and  belief  of  a round,  hard  body  really  exist- 
ing in  my  hand.  In  like  manner,  when  I see  the  fea- 
tures of  an  expressive  face,  I see  only  figure  and  color 
variously  modified.  But  by  the  constitution  of  my  na- 
ture, the  visible  object  brings  along  with  it  the  concep- 
tion and  belief  of  a certain  passion  or  sentiment  in  the 
mind  of  the  person.  In  the  former  case,  a sensation  of 
touch  is  the  sign,  and  the  hardness  and  roundness  of 
the  body  I grasp  is  signified  by  that  sensation.  In  the 
latter  case,  the  features  of  the  person  are  the  sign,  and 
the  passion  or  sentiment  is  signified  by  it. 

The  power  of  natural  signs,  to  signify  the  sentiments 
and  passions  of  the  mind,  is  seen  in  the  signs  of  dumb 
persons^  who  can  make  themselves  to  be  understood  in 


394 


JUDGMENT. 


a considerable  degree,  even  by  those  who  are  wholly  in- 
experienced in  that  language. 

It  is  seen  in  the  traffic  which  has  been  frequently 
carried  on  between  people  that  have  no  common  ac~ 
quired  language.  They  can  buy  and  sell,  and  ask  and 
refuse,  and  show  a friendly  or  hostile  disposition  by 
natural  signs. 

It  was  seen  still  more  in  the  actors  among  the  an- 
cients, who  performed  the  gesticulation  upon  the  stage, 
while  others  recited  the  words.  To  such  a pitch  was 
this  art  carried,  that  we  are  told  Cicero  and  Roscius 
used  to  contend  whether  the  orator  could  express  any 
thing  by  words  which  the  actor  could  not  express  in 
dumb  show  by  gesticulation  ; and  whether  the  same 
sentence  or  thought  could  not  be  acted  in  aU  the  va- 
riety of  ways  in  which  the  orator  could  express  it  in 
words. 

But  the  most  surprising  exhibition  of  this  kind  was 
that  of  the  pantomimes  among  the  Romans,  who  acted 
plays,  or  scenes  of  plays,  without  any  recitation,  and 
yet  could  be  perfectly  understood.  And  here  it  deserves 
our  notice,  that,  although  it  required  much  study  and 
practice  in  the  pantomimes  to  excel  in  their  art,  yet  it 
required  neither  study  nor  practice  in  the  spectators  to 
understand  them.  It  was  a natural  language^  and 
therefore  understood  by  all  men,  whether  Romans, 
Greeks,  or  barbarians,  by  the  learned  and  the  unlearned. 
Lucian  relates,  that  a king,  whose  dominions  bordered 
upon  the  Euxine  Sea,  happening  to  be  at  Rome  in  the 
reign  of  Nero,  and  having  seen  a pantomime  act,  beg- 
ged him  of  Nero,  that  he  might  use  him  in  his  in- 
tercourse with  all  the  nations  in  his  neighbourhood, 
u For,’’  said  he,  “ I am  obliged  to  employ  I don’t  know 
how  many  interpreters,  in  order  to  keep  up  a correspond- 
ence with  neighbours  who  speak  many  languages,  and 
do  not  understand  mine  ; but  this  fellow  will  make 
them  all  understand  him.” 

For  these  reasons,  I conceive,  it  must  be  granted,  not 
only  that  there  is  a connection  established  by  nature 
between  certain  signs  in  the  countenance,  voice,  and 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


395 


gesture,  and  the  thoughts  and  passions  of  the  mind  ; 
but  also,  that,  by  our  constitution,  we  understand  the 
meaning  of  those  signs,  and  from  the  sign  conclude  the 
existence  of  the  thing  signified.* 

8.  Another  first  principle  appears  to  me  to  be,  that 
there  is  a certain  regard  due  to  human  testimony  in  mat- 
ters  of  fact^  and  even  to  human  authority  in  matters  of 
opinion. 

Before  we  are  capable  of  reasoning  about  testimony 
or  authority,  there  are  many  things  which  it  concerns 
us  to  know,  for  which  we  can  have  no  other  evidence. 
The  wise  Author  of  nature  has  planted  in  the  human 
mind  a propensity  to  rely  upon  this  evidence  before  we 
can  give  a reason  for  doing  so.  This,  indeed,  puts  our 
judgment  almost  entirely  in  the  power  of  those  who 
are  about  us  in  the  first  period  of  life ; but  this  is 
necessary  both  to  our  preservation  and  to  our  improve- 
ment. If  children  were  so  framed,  as  to  pay  no  regard 
to  testimony  or  to  authority,  they  must,  in  the  literal 
sense,  “ perish  for  lack  of  knowledge.”  It  is  not  more 
necessary  that  they  should  be  fed  before  they  can  feed 
themselves,  than  that  they  should  be  instructed  in  many 
things  before  they  can  discover  them  by  their  own 
judgment. 

But  when  our  faculties  ripen,  we  find  reason  to  check 
that  propensity  to  yield  to  testimony  and  to  authority, 
which  was  so  necessary  and  so  natural  in  the  first  pe- 
riod of  life.  We  learn  to  reason  about  the  regard  due 
to  them,  and  see  it  to  be  a childish  weakness  to  lay 
more  stress  upon  them  than  reason  justifies.  Yet,  I 
believe,  to  the  end  of  life,  most  men  are  more  apt  to  go 
into  this  extreme  than  into  the  contrary ; and  the  natu- 
ral propensity  still  retains  some  force. 

The  natural  principles,  by  which  our  judgments  and 
opinions  are  regulated  before  we  come  to  the  use  of 
reason,  seem  to  be  no  less  necessary  to  such  a being  as 


* Compare  Condillac,  Essai  sur  V Origine  des  Connoissances  Humaines^  II® 
Partie  (translated  by  Nugent,  An  Essay  on  the  Origin  of  Human  Knowl- 
edge). Upham’s  Mental  Philosophy.,  Appendix  to  Vol.  if.  Chap.  I.  — Ed. 


396 


JUDGMENT. 


man,  than  those  natural  instincts  which  the  Author  of 
nature  has  given  us  to  regulate  our  actions  during  that 
period.* 

9.  The  last  principle  of  contingent  truths  I mention 
is,  that,  in  the  phenomena  of  nature^  what  is  to  be  ivill 
probably  be  like  to  what  has  been  in  similar  circum- 
stances. 

We  must  have  this  conviction  as  soon  as  we  are 
capable  of  learning  any  thing  from  experience ; for  all 
experience  is  grounded  upon  a belief  that  the  future 
will  be  like  the  past.  Take  away  this  principle,  and 
the  experience  of  a hundred  years  makes  us  no  wiser 
with  regard  to  what  is  to  come. 

This  is  one  of  those  principles,  which,  when  we  grow 
up  and  observe  the  course  of  nature,  we  can  confirm 
by  reasoning.  We  perceive  that  nature  is  governed  by 
fixed  laws,  and  that,  if  it  were  not  so,  there  could  be 
no  such  thing  as  prudence  in  human  conduct ; there 
would  be  no  fitness  in  any  means  to  promote  an  end; 
and  what,  on  one  occasion,  promoted  it,  might  as  prob- 
ably, on  another  occasion,  obstruct  it.  But  the  prin- 
ciple is  necessary  for  us  before  we  are  able  to  discover 
it  by  reasoning,  and  therefore  is  made  a part  of  our 
constitution,  and  produces  its  effects  before  the  use  of 
reason. 

This  principle  remains  in  all  its  force  when  we  come 
to  the  use  of  reason ; but  we  learn  to  be  more  cautious 
in  the  application  of  it.  We  observe  more  carefully 
the  circumstances  on  which  the  past  event  depended, 
and  learn  to  distinguish  them  from  those  which  were 
accidentally  conjoined  with  it.  In  order  to  this,  a num- 
ber of  experiments,  varied  in  their  circumstances,  is 
often  necessary.  Sometimes  a single  experiment  is 
thought  sufficient  to  establish  a general  conclusion. 
Thus,  when  it  was  once  found  that,  in  a certain  degree 
of  cold,  quicksilver  became  a hard  and  malleable  metal, 


* See  more  on  this  topic  in  Campbell’s  Dissertation  on  ’Miracles^  Part  I. 
Sect.  I.,  and  Chalmers’s  Evidences  of  the  Christian  Revelation^  Book  I. 
Chap.  III.  — Ed. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


397 


there  was  good  reason  to  think,  that  the  same  degree 
of  cold  would  always  produce  this  effect  to  the  end  of 
the  world. 

I need  hardly  mention,  that  the  whole  fabric  of  nat- 
ural philosophy  is  built  upon  this  principle,  and,  if  it 
be  taken  away,  must  tumble  down  to  the  foundation. 
Therefore  the  great  Newton  lays  it  down  as  an  axiom, 
or  as  one  of  his  laws  of  philosophizing,  in  these  words : 
— Effectuum  naturalium  ejusdem  generis  easdem  esse 
causas.  This  is  what  every  man  assents  to  as  soon  as 
he  understaitds  it,  and  no  man  asks  a reason  for  it.  It 
has  therefore  the  most  genuine  marks  of  a first  prin- 
ciple. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  that,  although  all  our  expecta- 
tion of  what  is  to  happen  in  the  course  of  nature  is 
derived  from  the  belief  of  this  principle,  yet  no  man 
thinks  of  asking  what  is  the  ground  of  this  belief.  Mr. 
Hume,  I think,  was  the  first  * who  put  this  question  ; 
and  he  has  shown  clearly  and  invincibly,  that  it  is 
neither  grounded  upon  reasoning,  nor  has  that  kind  of 
intuitive  evidence  which  mathematical  axioms  have. 
It  is  not  a necessary  truth. 

He  has  endeavoured  to  account  for  it  upon  his  own 
principles.  It  is  not  my  business  at  present  to  examine 
the  account  he  has  given  of  this  universal  belief  of 
mankind ; because,  whether  his  account  of  it  be  just  or 
not  (and  I think  it  is  not),  yet,  as  this  belief  is  univer- 
sal among  mankind,  and  is  not  grounded  upon  any 
antecedent  reasoning,  but  upon  the  constitution  of  the 
mind  itself,  it  must  be  acknowledged  to  be  a first  prin- 
ciple, in  the  sense  in  which  I use  that  word.f 

IV.  First  Principles  of  Necessary  Truths,]  About 
most  of  the  first  principles  of  necessary  truths  there  has 


* Hume  was  not  the  first : but  on  the  various  opinions  touching  the 
ground  of  our  expectancy,  I cannot  touch.  — H. 

t Compare  Stewart’s  Elements^  Part  I.  Chap.  IV.  Sect.  5,  and  Essays^ 
Ess.  II.  Chap.  II. ; Brown’s  Philosophy  of  the  Mind^  Lect.  VI.,  and  Cause 
and  Effect,  Parts  III.  and  IV. ; and  Bailey,  On  the  Pursuit  of  Truth,  Essay 
III*  — J.  S.  Mill  contends  for  the  empirical  origin  of  this  principle,  System 
of  Logic,  Book  III.  Chap.  III.  and  XXL  — Ed. 

34 


398 


JUDGMENT. 


been  no  dispute,  and  therefore  it  is  the  less  necessary 
to  dwell  upon  them.  It  will  be  sufficient  to  divide 
them  into  different  classes ; to  mention  some  by  way 
of  specimen,  in  each  class  ; and  to  make  some  remarks 
on  those  of  which  the  truth  has  been  called  in  question. 

They  may,  I think,  most  properly  be  divided  accord- 
ing to  the  sciences  to  which  they  belong. 

1.  There  are  some  first  principles  that  may  be  called 
grammatical ; such  as,  that  every  adjective  in  a sentence 
must  belong  to  some  substantive  expressed  or  understood ; 
that  every  complete  sentence  must  have  a ve^b. 

Those  who  have  attended  to  the  structure  of  lan- 
guage, and  formed  distinct  notions  of  the  nature  and 
use  of  the  various  parts  of  speech,  perceive,  without 
reasoning,  that  these,  and  many  other  such  principles, 
are  necessarily  true. 

2.  There  are  logical  axioms ; such  as,  that  any  con- 
texture  of  ivords^  which  does  not  make  a proposition^  is 
neither  true  nor  false ; that  every  proposition  is  either 
true  or  false  ; that  no  proposition  can  be  both  true  and 
false  at  the  same  time  ; that  reasoning  in  a circle  proves 
nothing ; that  whatever  may  be  truly  affirmed  of  a genus^ 
may  truly  be  affirmed  of  all  the  species  and  all  the  indi- 
viduals belonging  to  that  genus, 

3.  Every  one  knows  there  are  mathematical  axioms. 
Mathematicians  have,  from  the  days  of  Euclid,  very 
wisely  laid  down  the  axioms  or  first  principles  on  which 
they  reason.  And  the  effect  which  this  appears  to  have 
had  upon  the  stability  and  happy  progress  of  this  sci- 
ence gives  no  small  encouragement  to  attempt  to  lay 
the  foundation  of  other  sciences  in  a similar  manner, 
as  far  as  we  are  able.* 

Mr.  Hume  has  discovered,  as  he  apprehends,  a weak 
side,  even  in  mathematical  axioms  ; and  thinks  that  it 
is  not  strictly  true,  for  instance,  that  two  right  lines  can 
cut  one  another  in  one  point  only.  The  principle  he 


* On  mathematical  axioms,  see  Stewart’s  Elements^  Part  II.  Chap.  I. 
§§  1,  2 ; WhewelTs  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences^  Book  II.  Chap.  V. } 
Mill’s  System  of  Logic^  Book  II.  Chap.  V.  and  VI.  — Eo 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


399 


reasons  from  is,  that  every  simple  idea  is  a copy  of  a 
preceding  impression  ; and  therefore,  in  its  precision 
and  accuracy,  can  never  go  beyond  its  original.  From 
which  he  reasons  in  this  manner  : — No  man  ever  saw 
or  felt  a line  so  straight,  that  it  might  not  cut  another, 
equally  straight,  in  two  or  more  points.  Therefore 
there  can  be  no  idea  of  such  a line.  The  ideas  that 
are  most  essential  to  geometry,  such  as  those  of  equal- 
ity, of  a straight  line,  and  of  a square  surface,  are  far, 
he  says,  from  being  distinct  and  determinate  ; and  the 
definitions  destroy  the  pretended  demonstrations.  Thus, 
mathematical  demonstration  is  found  to  be  a rope  of 
sand. 

I agree  with  this  acute  author,  that,  if  we  could  form 
no  notion  of  points,  lines,  and  surfaces  more  accurate 
than  those  we  see  and  handle,  there  could  be  no  mathe- 
matical demonstration.  But  every  man  that  has  under- 
standing, by  analyzing,  by  abstracting,  and  compound- 
ing the  rude  materials  exhibited  by  his  senses,  can 
fabricate,  in  his  own  mind,  those  elegant  and  accurate 
forms  of  mathematical  lines,  surfaces,  and  solids.  If  a 
man  finds  himself  incapable  of  forming  a precise  and 
determinate  notion  of  the  figure  which  mathematicians 
call  a cube,  he  not  only  is  no  mathematician,  but  is 
incapable  of  being  one.  But  if  he  has  a precise  and 
determinate  notion  of  that  figure,  he  must  perceive  that 
it  is  terminated  by  six  mathematical  surfaces,  perfectly 
square,  and  perfectly  equal.  He  must  perceive  that 
these  surfaces  are  terminated  by  twelve  mathematical 
lines,  perfectly  straight,  and  perfectly  equal,  and  that 
those  lines  are  terminated  by  eight  mathematical  points. 

When  a man  is  conscious  of  having  these  concep- 
tions distinct  and  determinate,  as  every  mathematician 
is,  it  is  in  vain  to  bring  metaphysical  arguments  to 
convince  him  that  they  are  not  distinct.  You  may  as 
well  bring  arguments  to  convince  a man  racked  with 
pain  that  he  feels  no  pain.  Every  theory  that  is  in- 
consistent with  our  having  accurate  notions  of  mathe- 
matical lines,  surfaces,  and  solids,  must  be  false. 

4.  I think  there  are  axioms,  even  in  matters  of  taste. 


400 


JUDGMENT. 


Notwithstanding  the  variety  found  among  men,  in 
taste,  there  are,  I apprehend,  some  common  principles, 
even  in  matters  of  this  kind.  I never  heard  of  any 
man  who  thought  it  a beauty  in  a human  face  to  want 
a nose,  or  an  eye,  or  to  have  the  mouth  on  one  side. 
How  many  ages  have  passed  since  the  days  of  Homer? 
Yet,  in  this  long  tract  of  ages,  there  never  was  found  a 
man^who  took  Thersites  for  a beauty. 

The  Fine  Arts  are  very  properly  called  the  Arts  of 
Taste,  because  the  principles  of  both  are  the  same  ; 
and  in  the  fine  arts,  we  find  no  less  agreement  among 
those  who  practise  them  than  among  other  artists.  No 
work  of  taste  can  be  either  relished  or  understood  by 
those  who  do  not  agree  with  the  author  in  the  princi- 
ples of  taste.  Homer,  and  Virgil,  and  Shakspeare,  and 
Milton,  had  the  same  taste ; and  all  men  who  have 
been  acquainted  with  their  writings,  and  agree  in  the 
admiration  of  them,  must  have  the  same  taste.  The 
fundamental  rules  of  poetry  and  music  and  painting, 
and  dramatic  action  and  eloquence,  have  been  always 
the  same,  and  will  be  so  to  the  end  of  the  world. 

The  variety  we  find  among  men  in  matters  of  taste 
is  easily  accounted  for,  consistently  with  what  we  have 
advanced.  There  is  a taste  that  is  acquired,  and  a 
taste  that  is  natural.  This  holds  with  respect  both  to 
the  external  sense  of  taste  and  the  internal.  Habit 
and  fashion  have  a powerful  influence  upon  both. 

Of  tastes  that  are  natural,  there  are  some  that  may 
be  called  rational,  others  that  are  merely  animal.  Chil- 
dren are  delighted  with  brilliant  and  gaudy  colors,  with 
romping  and  noisy  mirth,  with  feats  of  agility,  strength, 
or  cunning ; and  savages  have  much  the  same  taste  as 
children.  But  there  are  tastes  that  are  more  intellec- 
tual. It  is  the  dictate  of  our  rational  nature,  that  love 
and  admiration  are  misplaced  when  there  is  no  intrinsic 
worth  in  the  object.  In  those  operations  of  taste  which 
are  rational,  we  judge  of  the  real  worth  and  excellence 
of  the  object,  and  our  love  or  admiration  is  guided  by 
that  judgment.  In  such  operations  there  is  judgment 
as  well  as  feeling,  and  the  feeling  depends  upon  the 


, FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


401 


judgment  we  form  of  the  object.  I do  not  maintain 
that  taste,  so  far  as  it  is  acquired,  or  so  far  as  it  is 
merely  animal,  can  be  reduced  to  principles.  But  as 
far  as  it  is  founded  on  judgment,  it  certainly  may. 
The  virtues,  the  graces,  the  muses,  have  a beauty  that 
is  intrinsic.  It  lies  not  in  the  feelings  of  the  spectator, 
but  in  the  real  excellence  of  the  object.  If  we  do  not 
perceive  their  beauty,  it  is  owing  to  the  defect  or  to  the 
perversion  of  our  faculties. 

And  as  there  is  an  original  beauty  in  certain  moral 
and  intellectual  qualities,  so  there  is  a borrowed  and 
derived  beauty  in  the  natural  signs  and  expressions  of 
such  qualities.  The  features  of  the  human  face,  the 
modulations  of  the  voice,  and  the  proportions,  attitudes, 
and  gestures  of  the  body,  are  all  natural  expressions  of 
good  or  bad  qualities  of  the  person,  and  derive  a 
beauty  or  a deformity  from  the  qualities  which  they 
express.  Works  of  art  express  some  quality  of  the 
artist,  and  often  derive  an  additional  beauty  from  their 
utility  or  fitness  for  their  end.  Of  such  things  there 
are  some  that  ought  to  please,  and  others  that  ought 
to  displease.  If  they  do  not,  it  is  owing  to  some  de- 
fect in  the  spectator.  But  what  has  real  excellence 
will  always  please  those  who  have  a correct  judgment 
and  a sound  heart. 

The  sum  of  what  has  been  said  upon  this  subject  is, 
that,  setting  aside  the  tastes  which  men  acquire  by 
habit  and  fashion,  there  is  a natural  taste,  which  is 
partly  animal  and  partly  rational.  With  regard  to  the 
first,  all  we  can  say  is,  that  the  Author  of  nature,  for 
wise  reasons,  has  formed  us  so  as  to  receive  pleasure 
from  the  contemplation  of  certain  objects,  and  disgust 
from  others,  before  we  are  capable  of  perceiving  any 
real  excellence  in  one,  or  defect  in  the  other.  But  that 
taste  which  we  may  call  rational^  is  that  part  of  our 
constitution  by  which  we  are  made  to  receive  pleasure 
from  the  contemplation  of  what  we  conceive  to  be 
excellent  in  its  kind,  the  pleasure  being  annexed  to 
this  judgment,  and  regulated  by  it.  This  taste  may  be 
true  or  false,  according  as  it  is  founded  on  a true  or 
34^ 


402 


JUDGMENT. 


false  judgment.  And  if  it  may  be  true  or  false,  it 
must  have  first  principles.* 

5.  There  are  also  first  principles  in  morals.  That  an 
unjust  action  has  more  demerit  than  an  ungenerous  one ; 
that  a generous  action  has  more  merit  than  a merely  just 
one ; that  no  man  ought  to  be  blamed  for  what  it  was 
not  in  his  power  to  hinder;  that  we  ought  not  to  do  to 
others  what  we  would  think  unjust  or  unfair  to  be  done 
to  us  in  like  circumstances  : these  are  moral  axioms, 
and  many  others  might  be  named  which  appear  to  me 
to  have  no  less  evidence  than  those  of  mathematics. 

Some  perhaps  may  think,  that  our  determinations, 
either  in  matters  of  taste  or  in  morals,  ought  not  to  be 
accounted  necessary  truths : that  they  are  grounded 
upon  the  constitution  of  that  faculty  which  we  call 
taste,  and  of  that  which  we  call  the  moral  sense  or 
conscience ; which  faculties  might  have  been  so  con- 
stituted as  to  have  given  determinations  different,  or 
even  contrary,  to  those  they  now  give  : that,  as  there  is 
nothing  sweet  or  bitter  in  itself,  but  according  as  it 
agrees  or  disagrees  with  the  external  sense  called  taste, 
so  there  is  nothing  beautiful  or  ugly  in  itself,  but  ac- 
cording as  it  agrees  or  disagrees  with  the  internal 
sense,  which  we  also  call  taste  ; and  nothing  morally 
good  or  ill  in  itself,  but  according  as  it  agrees  or  disa- 
grees with  our  moral  sense. 

This,  indeed,  is  a system,  with  regard  to  morals  and 
taste,  which  has  been  supported  in  modern  times  by 
great  authorities.  And  if  this  system  be  true,  the  con- 
sequence must  be,  that  there  can  be  no  principles,  either 
of  taste  or  of  morals,  that  are  necessary  truths.  For, 
according  to  this  system,  all  our  determinations,  both 
with  regard  to  matters  of  taste  and  with  regard  to 
morals,  are  reduced  to  matters  of  fact,  — to  such,  I 
mean,  as  these,  that  by  our  constitution  we  have  on 


* Compare  Karnes’s  Elements  of  Criticism^  Chap.  XXV. ; Sir  Joshua 
Reynolds’s  Discourses^  Disc.  VII. ; Edinburgh  Review^  Vol.  XVIII.  p.  43 
et  seq. ; Cousin  Sur  le  Fondement  des  Idees  Ahsolues,  Lecjons  XIX.  et  XX. 
(Cousin’s  Chapters  on  Beauty  have  been  translated  by  J.  C.  Daniel,  The 
Philosophy  of  the  Beautiful.)  — Ed. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


403 


such  occasions  certain  agreeable  feelings,  and  on  other 
occasions  certain  disagreeable  feelings. 

But  I cannot  help  being  of  a contrary  opinion,  being 
persuaded  that  a man  who  determined  that  polite  be- 
haviour has  great  deformity,  and  that  there  is  a great 
beauty  in  rudeness  and  ill-breeding,  judge  wrong, 

whatever  his  feelings  were.  In  like  manner,  I cannot 
help  thinking,  that  a man  who  determined  that  there  is 
more  moral  worth  in  cruelty,  perfidy,  and  injustice, 
than  in  generosity,  justice,  prudence,  and  temperance, 
would  judge  wrong,  whatever  his  constitution  was. 
And  if  it  be  true  that  there  is  judgment  in  our  deter- 
minations of  taste  and  of  morals,  it  must  be  granted 
that  what  is  true  or  false  in  morals,  or  in  matters  of 
taste,  is  necessarily  so.  For  this  reason,  I have  ranked 
the  first  principles  of  morals  and  of  taste  under  the 
class  of  necessary  truths.* 

6.  The  last  class  of  first  principles  I shall  mention, 
we  may  call  metaphysical. 

I shall  particularly  consider  three  of  these,  because 
they  have  been  called  in  question  by  Mr.  Hume. 

(1.)  The  first  is,  that  the  qualities  which  we  perceive 
by  our  senses  must  have  a subject^  which  we  call  body, 
and  that  the  thoughts  we  are  conscious  of  must  have  a 
subject^  which  we  call  mind. 

It  is  not  more  evident  that  two  and  two  make  four, 
than  it  is  that  figure  cannot  exist,  unless  there  be  some- 
thing that  is  figured,  nor  motion  without  something 
that  is  moved.  I not  only  perceive  figure  and  motion, 
but  I perceive  them  to  be  qualities  : they  have  a neces- 
sary relation  to  something  in  which  they  exist  as  their 
subject.  The  difficulty  which  some  philosophers  have 
found  in  admitting  this,  is  entirely  owing  to  the  theory 
of  ideas.  A subject  of  the  sensible  qualities  which  we 
perceive  by  our  senses,  is  not  an  idea  either  of  sensation 
or  of  consciousness ; therefore,  say  they,  we  have  no 


* Compare  Bentham’s  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation^  Chap.  II. ; 
Jouffroy’s  Introduction  to  Ethics^  Lect.  XX. ; Whewell’s  Lectures  on  •‘Syste- 
matic morality^  Lect.  II.  and  III.  — Ed. 


404 


JUDGMENT. 


such  idea.  Or,  in  the  style  of  Mr.  Hume,  From  what 
impression  is  the  idea  of  substance  derived  ? It  is  not 
a copy  of  amy  impression  ; therefore  there  is  no  such 
idea. 

The  distinction  between  sensible  qualities  and  the 
substance  to  which  they  belong,  and  between  thought 
and  the  mind  that  thinks,  is  not  the  invention  of  phi- 
losophers ; it  is  found  in  the  structure  of  all  languages, 
and  therefore  must  be  common  to  all  men  who  speak 
with  understanding.  And  I believe  no  man,  however 
skeptical  he  may  be  in  speculation,  can  talk  on  the 
common  affairs  of  life  for  half  an  hour,  without  saying 
things  that  imply  his  belief  of  the  reality  of  these  dis- 
tinctions. 

Mr.  Locke  acknowledges,  “ That  we  cannot  conceive 
how  simple  ideas  of  sensible  qualities  should  subsist 
alone ; and  therefore  we  suppose  them  to  exist  in,  and 
to  be  supported  by,  some  common  subject.”  In  his 
Essay ^ indeed,  some  of  his  expressions  seem  to  leave 
it  dubious  whether  this  belief  that  sensible  qualities 
must  have  a subject  be  a true  judgment,  or  a vulgar 
prejudice.  But  in  his  first  letter  to  the  Bishop  of  Wor- 
cester, he  removes  this  doubt,  and  quotes  many  pas- 
sages of  his  Essay ^ to  show  that  he  neither  denied  nor 
doubted  of  the  existence  of  substances,  both  thinking 
and  material ; and  that  he  believed  their  existence  on 
the  same  ground  the  Bishop  did,  to  wit,  “ on  the  repug- 
nancy to  our  conceptions,  that  modes  and  accidents 
should  subsist  by  themselves.”  He  offers  no  proof  of 
this  repugnancy;  nor,  I think,  can  any  proof  of  it  be 
given,  because  it  is  a first  principle. 

It  were  to  be  wished  that  Mr.  Locke,  who  inquired 
so  accurately  and  laudably  into  the  origin,  certainty, 
and  extent  of  human  knowledge,  had  turned  his  atten- 
tion more  particularly  to  the  origin  of  these  two  opin- 
ions which  he  firmly  believed  ; to  wit,  that  sensible 
qualities  must  have  a subject  which  we  call  body,  and 
that  thought  must  have  a subject  which  we  call  mind. 
A dye  attention  to  these  two  opinions,  which  govern 
the  belief  of  all  men,  even  of  skeptics  in  the  practice 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


•405 


of  life,  would  probably  have  led  him  to  perceive,  that 
sensation  and  consciousness  are  not  the  only  sources 
of  human  knowledge ; and  that  there  are  principles 
of  belief  in  human  nature,  of  which  we  can  give  no 
other  account  but  that  they  necessarily  result  from  the 
constitution  of  our  faculties ; and  that,  if  it  were  in  our 
power  to  throw  off  their  influence  upon  our  practice 
and  conduct,  we  could  neither  speak  nor  act  like  rea- 
sonable men.* 

(2.)  The  second  metaphysical  principle  I mention  is, 
that  whatever  begins  to  exist  must  have  a cause  which 
produced  it. 

With  regard  to  this  point,  we  must  hold  one  of  these 
three  things ; either  that  it  is  an  opinion  for  which  we 
have  no  evidence.,  and  which  men  have  foolishly  taken 
up  without  ground  ; or  that  it  is  capable  of  direct  proof 
by  argument;  or  that  it  is  self-evident.,  and  needs  no 
proof  but  ought  to  be  received  as  an  axiom  which  can- 
not by  reasonable  men  be  called  in  question. 

The  first  of  these  suppositions  would  put  an  end  to 
all  philosophy,  to  all  religion,  to  all  reasoning  that 
would  carry  us  beyond  the  objects  of  sense,  and  to  all 
prudence  in  the  conduct  of  life. 

As  to  the  second  supposition,  that  this  principle  may 
be  proved  by  direct  reasoning,  I am  afraid  we  shall  find 
the  proof  extremely  difficult,  if  not  altogether  impossi- 
ble. 

I know  only  of  three  or  four  arguments  that  have 
been  urged  by  philosophers,  in  the  way  of  abstract  rea- 
soning, to  prove  that  things  which  begin  to  exist  must 
have  a cause. 

One  is  offered  by  Mr.  Hobbes,  another  by  Dr.  Sam- 
uel Clarke,  another  by  Mr.  Locke.  Mr.  Hume,  in  his 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  Book  I.  Part  HI.  Sect.  HI., 
has  examined  them  all ; and,  in  my  opinion,  has  shown 
that  they  take  for  granted  the  thing  to  be  proved ; a 


* See  Royer- Collard,  Fragments^  VIII.,  appended  to  Jouffroy’s  (Euvres 
de  Reid^  Tome  IV.  p.  300  ; Cousin’s  Elements  of  Psychology^  Chap.  III.  j 
Mill’s  Analysis^  Chap.  XI.  — Ed. 


406 


JUDGMENT. 


kind  of  false  reasoning  which  men  are  apt  to  fall  into 
when  they  attempt  to  prove  what  is  self-evident. 

It  has  been  thought,  that,  although  this  principle 
does  not  admit  of  proof  from  abstract  reasoning,  it 
may  be  proved  from  experience,  and  may  be  justly 
drawn  by  induction  from  instances  that  fall  within  our 
observations, 

I conceive  this  method  of  proof  would  leave  us  in 
great  uncertainty,  for  these  three  reasons : — 

First.  Because  the  proposition  to  be  proved  is  not 
a contingent  but  a necessary  proposition.  It  is  not, 
that  things  which  begin  to  exist  commonly  have  a 
cause,  or  even  that  they  always  in  fact  have  a cause ; 
but  that  they  must  have  a cause,  and  cannot  begin  to 
exist  without  a cause.  Propositions  of  this  kind,  from 
their  nature,  are  incapable  of  proof  by  induction.  Ex- 
perience  informs  us  only  of  what  is  or  has  been,  not  of 
what  must  be ; and  the  conclusion  must  be  of  the  same 
nature  with  the  premises.  For  this  reason,  no  mathe- 
matical proposition  can  be  proved  by  induction.  Though 
it  should  be  found  by  experience  in  a thousand  cases 
that  the  area  of  a plane  triangle  is  equal  to  the  rec- 
tangle under  the  altitude  and  half  the  base,  this  would 
not  prove  that  it  must  be  so  in  all  cases,  and  cannot  be 
otherwise ; which  is  what  the  mathematician  affirms. 
In  like  manner,  though  we  had  the  most  ample  experi- 
mental proof  that  things  which  have  begun  to  exist 
had  a cause,  this  would  not  prove  that  they  must  have 
a cause.  Experience  may  show  us  what  is  the  estab- 
lished course  of  nature,  but  can  never  show  what  con- 
nections of  things  are  in  their  nature  necessary. 

Secondly.  General  maxims,  grounded  on  experience, 
have  only  a degree  of  probability  proportioned  to  the 
extent  of  our  experience,  and  ought  always  to  be  un- 
derstood so  as  to  leave  room  for  exceptions^  if  future 
experience  shall  discover  any  such.  The  law  of  gravi- 
tation has  as  full  a proof  from  experience  and  induction 
as  any  principle  can  be  supposed  to  have.  Yet  if  any 
philosopher  should,  by  clear  experiment,  show  that 
there  is  a kind  of  matter  in  some  bodies  which  does 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


407 


not  gravitate,  the  law  of  gravitation  ought  to  be  limited 
by  that  exception.  Now  it  is  evident  that  men  have 
never  considered  the  principle  of  the  necessity  of  causes 
as  a truth  of  this  kind,  which  may  admit  of  limitation 
or  exception ; and  therefore  it  has  not  been  received 
upon  this  kind  of  evidence. 

Thirdly,  I do  not  see  that  experience  could  satisfy 
us  that  every  change  in  nature  actually  has  a cause. 
In  the  far  greater  part  of  the  changes  in  nature  that  fall 
within  our  observation,  the  causes  are  unknown^  and 
therefore,  from  experience,  we  cannot  know  whether 
they  have  causes  or  not.  Causation  is  not  an  object 
of  sense.  The  only  experience  we  can  have  of  it  is  in 
the  consciousness  we  have  of  exerting  some  power  in 
ordering  our  thoughts  and  actions.*  But  this  experi- 
ence is  surely  too  narrow  a foundation  for  a general 
conclusion,  that  all  things  that  have  had  or  shall  have 
a beginning  must  have  a cause.  For  these  reasons, 
this  principle  cannot  be  drawn  from  experience^  any 
more  than  from  abstract  reasoning. 

The  third  supposition  is,  that  it  is  to  be  admitted  as 
a first  or  self-evident  principle.  Two  reasons  may  be 
urged  for  this. 

First,  The  universal  consent  of  mankind^  not  of  phi- 
losophers only,  but  of  the  rude  and  unlearned  vulgar. 

Mr.  Hume,  as  far  as  I know,  was  the  first  that  ever 
expressed  any  doubt  of  this  principle.!  And  when  we 
consider  that  he  has  rejected  every  principle  of  human 
knowledge,  excepting  that  of  consciousness,  and  has 
' not  even  spared  the  axioms  of  mathematics,  his  au- 
thority is  of  small  weight. 

Setting  aside  the  authority  of  Mr.  Hume,  what  has 
philosophy  been  employed  in,  since  men  first  began  to 


* From  this  consciousness,  many  philosophers  have,  after  Locke,  en- 
deavoured to  deduce  our  whole  notion  of  causality.  The  ablest  develop- 
ment of  this  theory  is  that  of  M.  Maine  de  Biran  \Examen  des  Leqons  de 
Philosophic  de  M.  Laromiyuihre.^  § 8,  and  Exposition  de  la  Doctrine  Philoso- 
phique  de  Leibnitz] ; the  ablest  refutation  of  it,  that  of  his  friend  and  editor, 
M.  Cousin  [in  his  Preface  to  the  fourth  volume  of  (Euvres  de  Maine  de 
Biran.,  and  in  Elements  of  Psychology^  Chap.  IV.].  — H. 
t Hume  was  not  the  first.  — H. 


408 


JUDGMENT. 


philosophize,  but  in  the  investigation  of  the  causes  of 
things  ? This  it  has  always  professed,  when  we  trace 
it  to  its  cradle.  It  never  entered  into  any  man^s 
thought,  before  the  philosopher  we  have  mentioned,  to 
put  the  previous  question,  whether  things  have  a cause 
or  not.  Had  it  been  thought  possible  that  they  might 
not,  it  may  be  presumed,  that,  in  the  variety  of  absurd 
and  contradictory  causes  assigned,  some  one  would 
have  had  recourse  to  this  hypothesis. 

They  could  conceive  the  world  to  arise  from  an  egg, 
— from  a struggle  between  love  and  strife,  between 
moisture  and  drought,  between  heat  and  cold ; but  they 
never  supposed  that  it  had  no  cause.  We  know  not 
any  atheistic  sect  that  ever  had  recourse  to  this  topic, 
though  by  it  they  might  have  evaded  every  argument 
that  could  be  brought  against  them,  and  answered  all 
objections  to  their  system.  But  rather  than  adopt  such 
an  absurdity,  they  contrived  some  imaginary  cause  — 
such  as  chance,  a concourse  of  atoms,  or  necessity  — as 
the  cause  of  the  universe. 

The  accounts  which  philosophers  have  given  of  par- 
ticular phenomena,  as  well  as  of  the  universe  in  general, 
proceed  upon  the  same  principle.  That  every  phe- 
nomenon must  have  a cause,  was  always  taken  for 
granted.  Nil  turpius  physico^  says  Cicero,  quam  fieri 
sine  causa  quicquam  dicere.  Though  an  Academic,  he 
was  dogmatical  in  this.  And  Plato,  the  father  of  the 
Academy,  was  no  less  so.  Udvri  yap  dbvmTOv  atTiov 
yev€(nv  (“  It  is  impossible  that  any  thing  should 
have  its  origin  without  a cause”). — Timceus. 

Secondly,  Another  reason  why  I conceive  this  to  be 
a first  principle  is,  that  mankind  not  only  assent  to  it 
in  speculation,  but  that  the  practice  of  life  is  grounded 
upon  it  in  the  most  important  matters,  even  in  cases 
where  experience  leaves  us  doubtful ; and  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  act  with  common  prudence  if  we  set  it  aside. 

In  great  families  there  are  so  many  bad  things  done 
by  a certain  personage  called  Nobody^  that  it  is  prover- 
bial that  there  is  a Nobody  about  every  house  who 
does  a great  deal  of  mischief ; and  even  where  there  is 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


409 


the  exactest  inspection  and  government,  many  events 
will  happen  of  which  no  other  author  can  be  found  : so 
that,  if  we  trust  merely  to  experience  in  this  matter. 
Nobody  will  be  found  to  be  a very  active  person,  and 
to  have  no  inconsiderable  share  in  the  management  of 
affairs.  But  whatever  countenance  this  system  may 
have  from  experience,  it  is  too  shocking  to  common 
sense  to  impose  upon  the  most  ignorant.  A child 
knows,  that,  when  his  top  or  any  of  his  playthings  are 
taken  away,  it  must  be  done  by  somebody.  Perhaps  it 
would  not  be  difficult  to  persuade  him  that  it  was  done 
by  some  invisible  being,  but  that  it  should  be  done  by 
nobody  he  cannot  believe. 

Suppose  a man’s  house  to  be  broken  open,  his  money 
and  jewels  taken  away.  Such  things  have  happened 
times  innumerable  without  any  apparent  cause  ; and 
were  he  only  to  reason  from  experience  in  such  a case, 
how  must  he  behave  ? He  must  put  in  one  scale  the 
instances  wherein  a cause  was  found  of  such  an  event, 
and  in  the  other  scale  the  instances  where  no  cause 
was  found,  and  the  preponderant  scale  must  determine 
whether  it  be  most  probable  that  there  was  a cause  of 
this  event,  or  that  there  was  none.  Would  any  man  of 
common  understanding  have  recourse  to  such  an  expe- 
dient to  direct  his  judgment? 

Suppose  a man  to  be  found  dead  on  the  highway, 
his  skull  fractured,  his  body  pierced  with  deadly  wounds, 
his  watch  and  money  carried  off.  The  coroner’s  jury 
sits  upon  the  body,  and  the  question  is  put.  What  was 
the  cause  of  this  man’s  death,  — was  it  accident,  ox  felo 
de  se,  or  murder  by  persons  unknown  ? Let  us  suppose 
an  adept  in  Mr.  Hume’s  philosophy  to  make  one  of  the 
jury,  and  that  he  insists  upon  the  previous  question,  — 
whether  there  was  any  ^cause  of  the  event,  or  whether 
it  happened  without  a cause. 

Surely,  upon  Mr.  Hume’s  principles,  a great  deal 
might  be  said  upon  this  point ; and,  if  the  matter  is  to 
be  determined  by  past  experience,  it  is  dubious  on 
which  side  the  weight  of  argument  might  stand.  But 
we  may  venture  to  say,  that,  if  Mr.  Hume  had  been  of 
35 


410 


JUDGMENT. 


such  a jury,  he  would  have  laid  aside  his  philosophical 
principles,  and  acted  according  to  the  dictates  of  com- 
mon prudence.* 

(3.)  The  third  and  last  metaphysical  principle  I men- 
tion, whicli  is  opposed  by  the  same  author,  is,  that  de- 
sign and  intelligence  in  the  cause  may  be  inferred^  with 
certainty^  from  marks  or  signs  of  them  in  the  effect. 

Intelligence,  design,  and  skill  are  not  objects  of  the 
external  senses,  nor  can  we  be  conscious  of  them  in  any 
person  but  ourselves.  Even  in  ourselves,  we  cannot, 
with  propriety,  be  said  to  be  conscious  of  the  natural  or 
acquired  talents  we  possess.  We  are  conscious  only 
of  the  operations  of  mind  in  which  they  are  exerted. 
Indeed,  a man  comes  to  know  his  own  mental  abilities, 
just  as  he  knows  another  man’s,  by  the  effects  they 
produce,  when  there  is  occasion  to  put  them  to  exer- 
cise. 

A man’s  wisdom  is  known  to  us  only  by  the  signs  of 
it  in  his  conduct ; his  eloquence,  by  the  signs  of  it  in 
his  speech.  In  the  same  manner  we  judge  of  his  vir- 
tue, of  his  fortitude,  and  of  ail  his  talents  and  qualities 
of  mind.  Yet  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  we  judge  of 
men’s  talents  with  as  little  doubt  or  hesitation  as  we 
judge  of  the  immediate  objects  of  sense.  One  person, 
we  are  sure,  is  a perfect  idiot ; another,  who  feigns 
idiotism  to  screen  himself  from  punishment,  is  found 
upon  trial  to  have  the  understanding  of  a man,  and  to 
be  accountable  for  his  conduct.  We  perceive  one  man 
to  be  open,  another  cunning ; one  to  be  ignorant,  an- 
other very  knowing ; one  to  be  slow  of  understanding, 
another  quick.  Every  man  forms  such  judgments  of 

* As  has  been  intimated  more  than  once,  Mr.  Hume  did  not  lay  down 
his  conclusions  as  true,  as  something  to  be  believed,  — for  he  was  a skeptic^ 
and  not  a believer^  — but  as  following  inevitably  from  the  assumptions  of  the 
dogmatists.  It  is  the  triumph  of  skepticism  to  show  that  speculation  and 
practice  are  irreconcilable. 

On  the  principle  of  causality^  consult  Hutton’s  Investigation  o f the  Princi- 
ples of  Knowledge.,  Part  II.  Sect.  VI. ; Scott’s  Inquiry  into  the  Limits  and 
Peculiar  Objects  of  Physical  and  Metaphysical  Science.,  Chap.  III.  Sect.  I.; 
Cousin’s  Elements  of  Psychology,  Chap.  IV. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the 
Inductive  Sciences.,  Part  I.  Book  III.  Chap.  I. -IV. ; Mill’s  System  of  Logic, 
Book  III.  Chap.  XXI. ; Bowen's  Lowell  Lectures,  Lect.  IV.  and  Vl.  — Ed. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


411 


those  he  converses  with  ; and  the  common  affairs  of 
life  depend  upon  such  judgments.  We  can  as  little 
avoid  them  as  we  can  avoid  seeing  what  is  before  our 
eyes. 

From  this  it  appears,  that  it  is  no  less  a part  of  the 
human  constitution  to  judge  of  men’s  characters,  and 
of  their  intellectual  powers,  from  the  signs  of  them  in 
their  actions  and  discourse,  than  to  judge  of  corporeal 
objects  by  our  senses  ; that  such  judgments  are  com- 
mon to  the  whole  human  race  that  are  endowed  with 
understanding ; and  that  they  are  absolutely  necessary 
in  the  conduct  of  life. 

Now,  every  judgment  of  this  kind  we  form  is  only  a 
particular  application  of  the  general  principle,  that  in- 
telligence, wisdom,  and  other  mental  qualities  in  the 
cause,  may  be  inferred  from  their  marks  or  signs  in  the 
effect.  The  actions  and  discourses  of  men  are  effects, 
of  which  the  actors  and  speakers  are  the  causes.  The 
effects  are  perceived  by  our  senses ; but  the  causes  are 
behind  the  scene.  We  only  conclude  their  existence 
and  their  degrees  from  our  observation  of  the  effects. 
From  wise  conduct  we  infer  wisdom  in  the  cause  ; 
from  brave  actions  we  infer  courage ; and  so  in  other 
cases. 

This  inference  is  made  with  perfect  security  by  all 
men.  We  cannot  avoid  it ; it  is  necessary  in  the  or- 
dinary conduct  of  life  ; it  has  therefore  the  strongest 
marks  of  being  a first  principle. 

Perhaps  some  may  think  that  this  principle  may  be 
learned  either  by  reasoning.,  or  by  experience.,  and  there- 
fore that  there  is  no  ground  to  think  it  a first  principle. 

If  it  can  be  shown  to  be  got  by  reasoning.,  by  all  or 
the  greater  part  of  those  who  are  governed  by  it,  I shall 
very  readily  acknowledge  that  it  ought  not  to  be  es- 
teemed a first  principle.  But  I apprehend  the  contrary 
appears  from  very  convincing  arguments. 

First.  The  principle  is  too  universal  to  be  the  effect 
of  reasoning.  It  is  common  to  philosophers  and  to  the 
vulgar ; to  the  learned  and  to  the  most  illiterate  ; to 
the  civilized  and  to  the  savage : and  of  those  who  are 


412 


JUDGMENT. 


governed  by  it,  not  one  in  ten  thousand  can  give  a rea- 
son for  it. 

Secondly.  We  find  philosophers,  ancient  and  modern, 
who  can  reason  excellently  on  subjects  that  admit  of 
reasoning,  when  they  have  occasion  to  defend  this  prin- 
ciple, not  offering  reasons  for  it,  or  any  medium  of  proof, 
but  appealing  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind  ; men- 
tioning particular  instances,  to  make  the  absurdity  of 
the  contrary  opinion  more  apparent,  and  sometimes 
using  the  weapons  of  wit  and  ridicule,  which  are  very 
proper  weapons  for  refuting  absurdities,  but  altogether 
improper  in  points  that  are  to  be  determined  by  rea- 
soning. 

To  confirm  this  observation,  I shall  quote  two  au- 
thors, an  ancient  and  a modern,  who  have  more  ex- 
pressly undertaken  the  defence  of  this  principle  than 
any  others  I remember  to  have  met  with,  and  whose 
good  sense  and  ability  to  reason,  where  reasoning  is 
proper,  will  not  be  doubted. 

The  first  is  Cicero,  whose  words.  Lib.  I.  Cap.  13,  De 
Divinatione^  may  be  thus  translated  : — “ Can  any  thing 
done  by  chance  have  all  the  marks  of  design  ? Four 
dice  may,  by  chance,  turn  up  four  aces ; but  do  you 
think  that  four  hundred  dice,  thrown  by  chance,  will 
turn  up  four  hundred  aces  ? Colors  thrown  upon  can- 
vas without  design  may  have  some  similitude  to  a hu- 
man face ; but  do  you  think  they  might  make  as  beau- 
tiful a picture  as  that  of  the  Coan  Venus?  A hog 
turning  up  the  ground  with  his  nose  may  make  some- 
thing of  the  form  of  the  letter  A ; but  do  you  think  that 
a hog  might  describe  on  the  ground  the  ‘ Andromache’ 
of  Ennius?  Carneades  imagined,  that  in  the  stone 
quarries  at  Chios  he  found,  in  a stone  that  was  split,  a 
representation  of  the  head  of  a little  Pan,  or  sylvan 
deity.  I believe  he  might  find  a figure  not  unlike  ; but 
surely  not  such  a one  as  you  would  say  had  been 
formed  by  an  excellent  sculptor  like  Scopas.  For  so, 
verily,  the  case  is,  that  chance  never  perfectly  imitates 
design.”  Thus  Cicero.* 


See  also  his  De  Natura  Deorum^  Lib.  11.  Cap.  37.  — H. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


413 


Now,  in  all  this  discourse,  I see  very  good  sense,  and 
what  is  apt  to  convince  every  unprejudiced  mind ; but 
I see  not  in  the  whole  a single  step  of  reasoning.  It  is 
barely  an  appeal  to  every  man’s  common  sense. 

Let  us  next  see  how  the  same  point  is  handled  by 
the  excellent  Archbishop  Tillotson,  Works^  Vol.  1.  Ser- 
mon 1.  — For  I appeal  to  any  man  of  reason,  whether 
any  thing  can  be  more  unreasonable,  than  obstinately 
to  impute  an  effect  to  chance  which  carries  on  the  face 
of  it  all  the  arguments  and  characters  of  design  ? Was 
ever  any  considerable  work,  in  which  there  was  required 
a great  variety  of  parts,  and  an  orderly  and  regular  ad- 
justment of  these  parts,  done  by  chance  ? Will  chance 
fit  means  to  ends,  and  that  in  ten  thousand  instances, 
and  not  fail  in  any  one?  How  often  might  a man, 
after  he  had  jumbled  a set  of  letters  in  a bag,  fling 
them  out  upon  the  ground  before  they  would  fall  into 
an  exact  poem,  yea,  or  so  much  as  make  a good  dis- 
course in  prose?  And  may  not  a little  book  be  as 
easily  made  as  this  great  volume  of  the  world  ? How 
long  might  a man  sprinkle  colors  upon  canvas  with  a 
careless  hand  before  they  would  make  the  exact  picture 
of  a man  ? And  is  a man  easier  made  by  chance  than 
his  picture  ? How  long  might  twenty  thousand  blind 
men,  which  should  be  sent  out  from  the  remote  parts  of 
England,  wander  up  and  down  before  they  would  all 
meet  upon  Salisbury  plains,  and  fall  into  rank  and  file 
in  the  exact  order  of  an  army  ? And  yet  this  is  much 
more  easy  to  be  imagined  than  how  the  innumerable 
blind  parts  of  the  matter  should  rendezvous  themselves 
into  a world.  A man  that  sees  Henry  the  Seventh’s 
chapel  at  Westminster  might  with  as  good  reason 
maintain  (yea,  and  much  better,  considering  the  vast 
difference  between  that  little  structure  and  the  huge 
fabric  of  the  world),  that  it  was  never  contrived  or  built 
by  any  man,  but  that  the  stones  did  by  chance  grow 
into  those  curious  figures  into  which  we  see  them  to 
have  been  cut  and  graven  ; and  that  upon  a time  (as 
tales  usually  begin),  the  materials  of  that  building,  the 
stone,  mortar,  timber,  iron,  lead,  and  glass,  happily  met 
35* 


414 


JUDGMENT. 


together,  and  very  fortunately  ranged  themselves  into 
that  delicate  order  in  which  we  see  them  now  so  close 
compacted,  that  it  must  be  a very  great  chance  that 
parts  them  again.  What  would  the  world  think  of  a 
man  that  should  advance  such  an  opinion  as  this,  and 
write  a book  for  it  ? If  they  would  do  him  right,  they 
ought  to  look  upon  him  as  mad.” 

In  this  passage,  the  excellent  author  takes  what  I 
conceive  to  be  the  proper  method  of  refuting  an  absurd- 
ity, by  exposing  it  in  different  lights,  in  which  every 
man  of  common  understanding  perceives  it  to  be  ridic- 
ulous. And  although  there  is  much  good  sense,  as  well 
as  wit,  in  the  passage  I have  quoted,  I cannot  find  one 
medium  of  proof  in  the  whole. 

I have  met  with  one  or  two  respectable  authors  who 
draw  an  argument  from  the  doctrine  of  chances^  to 
show  how  improbable  it  is  that  a regular  arrangement 
of  parts  should  be  the  effect  of  chance,  or  that  it  should 
not  be  the  effect  of  design.  I do  not  object  to  this 
reasoning ; but  I would  observe,  that  the  doctrine  of 
chances  is  a branch  of  mathematics  little  more  than  a 
hundred  years  old,  while  the  conclusion  in  question  has 
been  held  by  all  men  from  the  beginning  of  the  world. 
It  cannot,  therefore,  be  thought,  that  men  were  origi- 
nally led  to  this  conclusion  by  that  reasoning.  Indeed, 
it  may  be  doubted  whether  the  first  principle  upon 
which  all  the  mathematical  reasoning  about  chances 
is  grounded  is  more  self-evident  than  this  conclusion 
drawn  from  it,  or  whether  it  is  not  a particular  instance 
of  that  general  conclusion. 

We  are  next  to  consider  whether  we  may  not  learn 
from  experience^  that  effects  which  have  all  the  marks 
and  tokens  of  design  must  proceed  from  a designing 
cause. 

I apprehend  that  we  cannot  learn  this  truth  from  ex- 
perience, for  two  reasons. 

First  Because  it  is  a necessary  truth,  not  a contin- 
gent one.  It  agrees  with  the  experience  of  mankind 
since  the  beginning  of  the  world,  that  the  area  of  a 
triangle  is  equal  to  half  the  rectangle  under  its  base 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


415 


and  perpendicular.  It  agrees  no  less  with  experience, 
that  the  sun  rises  in  the  east  and  sets  in  the  west.  So 
far  as  experience  goes,  these  truths  are  upon  an  equal 
footing.  But  every  man  perceives  this  distinction  be- 
tween them,  that  the  first  is  a necessary  truth,  and  that 
it  is  impossible  it  should  not  be  true;  but  the  last  is 
not  necessary,  but  contingent,  depending  upon  the  will 
of  Him  who  made  the  world.  As  we  cannot  learn 
from  experience  that  twice  three  must  necessarily  make 
six,  so  neither  can  we  learn  from  experience  that  certain 
effects  must  proceed  from  a designing  and  intelligent 
cause.  Experience  informs  us  only  of  what  has  been^ 
but  never  of  what  must  be, 

Secondly,  It  may  be  observed,  that  experience  can 
show  a connection  between  a sign,  and  the  thing  signi- 
fied by  it,  in  those  cases  only,  where  both  the  sign  and 
the  thing  signified  are  perceived,  and  have  always  been 
perceived  in  conjunction.  But  if  there  be  any  case 
where  the  sign  only  is  perceived,  experience  can  never 
show  its  connection  with  the  thing  signified.  Thus, 
for  example,  thought  is  a sign  of  a thinking  principle 
or  mind.  But  how  do  we  know  that  thought  cannot 
be  without  a mind  ? If  any  man  should  say  that  he 
knows  this  by  experience,  he  deceives  himself.  It  is 
impossible  he  can  have  any  experience  of  this ; because, 
though  we  have  an  immediate  knowledge  of  the  ex- 
istence of  thought  in  ourselves  by  consciousness,  yet 
we  have  no  immediate  knowledge  of  a mind.  The 
mind  is  not  an  immediate  object  either  of  sense  or  of 
consciousness.  We  may  therefore  justly  conclude,  that 
the  necessary  connection  between  thought  and  a mind, 
or  thinking  being,  is  not  learned  from  experience. 

The  same  reasoning  may  be  applied  to  the  connec- 
tion between  a work  excellently  fitted  for  some  pur- 
pose, and  design  in  the  author  or  cause  of  that  work. 
One  of  these  — to  wit,  the  work  — may  be  an  imme- 
diate object  of  perception.  But  the  design  and  purpose 
of  the  author  cannot  be  an  immediate  object  of  per- 
ception ; and  therefore  experience  can  never  inform  us 
of  any  connection  between  the  one  and  the  other,  far 
less  of  a necessary  connection. 


416 


JUDGMENT. 


Thus  I think  it  appears,  that  the  principle  we  have 
been  considering  — to  wit,  that,  from  certain  signs  or 
indications  in  the  effect,  we  may  infer  that  there  must 
have  been  intelligence,  wisdom,  or  other  intellectual  or 
moral  qualities  in  the  cause  — is  a principle  which  we 
get  neither  by  reasoning  nor  by  experience ; and  there- 
fore, if  it  be  a true  principle,  it  must  be  a first  princi- 
ple. There  is  in  the  human  understanding  a light,  by 
which  we  see  immediately  the  evidence  of  it,  when 
there  is  occasion  to  apply  it. 

Of  how  great  importance  this  principle  is  in  com- 
mon life,  we  have  already  observed.  And  I need 
hardly  mention  its  importance  in  natural  theology. 
The  clear  marks  and  signatures  of  wisdom,  power,  and 
goodness,  in  the  constitution  and  government  of  the 
world,  is,  of  all  arguments  that  have  been  advanced 
for  the  being  and  providence  of  the  Deity,  that  which 
in  all  ages  has  made  the  strongest  impression  upon 
candid  and  thinking  minds  ; an  argument  which  has 
this  peculiar  advantage,  that  it  gathers  strength  as 
human  knowledge  advances,  and  is  more  convincing  at 
present  than  it  was  some  centuries  ago.  King  Alphonso 
might  say,  that  he  could  contrive  a better  planetary 
system  than  that  which  astronomers  held  in  his  day.* 
That  system  was  not  the  work  of  God,  but  the  fiction 
of  men.  But  since  the  true  system  of  the  sun,  moon, 
and  planets  has  been  discovered,  no  man,  however 
atheistically  disposed,  has  pretended  to  show  how  a 
better  could  be  contrived. 

When  we  attend  to  the  marks  of  good  contrivance 
which  appear  in  the  works  of  God,  every  discovery  we 
make  in  the  constitution  of  the  material  or  intellectual 
system  becomes  a hymn  of  praise  to  the  great  Creator 
and  Governor  of  the  world.  And  a man  who  is  pos- 


* Alphonso  X.  of  Castile.  He  flourished  in  the  thirteenth  century,  — 
a great  mathematician  and  astronomer.  To  him  we  owe  the  Alphonsine 
Tables.  His  saying  was  not  so  pious  and  philosophical  as  Reid  states ; 
but  that,  “ had  he  been  present  with  God  at  the  creation,  he  could  have 
supplied  some  useful  hints  towards  the  better  ordering  of  the  universe.” 
— H. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


417 


sessed  of  the  genuine  spirit  of  philosophy  will  think  it 
impiety  to  contaminate  the  Divine  workmanship,  by 
mixing  it  with  those  fictions  of  human  fancy  called 
theories  and  hypotheses,  which  will  always  bear  the 
signatures  of  human  folly,  no  less  than  the  other  bears 
those  of  Divine  wisdom. 

I know  of  no  person  who  ever  called  in  question  the 
principle  now  under  our  consideration,  when  it  is  ap- 
plied to  the  actions  and  discourses  of  men  : for  this 
would  be  to  deny  that  we  have  any  means  of  discern- 
ing a wise  man  from  an  idiot,  or  a man  that  is  illiter- 
ate in  the  highest  degree  from  a man  of  knowledge 
and  learning,  which  no  man  has  had  the  effrontery  to 
do.  But,  in  all  ages,  those  who  have  been  unfriendly 
to  the  principles  of  religion  have  made  attempts  to 
weaken  the  force  of  the  argument  for  the  existence  and 
perfections  of  the  Deity,  which  is  founded  on  this  prin- 
ciple. That  argument  has  got  the  name  of  the 
ment  from  Final  Causes;  and,  as  the  meaning  of  this 
name  is  well  understood,  we  shall  use  it. 

The  argument  from  final  causes,  when  reduced  to  a 
syllogism,  has  these  two  premises  : — Firsts  that  design 
and  intelligence  in  the  cause  may^  with  certainty^  be  in- 
ferred from  marks  or  signs  of  them  in  the  effect-  This 
is  the  principle  we  have  been  considering,  and  we  may 
call  it  the  major  proposition  of  the  argument.  The 
second^  which  we  call  the  minor  proposition,  is,  that 
there  are  in  fact  the  clearest  marks  of  design  and  ivis- 
dom  in  the  works  of  nature.  The  conclusion  is,  that  the 
works  of  nature  are  the  effects  of  a luise  and  intelligent 
cause.  One  must  either  assent  to  the  conclusion,  or 
deny  one  or  other  of  the  premises. 

Those  among  the  ancients  who  denied  a God  or  a 
providence  seem  to  me  to  have  yielded  the  major  prop- 
osition, and  to  have  denied  the  minor ; conceiving  that 
there  are  not  in  the  constitution  of  things  such  marks 
of  wise  contrivance  as  are  sufficient  to  put  the  conclu- 
sion beyond  doubt.  This,  I think,  we  may  learn  from 
the  reasoning  of  Cotta  the  Academic,  in  the  third  book 
of  Cicero,  Of  the  Nature  of  the  Gods. 


418 


JUDGMENT. 


The  gradual  advancement  made  in  the  knowledge  of 
nature  has  put  this  opinion  quite  out  of  countenance. 
When  the  structure  of  the  human  body  was  much  less 
known  than  it  is  now,  the  famous  Galen  saw  such 
evident  marks  of  wise  contrivance  in  it,  that,  though 
he  had  been  educated  an  Epicurean,  he  renounced  that 
system,  and  wrote  his  book  Of  the  Use  of  the  Parts  of 
the  Human  Body^  on  purpose  to  convince  others  of 
what  appeared  so  clear  to  himself,  that  it  was  impos- 
sible that  such  admirable  contrivance  should  be  the 
effect  of  chance.  Those,  therefore,  of  later  times,  who 
are  dissatisfied  with  this  argument  from  final  causes, 
have  quitted  the  stronghold  of  the  ancient  atheists, 
which  had  become  untenable,  and  have  chosen  rather 
to  make  a defence  against  the  major  proposition. 

Descartes  seems  to  have  led  the  way  in  this,  though 
he  was  no  atheist.  But,  having  invented  some  new 
arguments  for  the  being  of  God,  he  was  perhaps  led  to 
disparage  those  that  had  been  used  before,  that  he 
might  bring  more  credit  to  his  own.*  Or  perhaps  he 


* The  following  succinct  statement  of  Descartes’s  proofs  of  a Deity  is 
translated  from  the  Dictionnaire  des  Sciences  Philosophiques^  Art.  Dieu. 

“ The  ontological  proofs  as  it  is  called  by  Kant,  has  for  its  principle  the 
idea  of  an  absolutely  perfect  being.  It  was  first  adduced  in  the  Proslogium 
of  St.  Anselm,  the  argument  of  which,  originally  conceived  under  the 
form  of  a prayer,  may  be  stated  thus;  — All  men  have  the' idea  of  God,  — 
even  those  who  deny  it ; for  they  cannot  deny  that  of  which  they  have  no 
idea.  The  idea  of  God  is  the  idea  of  a being  absolutely  perfect,  one 
whom  we  cannot  imagine  to  have  a superior.  Now  the  idea  of  such  a 
being  necessarily  implies  existence ; otherwise  we  might  imagine  another 
being,  who,  by  the  superaddition  of  existence  to  the  perfection  of  the  first, 
would  thereby  excel  him  ; that  is  to  say,  excel  one  who,  by  supposition,  is 
absolutely  perfect.  Consequently,  we  cannot  conceive  the  idea  of  God 
without  being  constrained  to  believe  that  he  exists.  Descartes,  evidently 
without  any  acquaintance  with  his  predecessor  of  the  eleventh  century, 
fell  on  the  same  proof ; but,  by  the  manner  in  which  he  developed  it,  he 
has  made  it  more  legitimate,  and  saved  it,  in  advance,  from  the  formidable 
objection  of  Kant.  In  fact,  the  philosopher  of  the  Middle  Age,  and,  fol- 
lowing in  the  same  steps,  Cudworth  and  Leibnitz,  confined  themselves 
wholly  to  the  idea  of  perfection,  thinking  to  make  the  notion  of  existence 
come  out  of  that  alone  by  way  of  deduction  and  analysis ; but  they  did 
not  show  how  this  idea  is  indissolubly  connected  with  experience,  or  the 
perception  of  reality,  that  is  to  say,  of  facts,  and  imposed  on  our  mind  as 
the  condition  even  of  reality  and  of  facts,  as  a necessary  and  irresistible 
belief,  and  not  as  a pure  conception,  or  a supposition  invented  at  pleasure. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


419 


was  offended  with  the  Peripatetics,  because  they  often 
mixed  final  causes  with  physical,  in  order  to  account 
for  the  phenomena  of  nature. 


What  they  failed  to  do,  Descartes  has  done.  Taking  for  his  point  of  de- 
parture an  incontestable  fact,  an  immediate  verity,  our  own  existence, 
Descartes  ascends  to  the  belief  in  a being  absolutely  perfect.  The  latter 
belief  is  not  deduced  from  the  former  ; it  is  given  us,  it  is  imposed  upon  us, 
immediately  and  at  the  same  time  with  the  former.  The  Cartesian  argu- 
ment under  its  first  form,  such  as  we  find  it  in  the  Discourse  de  la  MHhode^ 
may  be  expressed  thus; — As  soon  as  I perceive  myself,  an  imperfect 
being,  to  exist,  I have  the  idea  of  a perfect  being,  and  am  under  the  neces- 
sity of  admitting  that  this  idea  has  been  imparted  to  me  by  a being  who  is 
actually  perfect,  who  really  possesses  all  the  perfections  of  which  I have 
some  idea,  — that  is  to  say,  who  is  God.  In  another  place  (3^  Meditation) 
Descartes  has  combined  the  idea  of  perfection  with  the  principle  of  cau- 
sality : — I do  not  exist  by  myself ; for  if  I were  the  cause  of  my  own  ex- 
istence I should  have  given  myself  all  the  perfections  of  which  I have  an 
idea.  I exist  then  by  another,  and  this  being  by  whom  I exist  is  all- 
perfect ; otherwise  I should  be  able  to  apply  to  him  the  same  reasoning 
which  I have  just  applied  to  myself.  It  is  the  argument  of  St.  Anselm, 
and  not  that  of  Descartes,  which  Leibnitz  has  reduced  to  the  form  of  a 
regular  syllogism,  and  which  has  since  been  attacked  by  Kant,  in  his  Critic 
of  Pure  Reason.  The  syllogism  of  Leibnitz  is  as  follows  : — A being  from 
whose  essence  we  can  conclude  existence^  exists  in  fact^  if  it  is  possible.  This 
proposition,  as  it  is  an  identical  axiom,  needs  no  proof.  Now  God  is  such 
a being  that  we  can  infer  from  his  essence  his  existence.  This,  also,  as  it  is 
the  definition  of  God,  stands  in  no  need  of  proofs.  Therefore.,  if  God  is 
possible^  God  exists. — Nouveaux  Essais^  Liv.  IV.  § 7.  Here,  however,  it 
is  proper  to  remark  that  what  Leibnitz  thought  to  add  to  the  Proslogium 
had  been  added  before  by  Cudworth,  using  nearly  the  same  words.  — Intel- 
lectual System,  Chap.  V.  Sect.  I.,  Harrison’s  edit.,  Vol.  III.  p.  39. 

“ Another  proof,  wholly  due  to  Descartes  {Discours  de  la  MUhode,  4® 
Partie,  and  3®  Meditation),  is  that  which  is  drawn  from  the  idea  of  the  in- 
finite. It  has  received  from  the  author  of  the  Meditations  the  same  form 
as  the  preceding,  with  which  it  is  blended.  It  is  presented  to  us,  therefore, 
as  an  immediate  or  first  principle  of  reason,  of  which  we  have  cognizance 
as  soon  as  we  arrive  at  consciousness  of  ourselves,  and  which  we  can  no 
more  call  into  doubt  than  our  own  existence.  At  the  same  time,  says 
Descartes,  that  I perceive  myself  as  a finite  being,  I have  the  idea  of  an 
infinite  being.  This  idea,  from  which  I cannot  withdraw  myself,  and 
which  is  derived  from  no  other  idea,  comes  to  me  neither  from  myself  nor 
from  any  other  finite  being  5 for  how  could  the  finite  produce  the  idea  of 
the  infinite  ? Therefore  it  has  been  imparted  to  me  by  a being  really  in- 
finite. Hence  we  see  that  the  Infinite,  such  as  Descartes  conceives  it,  is 
not  an  abstract  notion,  applicable  indiscriminately  to  all  things  ; it  is  the 
very  principle  of  our  ideas,  — that  is  to  say,  of  reason  and  of  thought.” 

See  the  same  article  for  a statement  of  three  other  forms  of  the  meta- 
physical argument  for  the  Divine  existence.  This  argument  is  not  in  favor 
among  English  theologians  generally ; but  those  who  have  adopted  it  are  i, 
among  the  most  distinguished,  — such  as  Henry  More,  Dr.  Samuel 
Clarke,  and  Bishop  Butler.  The  popular  objections  chiefly  insisted  on  at 
the  present  day  are  not  new.  See  also  L.  E.  Ancillon,  Judicium  de  Judiciis 


420 


JUDGMENT. 


He  maintained,  therefore,  that  physical  causes  only 
should  be  assigned  for  phenomena  ; that  the  philoso- 
pher has  nothing  to  do  with  final  causes  ; and  that  it 
is  presumption  in  us  to  pretend  to  determine  for  what 
end  any  work  of  nature  is  framed.  Some  of  those 
who  were  great  admirers  of  Descartes,  and  followed 
him  in  many  points,  differed  from  him  in  this,  particu- 
larly Dr.  Henry  More  and  the  pious  Archbishop  Fene- 
lon : but  others,  after  the  example  of  Descartes,  have 
shown  a contempt  of  all  reasoning  from  final  causes. 
Among  these,  I think,  we  may  reckon  Maupertuis  and 
Buffon.  But  the  most  direct  attack  has  been  made 
upon  this  principle  by  Mr.  Hume,  who  puts  an  argu- 
ment in  the  mouth  of  an  Epicurean,  on  which  he  seems 
to  lay  great  stress. 

The  argument  is,  that  the  universe  is  a singular 
effect,  and  therefore  we  can  draw  no  conclusion  from 
it,  whether  it  may  have  been  made  by  wisdom  or  not. 
If  I understand  the  force  of  this  argument,  it  amounts 
to  this,  — that  if  we  had  been  accustomed  to  see 
worlds  produced,  some  by  wisdom  and  others  without  it^ 
and  had  observed  that  such  a world  as  this  which  we 
inhabit  was  always  the  effect  of  wisdom,  we  might 
then,  from  past  experience,  conclude  that  this  world 
was  made  by  wisdom ; but  having  no  such  experience, 
we  have  no  means  of  forming  any  conclusion  about  it. 

That  this  is  the  strength  of  the  argument  appears, 
because,  if  the  marks  of  wi»sdom  seen  in  one  world  be 
no  evidence  of  wisdom,  the  like  marks  seen  in  ten 
thousand  will  give  as  little  evidence,  unless,  in  time 
past,  we  perceived  wisdom  itself  conjoined  with  the 
tokens  of  it ; and,  from  their  perceived  conjunction 
in  time  past,  conclude,  that  although,  in  the  present 
world,  we  see  only  one  of  the  two,  the  other  must  ac- 
company it. 


circa  Argumentum  Cartesium  pro  Existentia  Dei;  Bouchitte,  Histoire  des 
Preuves  de  V Existence  de  Dieu^  published  in  Memoires  de  VAcademie  Royale 
des  Sciences  Morales  et  Politigues,  Tome  I.,  Savants  Strangers ; Crombie’s 
Natural  Theology^  Chap.  I. ; Turton’s  Natural  Theology  considered  with  Ref- 
erence to  Lord  Brougham? s Discourse  on  that  Subject,  Sect,  V.  — Ed. 


FIRST  PRINCIPLES. 


421 


Whence  it  appears,  that  this  reasoning  of  Mr.  Hume 
is  built  on  the  supposition,  that  our  inferring  design 
from  the  strongest  marks  of  it  is  entirely  owing  to  our 
past  experience  of  having  always  found  these  two  things 
conjoined.  But  I hope  I have  made  it  evident  that  this 
is  not  the  case.  And  indeed  it  is  evident,  that,  accord- 
ing to  this  reasoning,  we  can  have  no  evidence  of  mind 
or  design  in  any  of  our  fellow-men. 

How  do  I know  that  any  man  of  my  acquaintance 
has  understanding?  I never  saw  his  understanding. 
I see  only  certain  effects,  which  my  judgment  leads  me 
to  conclude  to  be  marks  and  tokens  of  it. 

But,  says  the  skeptical  philosopher,  you  can  conclude 
nothing  from  these  tokens,  unless  past  experience  has 
informed  you  that  such  tokens  are  always  joined  with 
understanding.  Alas ! Sir,  it  is  impossible  I can  ever 
have  this  experience.  The  understanding  of  another 
man  is  no  immediate  object  of  sight,  or  of  any  other 
faculty  which  God  has  given  me  ; and  unless  I can 
conclude  its  existence  from  tokens  that  are  visible,  I 
have  no  evidence  that  there  is  understanding  in  any 
man. 

It  seems,  then,  that  the  man  who  maintains  that 
there  is  no  force  in  the  argument  from  final  causes, 
must,  if  he  will  be  consistent,  see  no  evidence  of  the 
existence  of  any  intelligent  being  but  himself.* 


* Compare  Kant’s  Critic  of  Pure  Reason^  Third  Division  of  the  Second 
Book  of  Transcendental  Dialectic ; Lord  Brougham’s^DiscoMrse  on  Natural 
I Theology^  Part  I. ; Baden  Powell’s  Connection  of  Natural  and  Divine  Truths 
Sect,  iil.,  IV. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  Part  I.  Book 
IX.  Chap.  VI. ; Hume’s  Dialogues  concerning  Natural  Religion ; Irons’s 
Whole  Doctrine  of  Final  Causes ; Bowen’s  Lowell  Lectures,  Lect.  IX.  See, 
also,  the  works  by  Bouchitte,  Crombie,  and  Turton,  referred  to  in  the  last 
note.  — Ed. 


36 


ESSAY  VII 


OF  REASONING. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  REASONING  IN  GENERAL,  AND  OF  DEMONSTRATION. 

I.  Of  Reasoning^  in  General^  as  distinguished  from 
Judgment]  The  power  of  reasoning  is  very  nearly  al- 
lied to  that  oi  judging ; and  it  is  of  little  consequence 
in  the  common  affairs  of  life  to  distinguish  them  nicely. 
On  this  account,  the  same  name  is  often  given  to  both. 
We  include  both  under  the  name  of  reason*  The  as- 


* “ Reason  (Xoyoy,  ratio^  raison^  Vernunft)  is  a very  vague,  vacillating,  and 
equivocal  word.  Throwing  aside  various  accidental  significations  which  it 
has  obtained  in  particular  languages,  as  in  Greek  denoting  not  only  the 
ratio^  but  the  oratio^  of  the  Latins  ; throwing  aside  its  employment,  in  most 
languages,  for  cause^  motive^  argument^  principle  of  probation^  or  middle  term 
of  a syllogism^  and  considering  it  only  as  a philosophical  word  denoting  a 
faculty,  or  complement  of  faculties  ; — in  this  relation  it  is  found  employed 
in  the  following  meanings,  not  only  by  different  individuals,  but  frequently, 
to  a greater  or  less  ej^tent,  by  the  same  philosopher. 

“It  has,  both  in  ancient  and  modern  times,  been  very  commonly  em- 
ployed, like  understanding  and  intellect^  to  denote  our  intelligent  nature  in 
general  (XoyiKov  pepos)  i and  this  usually  as  distinguished  from  the  lower 
cognitive  faculties,  as  sense,  imagination,  memory,  — but  always,  and  em- 
phatically, as  in  contrast  to  the  feelings  and  desires.  In  this  signification, 
to  follow  the  Aristotelic  division,  it  comprehends,  — 1°,  conception^  or  simple 
apprehension  {evvoia,  vogats  t<ov  ddLaipeTcov,  conceptus,  conception  apprehensio 
simplex^  das  Begreifen) ; — 2*^,  the  compositive  and  divisive  process^  affirmation 
and  negationn  judgment  {o-vvdea-is  Ka\  dLalp€a'LS,d7r6(j>av(Tis,  judicium)  ; — 3°, 
reasoning  or  the  discursive  faculty  {fiidvoia^  Xoyos,  \oyiap6s,  to  (ruXXoyt- 
(ecrSal,  discursus^  ratiocinatio)  ) — 4°,  intellect  or  intelligence  proper,  either  as 
the  intuition,  or  as  the  place,  of  principles  or  self-evident  truths  {vovs,  in- 
tellectuSn  intelligentian  mens). 

“ It  has  not  unfrequently  been  employed  to  comprehend  the  third  and 
fourth  of  the  special  functions  above  enumerated,  — to  wit,  the  dianoetic 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


423 


sent  we  give  to  a proposition  is  called  judgment,  wheth- 
er the  proposition  be  self-evident,  or  derive  its  evi- 
dence by  reasoning  from  other  propositions.  Yet  there 
is  a distinction  between  reasoning  and  judging.  Rea- 
soning is  the  process  by  which  we  pass  from  one  judg- 
ment to  another  which  is  the  consequence  of  it.  Accord- 


and  noetic.  In  this  meaning  it  is  taken  by  Keid  in  his  later  works.  Thus, 
in  the  Intellectual  Powers.,  he  states  that  reason,  in  its  first  office  or  degree 
(the  noetic),  is  identical  with  common  sense,  — in  its  second  (the  dianoetic), 
with  reasoning, 

“ It  has  very  generally,  both  in  ancient  and  modem  philosophy,  been 
employed  for  the  third  of  the  above  special  functions ; — and  \oyL(Tii6s, 

ratio  and  ratiocinatio,  reason  and  reasoning,  being  thus  compounded. 

“ In  the  ancient  systems  it  was  very  rarely  used  exclusively  for  XhQ  fourth 
special  function,  the  noetic,  in  contrast  to  the  dianoetic.  Aristotle,  indeed 
{Eth.  Nic.,  Lib.  VI.  c.  12;  Eth.  Eud.,  Lib.  V.  c.  8),  expressly  says  that 
reason  is  not  the  faculty  of  principles,  that  faculty  being  intelligence  proper. 
Boethius  {De  Cons.  Phil.,  Lib.  V.  Pr.  5)  states  fhat  reason  or  discursive  in- 
tellect belongs  to  man,  while  intelligence  or  intuitive  intellect  is  the  exclusive 
attribute  of  Divinity  ; while  Porphyry  somewhere  says  that  ‘ we  have  intel- 
ligence in  common  with  the  gods,  and  reason  in  common  with  the  brutes.’ 
Sometimes,  however,  it  was  apparently  so  employed.  Thus  St.  Augustine 
seems  to  view  reason  as  the  faculty  of  intuitive  truths,  and  as  opposed  to 
reasoning  {De  Quant.  An.,  § 53  ; De  Immort.  An.,  §§  1,  10).  This,  however, 
is  almost  a singular  exception. 

“ In  modern  times,  though  we  frequently  meet  with  reason,  as  a general 
faculty,  distinguished  from  reasoning,  as  a particular,  yet,  until  Kant,  I am 
not  aware  that  reason  ( Vernunft)  was  ever  exclusively,  or  even  emphatically, 
used  in  a signification  corresponding  to  the  noetic  faculty,  in  its  strict  and 
special  meaning,  and  opposed  to  understanding  ( Verstana)  viewed  as  com- 
prehending the  other  functions  of  thought,  — unless  Crusius  (Weg,&.c., 
§ 62  etseq.)  maybe  regarded  as  Kant’s  forerunner  in  this  innovation.  In- 
deed, the  Vernunft  of  Kant,  in  its  special  signification  (for  he  also  uses  it 
for  reason  in  the  first  or  more  general  meaning,  as  indeed  nothing  can  be 
more  vague  and  various  than  his  employment  of  the  word),  cannot  without 
considerable  qualification  be  considered  analogous  to  vovs,  far  less  to  com- 
mon sense ; though  his  usurpation  of  the  term  for  the  faculty  of  principles 
probably  determined  Jacobi  (who  had  originally,  like  philosophers  in  gen- 
eral, confounded  Vernunft  with  Verstand,  reason  with  reasoning)  to  appro- 
priate the  term  reason  to  what  he  had  at  first  opposed  to  it,  under  the  name 
of  belief  ( Glaube). 

“ Kant’s  abusive  employment  of  the  term  reason,  for  the  faculty  of  the 
Unconditioned,  determined  also  its  adoption,  under  the  same  signification, 
in  the  philosophy  of  Fichte,  Schelling,  and  Hegel ; though  vovs,  intellectus, 
intelligentia,  which  had  been  applied  by  the  Platonists  in  a similar  sense, 
were  ("through  Verstand,  by  which  they  had  been  always  rendered  into 
German)  the  only  words  suitable  to  express  that  cognition  of  the  Absolute, 
in  which  subject  and  object,  knowledge  and  existence,  God  and  man,  are 
supposed  to  be  identified.” 

Abridged  from  Sir  W.  Hamilton’s  Note  A,  § 5.  — Ed. 


424 


REASONING. 


ingly,  our  judgments  are  distinguished  into  intuitive^ 
which  are  not  grounded  upon  any  preceding  judgment, 
and  discursive^  which  are  deduced  from  some  preceding 
judgment  by  reasoning. 

In  all  reasoning,  therefore,  there  must  be  a proposi- 
tion inferred,  and  one  or  more  from  which  it  is  inferred. 
And  this  power  of  inferring,  or  drawing  a conclusion,  is 
only  another  name  for  reasoning ; the  proposition  in- 
ferred being  called  the  conclusion^  and  the  proposition 
or  propositions  from  which  it  is  inferred,  the  premises. 

Reasoning  may  consist  of  many  steps  ; the  first  con- 
clusion being  a premise  to  a second,  that  to  a third, 
and  so  on,  till  we  come  to  the  last  conclusion.  A pro- 
cess consisting  of  many  steps  of  this  kind  is  so  easily 
distinguished  from  judgment,  that  it  is  never  called  by 
that  name.  But  when  there  is  only  a single  step  to  the 
conclusion,  the  distinction  is  less  obvious,  and  the  pro- 
cess is  sometimes  called  judgment,  sometimes  reason- 
ing. 

It  is  not  strange,  that,  in  common  discourse,  judg- 
ment and  reasoning  should  not  be  very  nicely  distin- 
guished, since  they  are  in  some  cases  confounded  even 
by  logicians.  We  are  taught  in  logic,  that  judgment 
is  expressed  by  one  proposition,  but  that  reasoning  re- 
quires two  or  three.  But  so  various  are  the  modes  of 
speech,  that  what  in  one  mode  is  expressed  by  two  or 
three  propositions  may  in  another  mode  be  expressed 
by  one.  Thus  I may  say,  God  is  good;  therefore  good 
men  shall  be  happy.  This  is  reasoning,  of  that  kind 
which  logicians  call  an  enthymem^  consisting  of  an  an- 
tecedent proposition,  and  a conclusion  drawn  from  it. 
But  this  reasoning  may  be  expressed  by  one  proposi- 
tion, thus:  Because  God  is  good^  good  men  shall  be 
happy.  This  is  what  they  call  a causal  proposition^  and 
therefore  expresses  judgment ; yet  the  enthymem,  which 
is  reasoning,  expresses  no  more. 

Reasoning,  as  well  as  judgment,  must  be  true  or 
false  ; both  are  grounded  upon  evidence  which  may  be 
probable  or  demonstrative,  and  both  are  accompanied 
with  assent  or  belief. 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


425 


The  power  of  reasoning  is  justly  accounted  one  of 
the  prerogatives  of  human  nature  ; because  by  it  many 
important  truths  have  been  and  may  be  discovered, 
which  without  it  would  be  beyond  our  reach ; yet  it 
seems  to  be  only  a kind  of  crutch  to  a limited  under 
standing.  We  can  conceive  an  understanding,  superior 
to  human,  to  which  that  truth  appears  intuitively  which 
we  can  only  discover  by  reasoning.  For  this  cause, 
though  we  must  ascribe  judgment  to  the  Almighty, 
we  do  not  ascribe  reasoning  to  him,  because  it  implies 
some  defect  or  limitation  of  understanding.  Even 
among  men,  to  use  reasoning  in  things  that  are  self- 
evident  is  trifling ; like  a man  going  upon  crutches 
when  he  can  walk  upon  his  legs. 

What  reasoning  is  can  be  understood  only  by  a man 
who  has  reasoned,  and  who  is  capable  of  reflecting 
upon  this  operation  of  his  own  mind.  We  can  define 
it  only  by  synonymous  words  or  phrases,  such  as  infer- 
ring^ drawing  a conclusion^  and  the  like.  The  very  no- 
tion of  reasoning,  therefore,  can  enter  into  the  mind  by 
no  other  channel  than  that  of  reflecting  upon  the  opera- 
tion of  reasoning  in  our  own  minds  ; and  the  notions 
of  premises  and  conclusion,  of  a syllogism  and  all  its 
constituent  parts,  of  an  enthymem,  sorites,  demonstra- 
tion, paralogism,  and  many  others,  have  the  same  ori- 

gin- 

The  exercise  of  reasoning  on  various  subjects,  not 
only  strengthens  the  faculty,  but  furnishes  the  mind 
with  a store  of  materials.  Every  train  of  reasoning 
which  is  familiar  becomes  a beaten  track  in  the  way  to 
many  others.  It  removes  many  obstacles  which  lay  in 
our  way,  and  smooths  many  roads  which  we  may  have 
occasion  to  travel  in  future  disquisitions.  When  men 
of  equal  natural  parts  apply  their  reasoning  power  to 
any  subject,  the  man  who  has  reasoned  much  on  the 
same  or  on  similar  subjects  has  a like  advantage  over 
him  who  has  not,  as  the  mechanic  who  has  store  of 
tools  for  his  work  has  over  him  who  has  his  tools  to 
make,  or  even  to  invent. 

In  a train  of  reasoning,  the  evidence  of  every  step, 

36* 


426 


REASONING. 


where  nothing  is  left  to  be  supplied  by  the  reader  or 
hearer,  must  be  immediately  discernible  to  every  man  of 
ripe  understanding  who  has  a distinct  comprehension  of 
the  premises  and  conclusion^  and  who  compares  them  to- 
gether, To  be  able  to  comprehend,  in  one  view,  a com- 
bination of  steps  of  this  kind,  is  more  difficult,  and 
seems  to  require  a superior  natural  ability.  In  all,  it 
may  be  much  improved  by  habit. 

But  the  highest  talent  in  reasoning  is  the  invention  of 
proofs ; by  which,  truths  remote  from  the  premises  are 
brought  to  light.  In  all  works  of  understanding,  inven- 
tion has  the  highest  praise  ; it  requires  an  extensive 
view  of  what  relates  to  the  subject,  and  a quickness  in 
discerning  those  affinities  and  relations  which  may  be 
subservient  to  the  purpose. 

In  all  invention  there  must  be  some  end  in  view : and 
sagacity  in  finding  out  the  road  that  leads  to  this  end 
is,  I think,  what  we  call  invention.  In  this  chiefly,  as  I 
apprehend,  and  in  clear  and  distinct  conceptions,  con- 
sists that  superiority  of  understanding  which  we  call 
genius. 

In  every  chain  of  reasoning,  the  evidence  of  the  last 
conclusion  can  be  no  greater  than  that  of  the  iveakest 
link  of  the  chain^  whatever  may  be  the  strength  of  the 
rest. 

II.  Of  Demonstrative  Reasoning,]  The  most  remark- 
able distinction  of  reasonings  is,  that  some  are  probable^ 
others  demonstrative. 

In  every  step  of  demonstrative  reasoning,  the  infer- 
ence is  necessary,  and  we  perceive  it  to  be  impossible 
that  the  conclusion  should  not  follow  from  the  premises. 
In  probable  reasoning,  the  connection  between  the 
premises  and  the  conclusion  is  not  necessary,  nor  do  we 
perceive  it  to  be  impossible  that  the  first  should  be  true 
while  the  last  is  false. 

Hence  demonstrative  reasoning  has  no  degrees,  nor 
can  one  demonstration  be  stronger  than  another,  though, 
in  relation  to  our  faculties,  one  may  be  more  easily 
comprehended  than  another.  Every  demonstration 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


427 


gives  equal  strength  to  the  conclusion,  and  leaves  no 
possibility  of  its  being  false. 

It  was,  I think,  the  opinion  of  all  the  ancients,  that 
demonstrative  reasoning  can  be  applied  only  to  truths 
that  are  necessary,  and  not  to  those  that  are  contin- 
gent. In  this,  I believe,  they  judged  right.  Of  all 
created  things,  the  existence,  the  attributes,  and  conse- 
quently the  relations  resulting  from  those  attributes,  are 
contingent.  They  depend  upon  the  will  and  power  of 
him  who  made  them.  These  are  mailers  of  fact^  and 
admit  not  of  demonstration. 

The  field  of  demonstrative  reasoning,  therefore,  is 
the  various  relations  of  things  abstract^  that  is,  of  things 
which  we  conceive,  without  regard  to  their  existence. 
Of  these,  as  they  are  conceived  by  the  mind,  and  are 
nothing  but  what  they  are  conceived  to  be,  we  may 
have  a clear  and  adequate  comprehension.  Their  re- 
lations and  attributes  are  necessary  and  immutable. 
They  are  the  things  to  which  the  Pythagoreans  and 
Platonists  gave  the  name  of  ideas.  I would  beg  leave 
to  borrow  this  meaning  of  the  word  idea  from  those 
ancient  philosophers,  and  then  I must  agree  with  them, 
that  ideas  are  the  only  objects  about  which  we  can 
reason  demonstratively. 

There  are  many  even  of  our  ideas  about  which  we  can 
carry  on  no  considerable  train  of  reasoning.  Though 
they  be  ever  so  well  defined  and  perfectly  comprehend- 
ed, yet  their  agreements  and  disagreements  are  few, 
and  these  are  discerned  at  once.  We  may  go  a step 
or  two  in  forming  a conclusion  with  regard  to  such  ob- 
jects, but  can  go  no  farther.  There  are  others,  about 
which  we  may,  by  a long  train  of  demonstrative  reason- 
ing, arrive  at  conclusions  very  remote  and  unexpected. 

The  reasonings  I have  met  with  that  can  be  called 
strictly  demonstrative  may,  I think,  be  reduced  to  two 
classes.  They  are  either  metaphysical^  or  they  are  math- 
ematical. 

In  metaphysical  reasoning,  the  process  is  always 
short.  The  conclusion  is  but  a step  or  two,  seldom 
more,  from  the  first  principle  or  axiom  on  which  it  is 


428 


REASONING. 


grounded,  and  the  different  conclusions  depend  not  one 
upon  another. 

It  is  otherwise  in  mathematical  reasoning.  Here  the 
field  has  no  limits.  One  proposition  leads  on  to  another, 
that  to  a third,  and  so  on  without  end. 

If  it  should  be  asked,  why  demonstrative  reasoning 
has  so  wide  a field  in  mathematics,  while,  in  other 
abstract  subjects,  it  is  confined  within  very  narrow 
limits,  I conceive  this  is  chiefly  owing  to  the  nature  of 
quantity^  the  object  of  mathematics. 

Every  quantity,  as  it  has  magnitude,  and  is  divisible 
into  parts  without  end,  so,  in  respect  of  its  magnitude, 
it  has  a certain  ratio  to  every  quantity  of  the  kind. 
The  ratios  of  quantities  are  innumerable,  such  as,  a 
half,  a third,  a tenth,  double,  triple.  All  the  powers  of 
number  are  insufficient  to  express  the  variety  of  ratios. 
For  there  are  innumerable  ratios  which  cannot  be  per- 
fectly expressed  by  numbers,  such  as  the  ratio  of  the 
side  to  the  diagonal  of  a square,  of  the  circumference 
of  a circle  to  the  diameter.  Of  this  infinite  variety  of 
ratios,  every  one  may  be  clearly  conceived,  and  dis- 
tinctly expressed,  so  as  to  be  in  no  danger  of  being  mis- 
taken for  any  other.  Extended  quantities,  such  as 
lines,  surfaces,  solids,  besides  the  variety  of  relations 
they  have  in  respect  of  magnitude,  have  no  less  variety 
in  respect  of  figure;  and  every  mathematical  figure 
may  be  accurately  defined^  so  as  to  distinguish  it  from 
all  others. 

There  is  nothing  of  this  kind  in  other  objects  of  ab- 
stract reasoning.  Some  of  them  have  various  degrees ; 
but  these  are  not  capable  of  measure^  nor  can  they  be  said 
to  have  an  assignable  ratio  to  others  of  the  kind.  They 
are  either  simple,  or  compounded  of  a few  indivisible 
parts  ; and  therefore,  if  we  may  be  allowed  the  expres- 
sion, can  touch  only  in  few  points.  But  mathematical 
quantities,  being  made  up  of  parts  without  number,  can 
touch  in  innumerable  points,  and  be  compared  in  innu- 
merable different  ways. 

There  have  been  attempts  made  to  measure  the  merit 
of  actions  by  the  ratios  of  the  affections  and  principles 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


429 


of  action  from  which  they  proceed.  This  may,  per- 
haps, in  the  way  of  analogy,  serve  to  illustrate  what 
was  before  known ; but  I do  not  think  any  truth  can 
be  discovered  in  this  way.  There  are,  no  doubt,  de- 
grees of  benevolence,  self-love,  and  other  affections ; 
but  when  we  apply  ratios  to  them,  I apprehend  we 
have  no  distinct  meaning.* 

Some  demonstrations  are  called  direct^  others  indirecL 
The  first  kind  leads  directly  to  the  conclusion  to  be 
proved.  Of  the  indirect,  some  are  called  demonstra- 
tions ad  absurdum.  In  these  the  proposition  contradic- 
tory to  that  which  is  to  be  proved  is  demonstrated  to 
be  false,  or  to  lead  to  an  absurdity ; whence  it  follows, 
that  its  contradictory,  that  is,  the  proposition  to  be 
proved,  is  true.  This  inference  is  grounded  upon  an 
axiom  in  logic,  that,  of  two  contradictory  propositions, 
if  one  be  false,  the  other  must  be  true.f 

* Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  in  his  ingenious  chapter,  Of  Demonstration  and  Neces- 
sary Truths,  says : — “ The  opinion  of  Dugald  Stewart  respecting  the 
foundations  of  geometry  is,  I conceive,  substantially  correct ; — that  it  is 
built  upon  hypotheses ; that  it  owes  to  this  alone  the  peculiar  certainty 
supposed  to  distinguish  it ; and  that  in  any  science  whatever,  by  reasoning 
from  a set  of  hypotheses,  we  may  obtain  a body  of  conclusions  as  certain 
as  those  of  geometry,  that  is,  as  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  hypotheses, 
and  as  irresistibly  compelling  assent  on  condition  that  those  hypotheses  are 
true.”  He  allov/s,  however,  that  the  opponents  of  Stewart  have  greatly 
the  advantage  of  him  on  another  important  point  in  the  theoiy  of  geomet- 
rical reasoning,  — the  necessity  of  admitting  as  first  principles  axioms  as 
well  as  definitions.  “ The  axioms,”  he  says,  as  well  those  which  are  in- 
demonstrable as  those  which  admit  of  being  demonstrated,  differ  from  that 
other  class  of  fundamental  principles  which  are  involved  in  the  definitions, 
in  this,  that  they  are  true  without  any  mixture  of  hypothesis.”  “ It  re- 
mains to  inquire,  what  is  the  ground  of  our  belief  in  axioms  ? — what  is 
the  evidence  on  which  they  rest  ? I answer,  they  are  experimental  truths  ; 
generalizations  from  observation.  The  proposition.  Two  straight  lines  can- 
not inclose  a space,  — or,  in  other  words,  Two  straight  lines  which  have  once 
met  do  not  meet  again,  hut  continue  to  diverge,  — is  an  induction  from  the  evi- 
dence of  our  senses.”  According  to  Mill,  therefore,  all  truths,  including 
mathematical  truth,  are  either  empirical  or  hypothetical. 

For  a brilliant  polemic  on  this  whole  subject,  see  Stewart,  Elements, 
Part  II.  Chap.  IV. ; WhewelPs  Mechanical  Euclid,  to  which  are  added,  Re- 
marks on  Mathematical  Reasoning,  and  his  Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sci- 
ences, Part  I.  Book  II. ; Edinburgh  Review,  Vol.  LX VII.  p.  81  et  seq  ; 
Quarterly  Review,  Vol.  LXVIII.  p.  177  et  seq.;  Mill’s  Logic,  Book  II. 
Chap.  V.,  VI.  — Ed. 

t This  is  called  the  principle  of  the  excluded  middle,  — viz.  between  two 
contradictories.  — H. 

The  lex  exclusi  medii  reads  thus : — “ Either  a given  judgment  must  be 
true  of  any  subject,  or  its  contradictory ; there  is  no  middle  course.” — Ed. 


430 


REASONING. 


Another  kind  of  indirect  demonstration  proceeds  by 
enumerating  all  the  suppositions  that  can  possibly  be 
made  concerning  the  proposition  to  be  proved,  and  then 
demonstrating  that  all  of  them,  excepting  that  which  is 
to  be  proved,  are  false  ; whence  it  follows,  that  the  ex- 
cepted supposition  is  true.  Thus  one  line  is  proved  to 
be  equal  to  another,  by  proving  first  that  it  cannot  be 
greater,  and  then  tha-t  it  cannot  be  less  : for  it  must  be 
either  greater,  or  less,  or  equal ; and  two  of  these  sup- 
positions being  demonstrated  to  be  false,  the  third  must 
be  true. 

All  these  kinds  of  demonstration  are  used  in  mathe- 
matics, and  perhaps  some  others.  They  have  all  equal 
strength.  The  direct  demonstration  is  preferred  where 
it  can  be  had,  for  this  reason  only,  as  I apprehend,  that 
it  is  the  shortest  road  to  the  conclusion.  The  nature 
of  the  evidence  and  its  strength  are  the  same  in  all : 
only  we  are  conducted  to  it  by  different  roads. 

III.  Hov)  far  Morality  is  capable  of  Demonstration,^ 
What  has  been  said  of  demonstrative  reasoning  may 
help  us  to  judge  of  an  opinion  of  Mr.  Locke,  advanced 
in  several  places  of  his  Essay  ; — to  wit,  that  morality 
is  capable  of  demonstration  as  well  as  mathematics.” 

In  Book  III.  Chap.  XL,  having  observed  that,  mixed 
modes,  especially  those  belonging  to  morality,  being 
such  combinations  of  ideas  as  the  mind  puts  together 
of  its  own  choice,  the  signification  of  their  names  may 
be  perfectly  and  exactly  defined,  he  adds,  § 16 : — 
“ Upon  this  ground  it  is  that  I am  bold  to  think,  that 
morality  is  capable  of  demonstration  as  well  as  mathe- 
matics : since  the  precise  real  essence  of  the  things 
moral  words  stand  for  may  be  perfectly  known,  and  so 
the  congruity  or  incongruity  of  the  things  themselves 
be  certainly  discovered,  in  which  consists  perfect  knowl- 
edge. Nor  let  any  one  object,  that  the  names  of  sub- 
stances are  often  to  be  made  use  of  in  morality,  as  well 
as  those  of  modes,  from  which  will  arise  obscurity ; for, 
as  to  substances,  when  concerned  in  moral  discourses, 
their  divers  natures  are  not  so  much  inquired  into  as 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


431 


supposed : v,  g*.,  when  we  say  that  man  is  subject  to 
law^  we  mean  nothing  by  man  but  a corporeal  rational 
creature ; what  the  real  essence  or  other  qualities  of 
that  creature  are,  in  this  case,  is  no  way  considered.” 

Again,  in  Book  IV.  Chap.  III.  § 18  : — “ The  idea  of 
a Supreme  Being,  whose  workmanship  we  are,  and  the 
idea  of  ourselves,  being  such  as  are  clear  in  us,  would, 
I suppose,  if  duly  considered  and  pursued,  afford  such 
foundation  of  our  duty  and  rules  of  action,  as  might 
place  morality  among  the  sciences  capable  of  demon- 
stration. The  relation  of  other  modes  may  certainly 
be  perceived,  as  well  as  those  of  number  and  exten- 
sion ; and  I cannot  see  why  they  should  not  be  capable 
of  demonstration,  if  due  methods  were  thought  on  to 
examine  or  pursue  their  agreement  or  disagreement.” 

He  afterwards  gives  as  instances  two  propositions,  as 
moral  propositions  of  which  we  may  be  as  certain  as 
of  any  in  mathematics  ; and  considers  at  large  what 
may  have  given  the  advantage  to  the  ideas  of  quantity^ 
and  made  them  be  thought  more  capable  of  certainty 
and  demonstration. 

Some  of  his  learned  correspondents,  particularly  his 
friend  Mr.  Molyneux,  urged  and  importuned  him  to 
compose  a system  of  morals  according  to  the  idea  he 
had  advanced  in  his  Essay ; and,  in  his  answer  to  these 
solicitations,  he  only  pleads  other  occupations,  without 
suggesting  any  change  of  his  opinion,  or  any  great  dif- 
ficulty in  the  execution  of  what  was  desired. 

Those  philosophers  who  think  that  our  determina- 
tions in  morals  are  not  real  judgments,  that  right  and 
wrong  in  human  conduct  are  only  certain  feelings  or 
sensations  in  the  person  who  contemplates  the  action, 
must  reject  Mr.  Locke’s  opinion  without  examination. 
For  if  the  principles  of  morals  be  not  a matter  of  judg- 
ment, but  of  feeling  only,  there  can  be  no  demonstra- 
tion of  them ; nor  can  any  other  reason  be  given  for 
them,  but  that  men  are  so  constituted  by  the  Author  of 
their  being,  as  to  contemplate  with  pleasure  the  actions 
we  call  virtuous,  and  with  disgust  those  we  call  vicious. 
But  if  our  determinations  in  morality  be  real  judg- 


432 


REASONING. 


merits^  and,  like  all  other  judgments,  be  either  true  or 
false^  it  is  not  unimportant  to  understand  upon  what 
kind  of  evidence  those  judgments  rest. 

The  argument  offered  b^y  Mr.  Locke,  to  show  that 
morality  is  capable  of  demonstration,  is,  that  ‘‘  the  pre- 
cise real  essence  of  the  things  moral  words  stand  for 
may  be  perfectly  known,  and  so  the  congruity  or  incon- 
gruity of  the  things  themselves  be  certainly  discovered, 
in  which  consists  perfect  knowledge.”  The  field  of 
demonstration  is  the  various  relations  of  things  con- 
ceived abstractly,  of  which  we  may  have  perfect  and 
adequate  conceptions  ; and  Mr.  Locke,  taking  all  the 
things  which  moral  words  stand  for  to  be  of  this  kind, 
concluded  that  morality  is  as  capable  of  demonstration 
as  mathematics. 

Now  I acknowledge  that  the  names  of  the  virtues 
and  vices,  of  right  and  obligation,  of  liberty  and  prop- 
erty, stand  for  things  abstract,  which  may  be  accurately 
defined,  or,  at  least,  conceived  as  distinctly  and  ade- 
quately as  mathematical  quantities.  And  thence,  in- 
deed, it  follows,  that  their  mutual  relations  may  be 
perceived  as  clearly  and  certainly  as  mathematical 
truths.  Of  this  Mr.  Locke  gives  two  pertinent  exam- 
ples : the  first,  “ Where  there  is  no  property^  there  is  no 
injustice^  is,”  says  he,  “ a proposition  as  certain  as  any 
demonstration  in  Euclid.”  When  injustice  is  defined 
to  be  a violation  of  property,  it  is  as  necessary  a truth, 
that  there  can  be  no  injustice  where  there  is  no  prop- 
erty, as  that  you  cannot  take  from  a man  that  which 
he  has  not.  The  second  example  is,  that  ‘‘  no  govern^ 
ment  allows  absolute  liberty^  This  is  a truth  no  less 
certain  and  necessary.  But  such  abstract  truths  I 
would  call  metaphysical  rather  than  moral.  We  give 
the  name  of  mathematical  to  truths  that  express  the 
relations  of  quantities  considered  abstractly;  all  other 
abstract  truths  may  be  called  metaphysical.  But  if 
those  mentioned  by  Mr.  Locke  are  to  be  called  moral 
truths,  I agree  with  him  that  there  are  many  such  that 
are  necessarily  true,  and  that  have  all  the  evidence  that 
mathematical  truths  can  have, 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


433 


It  ought,  however,  to  be  remembered,  that,  as  was 
before  observed,  the  relations  of  things  abstract,  per- 
ceivable by  us,  excepting  those  of  mathematical  quanti- 
ties, are  few,  and  for  the  most  part  immediately  dis- 
cerned, so  as  not  to  require  that  train  of  reasoning 
which  we  call  demonstration.  Their  evidence  resem- 
bles more  that  of  mathematical  axioms  than  mathe- 
matical propositions.  This  appears  in  the  two  proposi- 
tions given  as  examples  by  Mr.  Locke.  The  first 
follows  immediately  from  the  definition  of  injustice  ; 
the  second,  from  the  definition  of  government.  Their 
evidence  may  more  properly  be  called  intuitive  than 
demonstrative.  And  this  I apprehend  to  be  the  case, 
or  nearly  the  case,  with  all  abstract  truths  that  are  not 
mathematical,  for  the  reason  given  above. 

The  propositions  which  I think  are  properly  called 
morale  are  those  that  affirm  some  moral  obligation  to 
be,  or  not  to  be,  incumbent  on  one  or  more  individual 
persons.  To  such  propositions  Mr.  Locke’s  reasoning 
does  not  apply,  because  the  subjects  of  the  proposition 
are  not  things  whose  real  essence  may  be  perfectly 
known.  They  are  the  creatures  of  God ; their  obliga- 
tion results  from  the  constitution  which  God  has  given 
them,  and  the  circumstances  in  which  he  has  placed 
them.  That  an  individual  has  such  a constitution,  and 
is  placed  in  such  circumstances,  is  not  an  abstract  and 
necessary,  but  a contingent  truth.  It  is  a matter  of 
fact,  and  therefore  not  capable  of  demonstrative  evi- 
dence, which  belongs  only  to  necessary  truths. 

If  a man  had  not  the  faculty  given  him  by  God  of 
perceiving  certain  things  in  conduct  to  be  right,  and 
others  to  be  wrong,  and  of  perceiving  his  obligation  to 
do  what  is  right,  and  not  to  do  what  is  wrong,  he  would 
not  be  a moral  and  accountable  being.  If  a man  be 
endowed  with  such  a faculty,  there  must  be  some 
things  which,  by  this  faculty,  are  immediately  discerned 
to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong ; and  therefore  there 
must  be  in  morals,  as  in  other  sciences,  first  principles^ 
which  do  not  derive  their  evidence  from  any  antecedent 
principles,  but  may  be  said  to  be  intuitivelv  discerned. 
37 


434 


REASONING. 


Moral  truths,  therefore,  may  be  divided  into  two 
classes,  — to  wit,  such  as  are  self-evident  to  every  man 
whose  understanding  and  moral  faculty  are  ripe,  and 
such  as  are  deduced  by  reasoning  from  those  that  are 
self-evident.  If  the  first  be  not  discerned  without  rea- 
soning, the  last  never  can  be  by  any  reasoning.  If  any 
man  could  say  with  sincerity,  that  he  is  conscious  of 
no  obligation  to  consult  his  own  present  and  future 
happiness  ; to  be  faithful  to  his  engagements  ; to  obey 
his  Maker ; to  injure  no  man  ; I know  not  what  rea- 
soning, either  probable  or  demonstrative,  I could  use  to 
convince  him  of  any  moral  duty.  As  you  cannot  rea- 
son in  mathematics  with  a man  who  denies  the  axioms, 
as  little  can  you  reason  with  a man  in  morals  who 
denies  the  first  principles  of  morals.  The  man  who 
does  not,  by  the  light  of  his  own  mind,  perceive  some 
things  in  conduct  to  be  right,  and  others  to  be  wrong, 
is  as  incapable  of  reasoning  about  morals  as  a blind 
man  is  about  colors. 

Every  man  knows  certainly,  that  what  he  approves 
in  other  men  he  ought  to  do  in  like  circumstances,  and 
that  he  ought  not  to  do  what  he  condemns  in  other 
men.  Every  man  knows  that  he  ought,  with  candor, 
to  use  the  best  means  of  knowing  his  duty.  To  every 
man  who  has  a conscience,  these  things  are  self-evi- 
dent. They  are  immediate  dictates  of  our  moral  fac- 
ulty, which  is  a part  of  the  human  constitution ; and 
every  man  condemns  himself,  whether  he  will  or  not, 
when  he  knowingly  acts  contrary  to  them. 

Thus  I think  it  appears,  that  every  man  of  common 
understanding  knows  certainly,  and  without  reasoning, 
the  ultimate  ends  he  ought  to  pursue,  and  that  reason- 
ing is  necessary  only  to  discover  the  most  proper  means 
of  attaining  them  ; and  in  this,  indeed,  a good  man 
may  often  be  in  doubt.  Thus,  a magistrate  knows 
that  it  is  his  duty  to  promote  the  good  of  the  commu- 
nity which  has  intrusted  him  with  authority ; and  to 
offer  to  prove  this  to  him  by  reasoning  would  be  to 
affront  him.  But  whether  such  a scheme  of  conduct 
in  his  office,  or  another,  may  best  serve  that  end,  he 


OF  DEMONSTRATION. 


435 


may  in  many  cases  be  doubtful.  I believe,  in  such 
cases,  he  can  very  rarely  have  demonstrative  evidence. 
His  conscience  determines  the  end  he  ought  to  pursue, 
and  he  has  intuitive  evidence  that  his  end  is  good ; but 
prudence  must  determine  the  means  of  attaining  that 
end ; and  prudence  can  very  rarely  use  demonstrative 
reasoning,  but  must  rest  in  what  appears  most  probable. 

Upon  the  whole,  I agree  with  Mr.  Locke,  that  propo- 
sitions expressing  the  congruities  and  incongruities  of 
things  abstract^  which  moral  words  stand  for,  may  have 
all  the  evidence  of  mathematical  truths.  But  this  is  not 
peculiar  to  things  which  moral  words  stand  for.  It  is 
common  to  abstract  propositions  of  every  kind.  For 
instance  : — You  cannot  take  from  a man  what  he  has 
not ; A man  cannot  be  bound  and  perfectly  free  at  the 
same  time.  I think  no  man  will  call  these  moral  truths, 
but  they  are  necessary  truths,  and  as  evident  as  any  in 
mathematics.  Indeed,  they  are  very  nearly  allied  to 
the  two  which  Mr.  Locke  gives  as  instances  of  moral 
propositions  capable  of  demonstration.  Of  such  ab- 
stract propositions,  however,  I think  it  may  more  prop- 
erly be  said  that  they  have  the  evidence  of  mathematical 
axioms,  than  that  they  are  capable  of  demonstration. 

There  are  propositions  of  another  kind,  which  alone 
deserve  the  name  of  moral  propositions.  They  are 
such  as  affirm  something  to  be  the  duty  of  persons  that 
really  exist.  These  are  not  abstract  propositions ; and 
therefore  Mr.  Locke’s  reasoning  does  not  apply  to  them. 
The  truth  of  all  such  propositions  depends  upon  the 
constitution  and  circumstances  of  the  persons  to  whom 
they  are  applied. 

Of  such  propositions,  there  are  some  that  are  self- 
evident  to  every  man  that  has  a conscience ; and  these 
are  the  principles  from  which  all  moral  reasoning  must 
be  drawn.  They  may  be  called  the  axioms  of  morals. 
But  our  reasoning  from  these  axioms  to  any  duty  that 
is  not  self-evident,  can  very  rarely  be  demonstrative. 
Nor  is  this  any  detriment  to  the  cause  of  virtue,  be- 
cause to  act  against  what  appears  most  probable  in  a 
matter  of  duty  is  as  real  a trespass  against  the  first 


436 


REASONING. 


principles  of  morality,  as  to  act  against  demonstration  ; 
and  because  he  who  has  but  one  talent  in  reasoning, 
and  makes  the  proper  use  of  it,  shall  be  accepted,  as 
well  as  he  to  whom  God  has  given  ten. 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  PROBABLE  REASONING. 

L Distinction  between  Probable  and  Demonstrative 
Reasoning'.]  The  field  of  demonstration,  as  has  been 
observed,  is  necessary  truth ; the  field  of  probable  rea- 
soning is  contingent  truth,  — not  what  necessarily  must 
be  at  all  times,  but  what  is,  or  was,  or  shall  be. 

No  contingent  truth  is  capable  of  strict  demonstra- 
tion ; but  necessary  truths  may  sometimes  have  proba- 
ble evidence.  Dr.  Wallis  discovered  many  important 
mathematical  truths,  by  that  kind  of  induction  which 
draws  a general  conclusion  from  particular  premises. 
This  is  not  strict  demonstration,  but,  in  some  cases, 
gives  as  full  conviction  as  demonstration  itself;  and  a 
man  may  be  certain  that  a truth  is  demonstrable  before 
it  ever  has  been  demonstrated.  In  other  cases,  a mathe- 
matical proposition  may  have  such  probable  evidence 
from  induction  or  analogy,  as  encourages  the  mathe- 
matician to  investigate  its  demonstration.  But  still 
the  reasoning  proper  to  mathematical  and  other  neces- 
sary truths  is  demonstration  ; and  that  which  is  proper 
to  contingent  truths  is  probable  reasoning. 

These  two  kinds  of  reasoning  differ  in  other  respects. 
In  demonstrative  reasoning,  one  argument  is  as  good 
as  a thousand.  One  demonstration  may  be  more  ele- 
gant than  another;  it  may  be  more  easily  compre- 
hended, or  it  may  be  more  subservient  to  some  purpose 
beyond  the  present.  On  any  of  these  accounts,  it  may 
deserve  a preference : but  then  it  is  sufficient  by  itself ; 
it  needs  no  aid  from  another ; it  can  receive  none.  To 


PROBABLE  EVIDENCE. 


437 


add  more  demonstrations  of  the  same  conclusion  would 
be  a kind  of  tautology  in  reasoning  ; because  one  dem- 
onstration, clearly  comprehended,  gives  all  the  evidence 
we  are  capable  of  receiving. 

The  strength  of  probable  reasoning,  for  the  most  part, 
depends,  not  upon  any  one  argument,  but  upon  many, 
which  unite  their  force,  and  lead  to  the  same  conclu- 
sion. Any  one  of  them  by  itself  would  be  insufficient 
to  convince  ; but  the  whole  taken  together  may  have  a 
force  that  is  irresistible,  so  that  to  desire  more  evidence 
would  be  absurd.  Would  any  man  seek  new  argu- 
ments to  prove  that  there  were  such  persons  as  King 
Charles  the  First,  or  Oliver  Cromwell  ? Such  evidence 
may  be  compared  to  a rope  made  up  of  many  slender 
filaments  twisted  together.  The  rope  has  strength 
more  than  sufficient  to  bear  the  stress  laid  upon  it, 
though  no  one'of  the  filaments  of  which  it  is  composed 
would  be  sufficient  for  that  purpose. 

It  is  a common  observation,  that  it  is  unreasonable 
to  require  demonstration  for  things  which  do  not  admit 
of  it.  It  is  no  less  unreasonable  to  require  reasoning 
of  any  kind  for  things  which  are  known  without  rea- 
soning. All  reasoning  must  be  grounded  upon  truths 
vMch  are  known  without  reasoning.  In  every  branch 
of  real  knowledge  there  must  be  first  principles  whose 
truth  is  known  intuitively,  without  reasoning,  either 
probable  or  demonstrative.  They  are  not  grounded  on 
reasoning,  but  all  reasoning  is  grounded  on  them.  It 
has  been  shown,  that  there  are  first  principles  of  neces- 
sary truths,  and  first  principles  of  contingent  truths. 
Demonstrative  reasoning  is  grounded  upon  the  former, 
and  probable  reasoning  upon  the  latter. 

That  we  may  not  be  embarrassed  by  the  ambiguity 
of  words,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  there  is  a popular 
meaning  of  probable  evidence^  which  ought  not  to  be 
confounded  with  the  philosophical  meaning  above  ex- 
plained. In  common  language,  probable  evidence  is 
considered  as  an  inferior  degree  of  evidence,  and  is  op- 
posed to  certainty ; so  that  what  is  certain  is  more  than 
probable,  and  what  is  only  probable  is  not  certain. 
37^ 


438 


REASONING. 


Philosophers  consider  probable  evidence,  not  as  a de- 
gree^  but  as  a species  of  evidence  which  is  opposed,  not 
to  certainty^  but  to  another  species  of  evidence  called 
demonstration. 

Demonstrative  evidence  has  no  degrees  ; but  prob- 
able evidence,  taken  in  the  philosophical  sense,  has  all 
degrees,  from  the  very  least  to  the  greatest,  which  we 
call  certainty.  That  there  is  such  a city  as  Rome,  I 
am  as  certain  as  of  any  proposition  in  Euclid ; but  the 
evidence  is  not  demonstrative,  but  of  that  kind  which 
philosophers  call  probable.  Yet,  in  common  language, 
it  would  sound  oddly  to  say.  It  is  probable  there  is  such 
a city  as  Rome^  because  it  would  imply  some  degree  of 
doubt  or  uncertainty. 

Taking  probable  evidence,  therefore,  in  the  philo- 
sophical sense,  as  it  is  opposed  to  demonstrative,  it 
may  have  any  degree  of  evidence,  from  the  least  to  the 
greatest. 

I think,  in  most  cases,  we  measure  the  degrees  of 
evidence  by  the  effect  they  have  upon  a sound  under- 
standing, when  comprehended  clearly,  and  without 
prejudice.  Every  degree  of  evidence  perceived  by  the 
mind  produces  a proportioned  degree  of  assent  or 
belief.  The  judgment  may  be  in  perfect  suspense  be- 
tween two  contradictory  opinions,  when  there  is  no 
evidence  for  either,  or  equal  evidence  for  both.  The 
least  preponderancy  on  one  side  inclines  the  judgment 
in  proportion.  Belief  is  mixed  with  doubt,  more  or 
less,  until  we  come  to  the  highest  degree  of  evidence, 
when  all  doubt  vanishes,  and  the  belief  is  firm  and  im- 
movable. This  degree  of  evidence,  the  highest  the 
human  faculties  can  attain,  we  call  certainty. 

II.  Different  Kinds  of  Probable  Evidence.]  Probable 
evidence  not  only  differs  in  kind  from  demonstrative, 
but  is  itself  of  different  kinds.  The  chief  of  these  I 
shall  mention,  without  pretending  to  make  a complete 
enumeration. 

1.  The  first  kind  is  that  of  human  testimony^  upon 
which  the  greatest  part  of  human  knowledge  is  built. 


PROBABLE  EVIDENCE. 


439 


The  faith  of  history  depends  upon  it,  as  well  as  the 
judgment  of  solemn  tribunals  with  regard  to  men’s  ac- 
quired rights,  and  with  regard  to  their  guilt  or  inno- 
cence when  they  are  charged  with  crimes.  A great 
part  of  the  business  of  the  judge,  of  counsel  at  the  bar, 
of  the  historian,  the  critic,  and  the  antiquarian,  is  to 
canvass  and  weigh  this  kind  of  evidence ; and  no  man 
can  act  with  common  prudence,  in  the  ordinary  occur- 
rences of  life,  who  has  not  some  competent  judgment 
of  it. 

The  belief  we  give  to  testimony,  in  many  cases,  is 
not  solely  grounded  upon  the  veracity  of  the  testifier. 
In  a single  testimony,  we  consider  the  motives  a man 
might  have  to  falsify.  If  there  be  no  appearance  of  any 
such  motive,  much  more  if  there  be  motives  on  the 
other  side,  his  testimony  has  weight  independent  of  his 
moral  character.  If  the  testimony  be  circumstantial, 
we  consider  how  far  the  circumstances  agree  together, 
and  with  things  that  are  known.  It  is  so  very  difficult 
to  fabricate  a story,  which  cannot  be  detected  by  a ju- 
dicious examination  of  the  circumstances,  that  it  ac- 
quires evidence  by  being  able  to  bear  such  a trial. 
There  is  an  art  in  detecting  false  evidence  in  judicial 
proceedings,  well  known  to  able  judges  and -barristers  ; 
so  that  I believe  few  false  witnesses  leave  the  bar  with- 
out suspicion  of  their  guilt. 

When  there  is  an  agreement  of  many  witnesses,  in  a 
great  variety  of  circumstances,  without  the  possibility 
of  a previous  concert,  the  evidence  may  be  equal  to  that 
of  demonstration.* 

2.  A second  kind  of  probable  evidence  is  the  author- 
ity of  those  who  are  good  judges  of  the  point  in  question. 
The  supreme  court  of  judicature  of  the  British  nation 
is  often  determined  by  the  opinion  of  lawyers  in  a point 
of  law,  of  physicians  in  a point  of  medicine,  and  of 


* See  Babbage’s  Ninth  Bridgewater  Treatise^  Note  E,  On  Hurnds  Argu- 
ment against  Miracles ; in  which  it  is  demonstrated  mathematically  that  “ it 
is  always  possible  to  assign  a number  of  independent  witnesses,  the  im- 
probability of  the  falsehood  of  whose  concurring  testimony  shall  be  greater 
than  the  improbability  of  the  alleged  miracle.”  — Ed. 


440 


REASONING. 


other  artists  in  what  relates  to  their  several  professions. 
And,  in  the  common  affairs  of  life,  we  frequently  rely 
upon  the  judgment  of  others,  in  points  of  which  we  are 
not  proper  judges  ourselves. 

3.  A third  kind  of  probable  evidence  is  that  by  v^hich 
we  recognize  the  identity  of  things^  and  persons  of  our 
acquaintance.  That  two  swords,  two  horses,  or  two 
persons  may  be  so  perfectly  alike,  as  not  to  be  distin- 
guishable by  those  to  whom  they  are  best  known,  can- 
not be  shown  to  be  impossible.  But  we  learn  either 
from  nature,  or  from  experience,  that  it  never  happens  ; 
or  so  very  rarely,  that  a person  or  thing  well  known  to 
us  is  immediately  recognized  without  any  doubt,  when 
we  perceive  the  marks  or  signs  by  which  we  have  been 
accustomed  to  distinguish  it  from  all  other  individuals 
of  the  kind. 

This  evidence  we  rely  upon  in  the  most  important 
affairs  of  life,  and  by  this  evidence  the  identity  both  of 
things  and  of  persons  is  determined  in  courts  of  judica- 
ture. 

4.  A fourth  kind  of  probable  evidence  is  that  which 
ice  have  of  men^s  future  actions  and  conduct^  from  the 
general  principles  of  action  in  man^  or  from  our  knowl- 
edge of  the  individuals. 

Notwithstanding  the  folly  and  vice  that  are  to  be 
found  among  men,  there  is  a certain  degree  of  prudence 
and  probity  which  we  rely  upon  in  every  man  that  is 
not  insane.  If  it  were  not  so,  no  man  would  be  safe  in 
the  company  of  another,  and  there  could  be  no  society 
among  mankind.  If  men  were  as  much  disposed  to 
hurt  as  to  do  good,  to  lie  as  to  speak  truth,  they  could 
not  live  together : they  would  keep  at  as  great  a dis- 
tance from  one  another  as  possible,  and  the  race  would 
soon  perish.  We  expect  that  men  will  take  some  care 
of  themselves,  of  their  family,  friends,  and  reputation ; 
that  they  will  not  injure  others  without  some  tempta- 
tion ; that  they  will  have  some  gratitude  for  good 
offices,  and  some  resentment  of  injuries. 

Such  maxims  with  regard  to  human  conduct  are  the 
foundation  of  all  political  reasoning,  and  of  common 


PROBABLE  EVIDENCE. 


441 


prudence  in  the  conduct  of  life.  Hardly  can  a man 
form  any  project  in  public  or  in  private  life,  which  does 
not  depend  upon  the  conduct  of  other  men,  as  well  as 
his  own,  and  which  does  not  go  upon  the  supposition, 
that  men  will  act  such  a part  in  such  circumstances. 
This  evidence  may  be  probable  in  a very  high  degree, 
but  can  never  be  demonstrative.  The  best  concerted 
project  may  fail,  and  wise  counsels  may  be  frustrated, 
because  some  individual  acted  a part  which  it  would 
have  been  against  all  reason  to  expect. 

5.  Another  kind  of  probable  evidence,  the  counter- 
part of  the  last,  is  that  by  which  we  collect  merCs  charac- 
ters and  designs  from  their  actions^  speech^  and  other  ex- 
ternal signs.  ' 

We  see  not  men’s  hearts,  nor  the  principles  by  which 
they  are  actuated ; but  there  are  external  signs  of  their 
principles  and  dispositions,  which,  though  not  certain, 
may  sometimes  be  more  trusted  than  their  professions  ; 
and  it  is  from  external  signs  that  we  must  draw  all  the 
knowledge  we  can  attain  of  men’s  characters. 

6.  The  next  kind  of  probable  evidence  I mention 
is  that  which  mathematicians  call  the  probability  of 
chances. 

We  attribute  some  events  to  chance,  because  we 
know  only  the  remote  cause  which  must  produce  some 
one  event  of  a number ; but  know  not  the  more  imme- 
diate cause  which  determines  a particular  event  of  that 
number,  in  preference  to  the  others.  I think  all  the 
chances  about  which  we  reason  in  mathematics  are  of 
this  kind.  Thus,  in  throwing  a just  die  upon  a table, 
we  say  it  is  an  equal  chance  which  of  the  six  sides  shall 
be  turned  up  ; because  neither  the  person  who  throws, 
nor  the  by-standers,  know  the  precise  measure  of  force 
and  direction  necessary  to  turn  up  any  one  side  rather 
than  another.  There  are  here,  therefore,  six  events,  one 
of  which  must  happen  ; and  as  all  are  supposed  to  have 
equal  probability,  the  probability  of  any  one  side  being 
turned  up  — the  ace,  for  instance  — is  as  one  to  the  re- 
maining number,  five.  The  probability  of  turning  up 
two  aces  with  two  dice  is  as  one  to  thirty-five  ; because 


442 


REASONING. 


here  there  are  thirty-six  events,  each  of  which  has  equal 
probability. 

Upon  such  principles  as  these,  the  doctrine  of  chances 
has  furnished  a field  of  demonstrative  reasoning  of  great 
extent,  although  the  events  about  which  this  reasoning 
is  employed  be  not  necessary,  but  contingent,  and  be 
not  certain,  but  probable.  This  may  seem  to  contra- 
dict a principle  before  advanced,  that  contingent  truths 
are  not  capable  of  demonstration  ; but  it  does  not : for 
in  the  mathematical  reasonings  about  chance,  the  con- 
clusion demonstrated  is  not  that  such  an  event  shall 
happen^  but  that  the  probability  of  its  happening  bears 
such  a ratio  to  the  probability  of  its  failing ; and  this 
conclusion  is  necessary  upon  the  suppositions  on  which 
it  is  grounded. 

7.  The  last  kind  of  probable  evidence  I shall  men- 
tion is  that  by  which  the  known  laws  of  nature  have  been 
discovered^  and  the  effects  ivhich  have  been  produced  by 
them  in  former  ages,  or  ivhich  may  be  expected  in  time  to 
come. 

The  laws  of  nature  are  the  rules  by  which  the  Su- 
preme Being  governs  the  world.  We  deduce  them 
only  from  facts  that  fall  within  our  own  observation,  or 
are  properly  attested  by  those  who  have  observed  them. 

The  knowledge  of  some  of  the  laws  of  nature  is 
necessary  to  all  men  in  the  conduct  of  life.  These  are 
soon  discovered,  even  by  savages.  They  know  that 
fire  burns,  that  water  drowns,  that  bodies  gravitate  to- 
wards the  earth.  They  know  that  day  and  night,  sum- 
mer and  winter,  regularly  succeed  each  other.  As  far 
back  as  their  experience  and  information  reach,  they 
know  that  these  have  happened  regularly ; and,  upon 
this  ground,  they  are  led,  by  the  constitution  of  human 
nature,  to  expect  that  they  will  happen  in  time  to  come, 
in  like  circumstances. 

The  knowledge  which  the  philosopher  attains  of  the 
laws  of  nature  differs  from  that  of  the  vulgar,  not  in  the 
first  principles  on  which  it  is  grounded,  but  in  its  extent 
and  accuracy.  He  collects  with  care  the  phenomena 
that  lead  to  the  same  conclusion,  and  compares  them 


PROBABLE  EVIDENCE. 


443 


with  those  that  seem  to  contradict  or  to  limit  it.  He 
observes  the  circumstances  on  which  every  phenome- 
non depends,  and  distinguishes  them  carefully  from 
those  that  are  accidentally  conjoined  with  it.  He  puts 
natural  bodies  in  various  situations,  and  applies  them 
to  one  another  in  various  ways,  on  purpose  to  observe 
the  effect ; and  thus  acquires  from  his  senses  a more 
extensive  knowledge  of  the  course  of  nature  in  a short 
time,  than  could  be  collected  by  casual  observation  in 
many  ages. 

But  what  is  the  result  of  his  laborious  researches  ? 
It  is,  that,  as  far  as  he  has  been  able  to  observe,  such 
things  have  always  happened  in  such  circumstances, 
and  such  bodies  have  always  been  found  to  have  such 
properties.  These  are  matters  of  fact,  attested  by  sense, 
memory,  and  testimony,  just  as  the  few  facts  which  the 
vulgar  know  are  attested  to  them. 

And  what  conclusions  does  the  philosopher  draw 
from  the  facts  he  has  collected  ? They  are,  that  like 
events  have  happened  in  former  times  in  like  circum- 
stances, and  will  happen  in  time  to  come  ; and  these 
conclusions  are  built  on  the  very  same  ground  on  which 
the  simple  rustic  concludes  that  the  sun  will  rise  to- 
morrow. 

Facts  reduced  to  general  rules,  and  the  consequences 
of  those  general  rules,  are  all  that  we  really  know  of  the 
material  world.  And  the  evidence  that  such  general 
rules  have  no  exceptions,  as  well  as  the  evidence  that 
they  will  be  the  same  in  time  to  come  as  they  have 
been  in  time  past,  can  never  be  demonstrative.  It  is 
only  that  species  of  evidence  which  philosophers  call 
probable.  General  rules  may  have  exceptions  or  lim- 
itations which  no  man  ever  had  occasion  to  observe. 
The  laws  of  nature  may  be  changed  by  Him  who  es- 
tablished them.  But  we  are  led  by  our  constitution  to 
rely  upon  their  continuance  with  as  little  doubt  as  if  it 
was  demonstrable.* 


* As  Reid  gives  an  entire  Essay  to  Reasoning,  it  is  remarkable  that  he 
does  not  treat  of  induction  by  name,  to  which  his  last-mentioned  form  of 


444 


REASONING, 


CHAPTER  III. 

OF  MR.  HUME’S  SKEPTICISM  WITH  REGARD  TO  REASON. 

L He  reduces  all  Knowledge  to  Probability.]  In  the 
Treatise  of  Human  Nature^  Book  1.  Part  IV.  Sect.  I., 
the  author  undertakes  to  prove  two  points:  — Firsts 
that  all  that  is  called  human  knowledge  (meaning 
demonstrative  knowledge)  is  only  probability  ; and 
secondly^  that  this  probability,  when  duly  examined, 
evanishes  by  degrees,  and  leaves  at  last  no  evidence  at 
all : so  that,  in  the  issue,  there  is  no  ground  to  believe 


probable  reasoning  belongs,  nor  mark  the  distinction  between  inductive  and 
deductive  reasoning.  To  supply  this  defect  I copy  a passage  from  Jouffroy 
(Introduction  to  Ethics^  Lect.  IX.),  one  of  the  most  faithful  of  Reid’s  fol- 
lowers : — 

“ This  is  the  process  of  reasoning  hy  induction  : — when  several  particular 
cases,  which  are  analogous,  have  been  ascertained  by  observation,  and 
stored  up  in  the  memory,  reason  applies  to  this  series  of  analogous  obser- 
vations the  a priori  principle,  that  the  laws  of  nature  are  constant ; and,  at 
once,  what  was  true  through  observation  in  only  twenty,  thirty,  or  forty 
observed  cases,  becomes,  by  the  application  of  this  principle,  a general 
law,  as  true  of  other  cases  not  observed  as  of  those  which  observation  has 
ascertained.  From  the  results  of  observation,  and  solely  by  the  application 
to  these  results  of  a conception  of  reason,  the  mind  arrives  at  a conse- 
quence that  transcends  them.  Such  is  the  method  of  reasoning  by  induc- 
tion. Its  characteristic  is,  that  it  proceeds  from  certain  results,  communi- 
cated by  observation,  to  a general  principle,  within  which  they  are  in- 
cluded. 

“ The  process  of  reasoning  hy  deduction  is  as  follows  : — A truth  of  any 
kind,  particular,  general,  or  universal,  being  made  known,  reason  deduces 
from  it  whatever  other  truths  it  includes.  Sometimes  the  deduction  is 
complete,  in  which  case  reason  only  presents  the  whole  truth  under  two 
different  aspects  ; at  other  times  the  deduction  is  imperfect,  and  then  rea- 
son passes  from  the  whole  to  a part.  But  in  either  case,  if  we  compare  to- 
gether the  results  of  our  reasoning  and  the  premises  from  which  we  drew 
them,  we  shall  always  find  that  these  results,  and  a part  or  the  whole  of  the 
premises,  are  perfectly  equivalent.  This  is  the  special  characteristic  of  de- 
ductive reasoning.” 

The  following  admirable  passage  on  the  verification  of  inductions  is  from 
the  Quarterly  Review,  Vol.  LXVIII.  p.  233^:  — 

“ It  is  of  great  moment  to  distinguish  the  characters  of  a sound  induction. 
One  of  them  is  its  ready  identification  with  our  conceptions  of  facts,  so  as  to 
make  itself  a part  of  them,  to  ingraft  itself  into  language,  and  by  no  subse- 
quent effort  of  the  mind  to  be  got  rid  of.  The  leading  term  of  a true  theory 


ABSOLUTE  SKEPTICISM. HUME. 


445 


any  one  proposition  rather  than  its  contrary,  and  ‘‘  all 
those  are  certainly  fools  who  reason,  or  believe  any 
thing.’’ 

To  pretend  to  prove  by  reasoning  that  there  is  no 
force  in  reason,  does  indeed  look  like  a philosophical 
delirium.  It  is  like  a man’s  pretending  to  see  clearly 
that  he  himself  and  all  other  men  are  blind. 

Still,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  inquire,  whether,  as 
the  author  thinks,  this  state  of  mind  was  produced  by 
a just  application  of  the  rules  of  logic,  or,  as  others  may 
be  apt  to  think,  by  the  misapplication  and  abuse  of  them. 

Firsts  Because  we  are  fallible^  the  author  infers  that 
all  knowledge  degenerates  into  probability. 

That  man,  and  probably  every  created  being,  is  falli- 


once  pronounced,  we  cannot  fall  back,  even  in  thought,  to  that  helpless 
state  of  doubt  and  bewilderment  in  which  we  gazed  on  the  facts  before. 
The  general  proposition  is  more  than  a sum  of  the  particulars.  Our  dots 
are  filled  in  and  connected  by  an  ideal  outline,  which  we  pursue  even  be- 
yond their  limits,  assign  it  a name,  and  speak  of  it  as  a thing.  In  all  our 
propositions,  this  new  thing  is  referred  to,  the  elements  of  which  it  is  formed 
are  forgotten ; and  thus  we  arrive  at  an  inductive  formula^  — a general, 
perhaps  a universal,  proposition. 

“ Another  character  of  sound  inductions  is,  that  they  enable  us  to  predict. 
We  feel  secure  that  our  rule  is  based  upon  the  realities  of  nature,  when  it 
stands  us  in  the  stead  of  more  experience  ; when  it  embodies  facts,  as  an 
experience  wider  than  our  own  would  do,  and  in  a way  that  our  ordinary 
experience  would  never  reach  ; when  it  will  bear,  not  stress,  but  torture, 
and  gives  true  results  in  cases  studiously  different  from  those  which  led  to 
the  discovery.  The  theories  of  Newton  and  Fresnel  are  full  of  sueh  cases. 
In  the  latter,  indeed  [the  theory  of  polarization],  this  test  is  carried  to  such 
an  extreme,  that  theory  has  actually  remanded  back  experiment  to  read  her 
lesson  anew,  and  convicted  her  of  blindness  and  error.  It  has  informed 
her  of  facts  so  strange  as  to  appear  to  her  impossible,  and  showed  her  all 
the  singularities  she  would  observe  in  critical  cases  she  never  dreamed  of 
trying. 

“ Another  character,  which  is  exemplified  only  in  the  greatest  theories, 
is  the  consilience  of  inductions^  where  many  and  widely  different  lines  of  ex- 
perience spring  together  into  one  theory  which  explains  them  all,  and  that 
in  a more  simple  manner  than  seemed  to  be  required  for  either  separately. 
Thus,  in  the  infinitely  varied  phenomena  of  physical  astronomy,  when  all 
are  discussed  and  all  explained,  we  hear  from  all  quarters  the  consentane- 
ous echoes  of  but  one  word, — gravitation. 

For  recent  authorities  on  the  subject  of  induction,  see  Baden  Powell’s 
Connection  of  Natural  and  Divine  Truth  Sect.  I. ; Whewell’s  Philosophy  of 
the  Inductive  Sciences,  Books  I.,  XI.,  and  XIII. ; Mill’s  Logic.,  Book  III. ; 
Whewell,  On  Induction  with  Special  Reference  to  Mr.  Mills  System  of  Logic. 
— Ed. 


446 


REASONING. 


ble,  and  that  a fallible  being  cannot  have  that  perfect 
comprehension  and  assurance  of  truth  which  an  infalli- 
ble being  has,  I think  ought  to  be  granted.  It  becomes 
a fallible  being  to  be  modest,  open  to  new  light,  and 
sensible  that,  by  some  false  bias,  or  by  rash  judging,  he 
may  be  misled.  If  this  be  called  a degree  of  skepticism, 
I cannot  help  approving  of  it,  being  persuaded  that  the 
man  who  makes  the  best  use  he  can  of  the  faculties 
which  God  has  given  him,  without  thinking  them  more 
perfect  than  they  really  are,  may  have  all  the  belief  that 
is  necessary  in  the  conduct  of  life,  and  all  that  is  neces- 
sary to  his  acceptance  with  his  Maker. 

It  is  granted,  then,  that  human  judgments  ought  al- 
ways to  be  formed  with  a humble  sense  of  our  fallibility 
in  judging.  This  is  all  that  can  be  inferred  by  the  rules 
of  logic  from  our  being  fallible.  And  if  this  be  all  that 
is  meant  by  our  knowledge  degenerating  into  probabil- 
ity, I know  no  person  of  a different  opinion.  But  it 
may  be  observed,  that  the  author  here  uses  the  word 
probability  in  a sense  for  which  I know  no  authority 
but  his  owm.  Philosophers  understand  probability  as 
opposed  to  demonstration ; the  vulgar  as  opposed  to  cer- 
tainty; but  this  author  understands  it  as  opposed  to 
infallibility^  which  no  man  claims. 

One  who  believes  himself  to  be  fallible  may  still  hold 
it  to  be  certain  that  two  and  two  make  four,  and  that 
two  contradictory  propositions  cannot  both  be  true.  He 
may  believe  some  things  to  be  probable  only,  and  other 
things  to  be  demonstrable,  without  making  any  pre- 
tence to  infallibility. 

If  we  use  words  in  their  proper  meaning,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  demonstration  should  degenerate  into  proba- 
bility from  the  imperfection  of  our  faculties.  Our  judg- 
ment cannot  change  the  nature  of  the  things  about 
which  we  judge.  What  is  really  demonstration  will 
still  be  so,  whatever  judgment  we  form  concerning  it. 
It  may  likewise  be  observed,  that,  when  we  mistake 
that  for  demonstration  which  really  is  not,  the  conse- 
quence of  this  mistake  is,  not  that  demonstration  de- 
generates into  probability,  but  that  what  we  took  to  be 


ABSOLUTE  SKEPTICISM. HUME.  447 

demonstration  is  no  proof  at  all ; for  one  false  step  in  a 
demonstration  destroys  the  whole,  but  cannot  turn  it 
into  another  kind  of  proof. 

Upon  the  whole,  then,  this  first  conclusion  of  our  au- 
thor, that  the  fallibility  of  human  judgment  turns  all 
knowledge  into  probability,  if  understood  literally,  is 
absurd  ; but  if  it  be  only  a figure  of  speech,  and  means 
no  more  than  that,  in  all  our  judgments,  we  ought  to 
be  sensible  of  our  fallibility,  and  ought  to  hold  our 
opinions  with  that  modesty  that  becomes  fallible  crea- 
tures, which  I take  to  be  what  the  author  meant,  this,  I 
think,  nobody  denies,  nor  was  it  necessary  to  enter  into 
a laborious  proof  of  it. 

II.  And  all  Probability  to  Nothing,]  The  second  point 
which  he  attempts  to  prove  is,  that  this  probability, 
when  duly  examined,  suffers  a continual  diminution,^  and 
at  last  a total  extinction. 

The  obvious  consequence  of  this  is,  that  no  fallible 
being  can  have  good  reason  to  believe  any  thing  at  all. 
But  let  us  hear  the  proof. 

“ In  every  judgment,  we  ought  to  correct  the  first 
judgment  derived  from  the  nature  of  the  object,  by  an- 
other judgment  derived  from  the  nature  of  the  under- 
standing. Beside  the  original  uncertainty  inherent  in 
the  subject,  there  arises  another,  derived  from  the  weak- 
ness of  the  faculty  which  judges.  Having  adjusted 
these  two  uncertainties  together,  we  are  obliged,  by  our 
reason,  to  add  a new  uncertainty,  derived  from  the  pos- 
sibility of  error  in  the  estimation  we  make  of  the  truth 
and  fidelity  of  our  faculties.  This  is  a doubt  of  which, 
if  we  would  closely  pursue  our  reasoning,  we  cannot 
avoid  giving  a decision.  But  this  decision,  though  it 
should  be  favorable  to  our  preceding  judgment,  being 
founded  only  on  probability,  must  weaken  still  further 
our  first  evidence.  The  third  uncertainty  must  in  like 
manner  be  criticized  by  a fourth,  and  so  on  without 
end. 

“ Now,  as  every  one  of  these  uncertainties  takes  away 
a part  of  the  original  evidence,  it  must  at  last  be  re- 


448 


REASONING. 


duced  to  nothing.  Let  our  first  belief  be  ever  so  strong, 
it  must  infallibly  perish  by  passing  through  so  many 
examinations,  each  of  which  carries  off  somewhat  of  its 
force  and  vigor.  No  finite  object  can  subsist  under  a 
decrease  repeated  in  infinitumP 

This  is  the  author’s  Achillean  argument  against  the 
evidence  of  reason,  from  which  he  concludes,  that  a man 
who  would  govern  his  belief  by  reason  must  believe 
nothing  at  all,  and  that  belief  is  an  act,  not  of  the  cogi- 
tative, but  of  the  sensitive  part  of  our  nature.  If  there 
be  any  such  thing  as  motion,  said  an  ancient  skeptic, 
the  swift-footed  Achilles  could  never  overtake  an  old 
man  in  a journey.  For,  suppose  the  old  man  to  set 
out  a thousand  paces  before  Achilles,  and  that,  while 
Achilles  has  travelled  the  thousand  paces,  the  old  man 
has  got  five  hundred  ; when  Achilles  has  gone  the  five 
hundred,  the  old  man  has  gone  two  hundred  and  fifty ; 
and  when  Achilles  has  gone  the  two  hundred  and  fifty, 
the  old  man  is  still  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  before 
him.  Repeat  these  estimations  in  infinitum^  and  you 
will  still  find  the  old  man  foremost ; therefore  Achilles 
can  never  overtake  him  ; therefore  there  can  be  no 
such  thing  as  motion. 

The  reasoning  of  the  modern  skeptic  against  reason 
is  equally  ingenious,  and  equally  convincing.  Indeed, 
they  have  a great  similarity.  If  we  trace  the  journey 
of  Achilles  two  thousand  paces,  we  shall  find  the  very 
point  where  the  old  man  is  overtaken  : but  this  short 
journey,  by  dividing  it  into  an  infinite  number  of  stages, 
with  corresponding  estimations,  is  made  to  appear  infi- 
nite. In  like  manner,  our  author,  subjecting  every  judg- 
ment to  an  infinite  number  of  successive  probable  esti- 
mations, reduces  the  evidence  to  nothing. 

To  return,  then,  to  the  argument  of  the  modern 
skeptic.  I examine  the  proof  of  a theorem  of  Euclid. 
It  appears  to  me  to  be  strict  demonstration.  But  I 
may  have  overlooked  some  fallacy  ; therefore  I examine 
it  again  and  again,  but  can  find  no  flaw  in  it.  I find 
all  that  have  examined  it  agree  with  me.  I have  now 
that  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  proposition  which  I 


ABSOLUTE  SKEPTICISM. HUME. 


449 


and  all  men  call  demonstration,  and  that  belief  of  it 
which  we  call  certainty. 

Here  my  skeptical  friend  interposes,  and  assures  me, 
that  the  rules  of  logic  reduce  this  demonstration  to  no 
evidence  at  all.  I am  willing  to  hear  what  step  in  it 
he  thinks  fallacious,  and  why.  He  makes  no  objection 
to  any  part  of  the  demonstration,  but  pleads  my  falli- 
bility in  judging.  I have  made  the  proper  allowance 
for  this  already,  by  being  open  to  conviction.  “ But,” 
says  he,  there  are  two  uncertainties,  the  first  inherent 
in  the  subject,  which  I have  already  shown  to  have 
only  probable  evidence ; the  second  arising  from  the 
weakness  of  the  faculty  that  judges.”  I answer,  it  is 
the  weakness  of  the  faculty  only  that  reduces  this  dem- 
onstration to  what  you  call  probability.  You  must 
not,  therefore,  make  it  a second  uncertainty ; for  it  is 
the  same  with  the  first.  To  take  credit  twice  in  an  ac- 
count for  the  same  article  is  not  agreeable  to  the  rules 
of  logic.  Hitherto,  therefore,  there  is  but  one  uncer- 
tainty,— to  wit,  my  fallibility  in  judging. 

But,”  says  my  friend,  ‘‘  you  are  obliged  by  reason 
to  add  a new  uncertainty,  derived  from  the  possibility  of 
error  in  the  estimation  you  make  of  the  truth  and  fidelity 
of  your  faculties,^^  I answer, — This  estimation  is  am- 
biguously expressed ; it  may  either  mean  an  estimation 
of  my  liableness  to  err  by  the  misapplication  and  abuse 
of  my  faculties,  or  it  may  mean  an  estimation  of  my 
liableness  to  err  by  conceiving  my  faculties  to  be  true 
and  faithful,  while  they  may  be  false  and  fallacious  in 
themselves,  even  when  applied  in  the  best  manner.  I 
shall  consider  this  estimation  in  each  of  these  senses. 

If  the  first  be  the  estimation  meant,  it  is  true  that 
reason  directs  us,  as  fallible  creatures,  to  carry  along 
with  us,  in  all  our  judgments,  a sense  of  our  fallibility. 
It  is  true,  also,  that  we  are  in  greater  danger  of  erring 
in  some  cases,  and  less  in  others  ; and  that  this  danger 
of  erring  may,  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the 
case,  admit  of  an  estimation,  which  we  ought  likewise 
to  carry  along  with  us  in  every  judgment  we  form. 

After  repeated  examination  of  a proposition  of  Eu- 

38* 


450 


REASONING. 


did,  I judge  it  to  be  strictly  demonstrated  ; this  is  my 
first  judgment.  But  as  I am  liable  to  err  from  various 
causes,  I consider  how  far  I may  have  been  misled  by 
any  of  these  causes  in  this  judgment.  My  decision 
upon  this  second  point  is  favorable  to  my  first  judgment, 
and  therefore,  as  I apprehend,  must  strengthen  it.  To 
say,  that  this  decision,  because  it  is  only  probable,  must 
weaken  the  first  evidence,  seems  to  me  contrary  to  all 
rules  of  logic,  and  to  common  sense.  The  first  judg- 
ment may  be  compared  to  the  testimony  of  a credible 
witness  ; the  second,  after  a scrutiny  into  the  character 
of  the  witness,  wipes  off  every  objection  that  can  be 
made  to  it,  and  therefore  surely  must  confirm,  and  not 
weaken,  his  testimony. 

But  let  us  suppose,  that,  in  another  case,  I examine 
my  first  judgment  upon  some  point,  and  find,  that  it 
was  attended  with  unfavorable  circumstances.  What, 
in  reason,  and  according  to  the  rules  of  logic,  ought  to 
be  the  effect  of  this  discovery  ? 

The  effect  surely  will  be,  and  ought  to  be,  to  make 
me  less  confident  in  my  first  judgment,  until  I examine 
the  point  anew  in  more  favorable  circumstances.  If  it 
be  a matter  of  importance,  I return  to  weigh  the  evi- 
dence of  my  first  judgment.  If  it  was  precipitate  be- 
fore, it  must  now  be  deliberate  in  every  point.  If  at 
first  I was  in  passion,  I must  now  be  cool.  If  I had  an 
interest  in  the  decision,  I must  place  the  interest  on  the 
other  side. 

It  is  evident,  that  this  review  of  the  subject  may  con- 
firm my  first  judgment,  notwithstanding  the  suspicious 
circumstances  that  attended  it.  Though  the  judge  was 
biased  or  corrupted,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  sentence 
was  unjust.  The  rectitude  of  the  decision  does  not  de- 
pend upon  the  character  of  the  judge,  but  upon  the  na- 
ture of  the  case.  From  that  only  it  must  be  determined 
whether  the  decision  be  just.  The  circumstances  that 
rendered  it  suspicious  are  mere  presumptions,  which 
have  no  force  against  direct  evidence. 

Thus,  I have  considered  the  effect  of  this  estimation 
of  our  liableness  to  err  in  our  first  judgment,  and  have 


ABSOLUTE  SKEPTICISM. HUME.  451 

allowed  to  it  all  the  effect  that  reason  and  the  rules  of 
logic  permit.  In  the  case  I first  supposed,  and  in  every 
case  where  we  can  discover  no  cause  of  error,  it  affords 
a presumption  in  favor  of  the  first  judgment.  In  other 
caseS;  it  may  afford  a presumption  against  it.  But  the 
rules  of  logic  require  that  we  should  not  judge  by  pre- 
sumptions where  we  have  direct  evidence.  The  effect 
of  an  unfavorable  presumption  should  only  be,  to  make 
us  examine  the  evidence  with  the  greater  care. 

The  skeptic  urges,  in  the  last  place,  that  this  estima- 
tion must  be  subjected  to  another  estimation,  that  to 
another,  and  so  on  in  infinitum ; and  as  every  new  esti- 
mation takes  away  from  the  evidence  of  the  first  judg- 
ment, it  must  at  last  be  totally  annihilated. 

I answer,  firsts  it  has  been  shown  above,  that  the  first 
estimation,  supposing  it  unfavorable,  can  only  afford  a 
presumption  against  the  first  judgment  ; the  second, 
upon  the  same  supposition,  will  be  only  the  presump- 
tion of  a presumption  ; and  the  third,  the  presumption 
that  there  is  a presumption  of  a presumption.  This  in- 
finite series  of  presumptions  resembles  an  infinite  series 
of  quantities  decreasing  in  geometrical  proportion,  which 
amounts  only  to  a finite  sum.  The  infinite  series  of 
stages  of  Achilles’s  journey  after  the  old  man  amounts 
only  to  two  thousand  paces  ; nor  can  this  infinite  series 
of  presumptions  outweigh  one  solid  argument  in  favor 
of  the  first  judgment,  supposing  them  all  to  be  unfavor- 
able to  it. 

Secondly^  I have  shown,  that  the  estimation  of  our 
first  judgment  may  strengthen  it ; and  the  same  thing 
may  be  said  of  all  the  subsequent  estimations.  It  would, 
therefore,  be  as  reasonable  to  conclude,  that  the  first 
judgment  will  be  brought  to  infallible  certainty  when 
this  series  of  estimations  is  wholly  in  its  favor,  as  that 
its  evidence  will  be  brought  to  nothing  by  such  a series 
supposed  to  be  wholly  unfavorable  to  it.  But,  in  reality, 
one  serious  and  cool  reexamination  of  the  evidence  by 
which  our  first  judgment  is  supported  has,  and,  in  rea- 
son, ought  to  have,  more  force  to  strengthen  or  weaken 
it,  than  an  infinite  series  of  such  estimations  as  our  au- 
thor requires. 


452 


REASONING. 


Thirdly^  I know  no  reason  nor  rale  in  logic  that  re- 
quires that  such  a series  of  estimations  should  follow 
every  particular  judgment. 

The  author’s  reasoning  supposes,  that  a man,  when 
he  forms  his  first  judgment,  conceives  himself  to  be 
infallible ; that  by  a second  and  subsequent  judgment, 
he  discovers  that  he  is  not  infallible;  and  that  by  a 
third  judgment,  subsequent  to  the  second,  he  estimates 
his  liableness  to  err  in  such  a case  as  the  present. 

If  the  man  proceed  in  this  order,  I grant  that  his  sec- 
ond judgment  will,  with  good  reason,  bring  down  the 
first  from  supposed  infallibility  to  fallibility ; and  that 
his  third  judgment  will,  in  some  degree,  either  strength- 
en or  weaken  the  first,  as  it  is  corrected  by  the  second. 
But  every  man  of  understanding  proceeds  in  a contrary 
order.  When  about  to  judge  in  any  particular  point, 
he  knows  already  that  he  is  not  infallible.  He  knows 
what  are  the  cases  in  which  he  is  most  or  least  liable 
to  err.  The  conviction  of  these  things  is  always  pres- 
ent to  his  mind,  and  influences  the  degree  of  his  assent 
in  his  first  judgment,  as  far  as  to  him  appears  reason- 
able. If  he  should  afterwards  find  reason  to  suspect 
his  first  judgment,  and  desires  to  have  all  the  satisfac- 
tion his  faculties  can  give,  reason  will  direct  him  not  to 
form  such  a series  of  estimations  upon  estimations  as 
this  author  requires,  but  to  examine  the  evidence  of  his 
first  judgment  carefully  and  coolly;  and  this  review 
may  very  reasonably,  according  to  its  result,  either 
strengthen  or  weaken,  or  totally  overturn,  his  first  judg- 
ment. 

This  infinite  series  of  estimations,  therefore,  is  not  the 
method  that  reason  directs  in  order  to  form  our  judg- 
ment in  any  case.  It  is  introduced  without  necessity, 
without  any  use  but  to  puzzle  the  understanding,  and 
to  make  us  think,  that  to  judge,  even  in  the  simplest 
and  plainest  cases,  is  a matter  of  insurmountable  diffi- 
culty and  endless  labor;  just  as  the  ancient  skeptic,  to 
make  a journey  of  two  thousand  paces  appear  endless, 
divided  it  into  an  infinite  number  of  stages. 

But  we  observed,  that  the  estimation  which  our  au- 


ABSOLUTE  SKEPTICISM. HUME. 


453 


thor  requires  may  admit  of  another  meaning,  which, 
indeed,  is  more  agreeable  to  the  expression,  but  incon- 
sistent with  what  he  advanced  before. 

By  the  possibility  of  error  in  the  estimation  of  the 
truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties,  may  be  meant,  that 
we  may  err  by  esteeming  our  faculties  true  and  faith- 
ful^ while^  in  fact^  they  may  be  false  and  fallacious^ 
even  when  used  according  to  the  rules  of  reason  and 
logic. 

If  this  be  meant,  I answer,  firsts  that  the  truth  and 
fidelity  of  our  faculty  of  judging  are,  and  must  be, 
taken  for  granted  in  every  judgment  and  in  every  esti- 
mation. 

If  the  skeptic  can  seriously  doubt  of  the  truth  and 
fidelity  of  his  faculty  of  judging  when  properly  used, 
and  suspend  his  judgment  upon  that  point  till  he  finds 
proof,  his  skepticism  admits  of  no  cure  by  reasoning, 
and  he  must  even  continue  in  it  until  he  have  new 
faculties  given  him,  which  shall  have  authority  to  sit  in 
judgment  upon  the  old.  Nor  is  there  any  need  of  an 
endless  succession  of  doubts  upon  this  subject,  for  the 
first  puts  an  end  to  all  judgment  and  reasoning,  and  to 
the  possibility  of  conviction  by  that  means.  The  skep- 
tic has  here  got  possession  of  a stronghold  which  is 
impregnable  to  reasoning,  and  we  must  leave  him  in 
possession  of  it,  till  nature,  by  other  means,  makes  him 
give  it  up. 

Secondly^  I observe,  that  this  ground  of  skepticism, 
from  the  supposed  infidelity  of  our  faculties,  contra- 
dicts what  the  author  before  advanced  in  this  very 
argument,  to  wit,  that  “ the  rules  of  the  demonstrative 
sciences  are  certain  and  infallible,  and  that  truth  is  the 
natural  effect  of  reason,  and  that  error  arises  from  the 
irruption  of  other  causes.” 

But  perhaps  he  made  these  concessions  unwarily. 
He  is  therefore  at  liberty  to  retract  them,  and  to  rest 
his  skepticism  upon  this  sole  foundation,  that  no  rea- 
soning can  prove  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties. 
Here  he  stands  upon  firm  ground  : for  it  is  evident,  that 
every  argument  offered  to  prove  the  truth  and  fidelity 


454 


REASONING. 


of  our  faculties  takes  for  granted  the  thing  in  question, 
and  is  therefore  that  kind  of  sophism  which  logicians 
call  petitio  principiL 

All  we  would  ask  of  this  kind  of  skeptic  is,  that  he 
would  be  uniform  and  consistent,  and  that  his  practice 
in  life  do  not  belie  his  profession  of  skepticism  with 
regard  to  the  fidelity  of  his  faculties : for  the  want  of 
faith,  as  well  as  faith  itself,  is  best  shown  by  works.  K 
a skeptic  avoid  the  fire  as  much  as  those  who  believe  it 
dangerous  to  go  into  it,  we  can  hardly  avoid  thinking 
his  skepticism  to  be  feigned,  and  not  real. 

Our  author,  indeed,  was  aware,  that  neither  his  skep- 
ticism, nor  that  of  any  other  person,  was  able  to  en- 
dure this  trial,  and  therefore  enters  a caveat  against  it. 
“ Neither  I,”  says  he,  “ nor  any  other  person,  was  ever 
sincerely  and  constantly  of  that  opinion.  Nature,  by 
an  absolute  and  uncontrollable  necessity,  has  deter- 
mined us  to  judge,  as  well  as  to  breathe  and  feel.” 

Upon  the  whole,  I see  only  two  conclusions  that  can 
be  fairly  drawn  from  this  profound  and  intricate  rea- 
soning against  reason.  The  first  is,  that  we  are  fallible 
in  all  our  judgments  and  in  all  our  reasonings.  The 
second,  that  the  truth  and  fidelity  of  our  faculties  can 
never  be  proved  by  reasoning ; and  therefore  our  trust 
in  them  cannot  be  founded  on  reasoning.  If  the  last 
be  what  the  author  calls  his  hypothesis,  I subscribe  to 
it,  and  think  it  not  an  hypothesis,  but  a manifest  truth ; 
though  I conceive  it  to  be  very  improperly  expressed 
by  saying  that  belief  is  more  properly  an  act  of  the 
sensitive  than  of  the  cogitative  part  of  our  nature.* 


* On  the  general  subject  of  skepticism,  see  Fichte’s  Destination  of  Man ; 
JoufFroy’s  Introduction  to  Ethics^  Lectures  VIII. -X.;  Ancillon,  Essai  sur 
la  Science  et  sur  la  Foi  Philosophique ; Javary,  De  la  Certitude.  — Ed. 


ESSAY  VIII. 


OF  TASTE. 


CHAPTER  I. 

OF  TASTE  IN  GENEKAL. 

That  power  of  the  mind  by  which  we  are  capable 
of  discerning  and  relishing  the  beauties  of  nature,  and 
whatever  is  excellent  in  the  fine  arts,  is  called  taste. 

In  treating  of  this  as  an  intellectual  power  of  the 
mind,  I intend  only  to  make  some  observations,  first 
on  its  nature^  and  then  on  its  objects. 

1.  In  the  external  sense  of  taste,  we  are  led  by  reason 
and  reflection  to  distinguish  between  the  agreeable  sen- 
sation we  feel,  and  the  quality  in  the  object  which  oc- 
casions it.  Both  have  the  same  name,  and  on  that 
account  are  apt  to  be  confounded  by  the  vulgar,  and 
even  by  philosophers.  The  sensation  I feel  when  I 
taste  any  sapid  body  is  in  my  mind  ; but  there  is  a real 
quality  in  the  body  which  is  the  cause  of  this  sensa- 
tion. These  two  things  have  the  same  name  in  lan- 
guage, not  from  any  similitude  in  their  nature,  but  be- 
cause the  one  is  the  sign  of  the  other,  and  because 
there  is  little  occasion  in  common  life  to  distinguish 
them.  This  was  fully  explained  in  treating  of  the  Sec- 
ondary Qualities  of  Bodies.  The  reason  of  taking 
notice  of  it  now  is,  that  the  internal  power  of  taste 
bears  a great  analogy  in  this  respect  to  the  external. 

When  a beautiful  object  is  before  us,  we  may  distin- 
guish the  agreeable  emotion  it  produces  in  us  from  the 
quality  of  the  object  which  causes  that  emotion.  AVhen 


456 


TASTE. 


I hear  an  air  in  music  that  pleases  me,  I say  it  is  fine, 
it  is  excellent.  This  excellence  is  not  in  me ; it  is  in 
the  music.  But  the  pleasure  it  gives  is  not  in  the 
music  ; it  is  in  me.  Perhaps  I cannot  say  what  it  is  in 
the  tune  that  pleases  my  ear,  as  I cannot  say  what  it 
is  in  a sapid  body  that  pleases  my  palate  ; but  there  is 
a quality  in  the  sapid  body  which  pleases  my  palate, 
and  I call  it  a delicious  taste ; and  there  is  a quality  in 
the  tune  that  pleases  my  taste,  and  I call  it  a fine  or  an 
excellent  air. 

But  though  some  of  the  qualities  that  please  a good 
taste  resemble  the  secondary  qualities  of  body,  and 
therefore  may  be  called  occult  qualities,  as  we  only  feel 
their  effect,  and  have  no  more  knowledge  of  the  cause 
than  that  it  is  something  which  is  adapted  by  nature  to 
produce  that  effect,  this  is  not  always  the  case.  Our 
judgment  of  beauty  is,  in  many  cases,  more  enlight- 
ened. A work  of  art  may  appear  beautiful  to  the  most 
ignorant,  even  to  a child.  It  pleases,  but  he  knows 
not  why.  To  one  who  understands  it  perfectly,  and 
perceives  how  every  part  is  fitted  with  exact  judgment 
to  its  end,  the  beauty  is  not  mysterious ; it  is  perfectly 
comprehended  ; and  he  knows  wherein  it  consists,  as 
well  as  how  it  affects  him. 

2.  We  may  observe,  that,  though  all  the  tastes  we 
perceive  by  the  palate  are  either  agreeable  or  disagree- 
able, or  indifferent ; yet  among  those  that  are  agree- 
able there  is  a great  diversity,  not  in  degree  only,  but 
in  kind.  And  as  we  have  not  generical  names  for  all 
the  different  kinds  of  taste,  we  distinguish  them  by  the 
bodies  in  which  they  are  found.  In  like  manner,  all 
the  objects  of  our  internal  taste  are  either  beautiful,  or 
disagreeable,  or  indifferent;  yet  of  beauty  there  is  a 
great  diversity^  not  only  of  degree^  but  of  kind:  the 
beauty  of  a demonstration,  the  beauty  of  a poem,  the 
beauty  of  a palace,  the  beauty  of  a piece  of  music,  the 
beauty  of  a fine  woman,  and  many  more  that  might 
be  named,  are  different  kinds  of  beauty ; and  we  have 
no  names  to  distinguish  them,  but  the  names  of  the 
different  objects  to  which  they  belong. 


ITS  NATURE. 


457 


As  there  is  such  diversity  in  the  kinds  of  beauty  as 
well  as  in  the  degrees^  we  need  not  think  it  strange 
that  philosophers  have  gone  into  different  systems  in 
analyzing  it,  and  enumerating  its  simple  ingredients. 
They  have  made  many  just  observations  on  the  sub- 
ject; but,  from  the  love  of  simplicity,  have  reduced  it 
to  fewer  principles  than  the  nature  of  the  thing  will 
permit,  having  had  in  their  eye  some  particular  kinds 
of  beauty,  while  they  overlooked  others. 

There  are  moral  beauties  as  well  as  natural ; beauties 
in  the  objects  of  sense,  and  in  intellectual  objects;  in 
the  works  of  men,  and  in  the  works  of  God  ; in  things 
inanimate,  in  brute  animals,  and  in  rational  beings  ; in 
the  constitution  of  the  body  of  man,  and  in  the  consti- 
tution of  his  mind.  There  is  no  real  excellence  which 
has  not  its  beauty  to  a discerning  eye,  when  placed  in 
a proper  point  of  view ; and  it  is  as  difficult  to  enumer- 
ate the  ingredients  of  beauty  as  the  ingredients  of  real 
excellence. 

3.  Those  who  conceive  that  there  is  no  standard  in 
nature  by  which  taste  may  be  regulated,  and  that  the 
common  proverb,  that  there  ought  to  be  no  dispute  about 
taste^  is  to  be  taken  in  the  utmost  latitude,  go  upon 
slender  and  insufficient  ground.  The  same  arguments 
might  be  used  with  equal  force  against  any  standard 
of  truth.  Whole  nations  by  the  force  of  prejudice  are 
brought  to  believe  the  grossest  absurdities ; and  why 
should  it  be  thought  that  the  taste  is  less  capable  of 
being  perverted  than  the  judgment  ? It  must  indeed 
I be  acknowledged,  that  men  differ  more  in  the  faculty 
of  taste  than  in  what  we  commonly  call  judgment ; 
and  therefore  it  may  be  expected  that  they  should  be 
more  liable  to  have  their  taste  corrupted  in  matters  of 
beauty  and  deformity,  than  their  judgment  in  matters 
of  truth  and  error. 

If  we  make  due  allowance  for  this,  we  shall  see  that 
it  is  as  easy  to  account  for  the  variety  of  . taste,  though 
there  be  in  nature  a standard  of  true  beauty,  and  con- 
sequently of  good  taste,  as  it  is  to  account  for  the  va- 
riety and  contrariety  of  opinions,  though  there  be  in 


458 


TASTE. 


nature  a standard  of  truth,  and  consequently  of  right 
judgment. 

4.  Nay,  if  we  speak  accurately  and  strictly,  we  shall 
• find  that,  in  every  operation  of  taste^  there  is  judgment 
implied. 

When  a man  pronounces  a poem  or  a palace  to  be 
beautiful,  he  affirms  something  of  that  poem  or  that 
palace;  and  every  affirmation  or  denial  expresses  judg- 
ment. For  we  cannot  better  define  judgment,  than  by 
saying  that  it  is  an  affirmation  or  denial  of  one  thing 
concerning  another.  I had  occasion  to  show,  when 
treating  of  judgment,  that  it  is  implied  in  every  per- 
ception of  our  external  senses.  There  is  an  immediate 
conviction  and  belief  of  the  existence  of  the  quality 
perceived,  whether  it  be  color,  or  sound,  or  figure  ; and 
the  same  thing  holds  in  the  perception  of  beauty  or 
deformity. 

If  it  be  said,  that  the  perception  of  beauty  is  merely 
a feeling  in  the  mind  that  perceives,  without  any  belief 
of  excellence  in  the  object,  the  necessary  consequence 
of  this  opinion  is,  that  when  I say  VirgiPs  Georgies  is 
a beautiful  poem,  I mean  not  to  say  any  thing  of  the 
poem,  but  only  something  concerning  myself  and  my 
feelings.  Why  should  I use  a language  that  expresses 
the  contrary  of  what  I mean  ? My  language,  accord- 
ing to  the  necessary  rules  of  construction,  can  bear  no 
other  meaning  but  this,  that  there  is  something  in  the 
poem,  and  not  in  me,  which  I call  beauty.  Even  those 
who  hold  beauty  to  be  merely  a feeling  in  the  person 
that  perceives  it,  find  themselves  under  a necessity  of 
expressing  themselves  as  if  beauty  were  solely  a qual- 
ity of  the  object,  and  not  of  the  percipient. 

Our  judgment  of  beauty  is  not,  indeed,  a dry  and 
unaffecting  judgment,  like  that  of  a mathematical  or 
metaphysical  truth.  By  the  constitution  of  our  nature, 
it  is  accompanied  with  an  agreeable  feeling  or  emotion, 
for  which  we  have  no  other  name  but  the  sense  of 
beauty.  This  sense  of  beauty,  like  the  perceptions  of 
our  other  senses,  implies  not  only  a feeling,  but  an 
opinion  of  some  quality  in  the  object  which  occasions 
that  feeling. 


ITS  OBJECTS. 


459 


In  objects  that  please  the  taste,  we  always  judge  that 
there  is  some  real  excellence,  some  superiority  to  those 
that  do  not  please.  In  some  cases,  that  superior  excel- 
lence is  distinctly  perceived,  and  can  be  pointed  out; 
in  other  cases,  we  have  only  a general  notion  of  some 
excellence  which  we  cannot  describe.  Beauties  of  the 
former  kind  may  be  compared  to  the  primary  qualities 
perceived  by  the  external  senses;  those  of  the  latter 
kind,  to  the  secondary. 

5.  Beauty  or  deformity  in  an  object  results  from  its 
nature  or  structure.  To  perceive  the  beauty,  therefore, 
we  must  perceive  the  nature  or  structure  from  which  it 
results.  In  this  the  internal  sense  differs  from  the  ex- 
ternal. Our  external  senses  may  discover  qualities 
which  do  not  depend  upon  any  antecedent  perception. 
Thus  I can  hear  the  sound  of  a bell,  though  I never 
perceived  any  thing  else  belonging  to  it.  But  it  is  im- 
possible to  perceive  the  beauty  of  an  object  without 
perceiving  the  object,  or  at  least  conceiving  it.  On  this 
account.  Dr.  Hutcheson  called  the  senses  of  beauty  and 
harmony  reflex  or  secondary  senses  ; because  the  beauty 
cannot  be  perceived  unless  the  object  be  perceived  by 
some  other  power  of  the  mind.  Thus  the  sense  of 
harmony  and  melody  in  sounds  supposes  the  external 
sense  of  hearing,  and  is  a kind  of  secondary  to  it.  A 
man  born  deaf  may  be  a good  judge  of  beauties  of 
another  kind,  but  can  have  no  notion  of  melody  or  har- 
mony. The  like  may  be  said  of  beauties  in  coloring 
and  in  figure,  which  can  never  be  perceived  without  the 
senses  by  which  color  and  figure  are  perceived. 


CHAPTER  II. 

OF  THE  OBJECTS  OF  TASTE. 

A PHILOSOPHICAL  analysis  of  the  objects  of  taste  is 
like  applying  the  anatomical  knife  to  a fine  face.  The 


460 


TASTE. 


design  of  the  philosopher,  as  well  as  of  the  anatomist, 

is,  not  to  gratify  taste,  but  to  improve  knowledge.  The 
reader  ought  to  be  aware  of  this,  that  he  may  not 
entertain  an  expectation  in  which  he  will  be  disap- 
pointed. 

By  the  objects  of  taste^  I mean  those  qualities  or  at- 
tributes of  things^  which  are  by  nature  adapted  to  please 
a good  taste,  Mr.  Addison,  and  Dr.  Akenside  after 
him,  have  reduced  them  to  three,  to  wit,  novelty,,  grand- 
eur,, and  beauty.  This  division  is  sufficient  for  all  I 
intend  to  say  upon  the  subject,  and  therefore  I shall 
adopt  it;  — observing  only,  that  beauty  often  taken 
in  so  extensive  a sense  as  to  comprehend  all  the  objects 
of  taste  ; yet  all  the  authors  I have  met  with,  who  have 
given  a division  of  the  objects  of  taste,  make  beauty 
one  species.  I take  the  reason  of  this  to  be,  that  we 
have  specific  names  for  some  of  the  qualities  that 
please  the  taste,  but  not  for  all ; and  therefore  all  those 
fall  under  the  general  name  of  beauty  for  which  there 
is  no  specific  name  in  the  division. 

1.  First  Object  of  Taste,  — Novelty,]  Novelty  is  not 
properly  a quality  of  the  thing  to  which  we  attribute 

it,  far  less  is  it  a sensation  in  the  mind  to  which  it  is 
new : it  is  a relation  which  the  thing  has  to  the  knowU 
edge  of  the  person.  What  is  new  to  one  man  may  not 
be  so  to  another ; what  is  new  this  moment  may  be 
familiar  to  the  same  person  some  time  hence.  When 
an  object  is  first  brought  to  our  knowledge,  it  is  new, 
whether  it  be  agreeable  or  not.  It  is  evident,  therefore, 
with  regard  to  novelty  (whatever  may  be  said  of  other 
objects  of  taste),  that  it  is  not  merely  a sensation  in 
the  mind  of  him  to  whom  the  thing  is  new ; it  is  a real 
relation  which  the  thing  has  to  his  knowledge  at  that 
time. 

But  we  are  so  constituted,  that  what  is  new  to  us 
commonly  gives  pleasure  upon  that  account,  if  it  be 
not  in  itself  disagreeable.  It  rouses  our  attention,  and 
occasions  an  agreeable  exertion  of  our  faculties. 

We  can  perhaps  conceive  a being  so  made,  that  his 


ITS  OBJECTS. NOVELTY. 


461 


happiness  consists  in  a continuance  of  the  same  un- 
varied sensations  or  feelings,  without  any  active  exer- 
tion on  his  part.  Whether  this  be  possible  or  not,  it  is 
evident  that  man  is  not  such  a being.  His  good  con- 
sists in  the  vigorous  exertion  of  his  active  and  intel- 
lective powers  upon  their  proper  objects,;  he  is  made 
for  action  and  progress,  and  cannot  be  happy  without 
it;  his  enjoyments  seem  to  be  given  by  nature,  not  so 
much  for  their  own  sake,  as  to  encourage  the  exercise 
of  his  various  powers.  That  tranquillity  of  soul  in 
which  some  place  human  happiness  is  not  a dead  rest, 
but  a regular  progressive  motion. 

Such  is  the  constitution  of  man  by  the  appointment 
of  nature.  This  constitution  is  perhaps  a part  of  the 
imperfection  of  our  nature  ; but  it  is  wisely  adapted  to 
our  state,  which  is  not  intended  to  be  stationary,  but 
progressive.  The  eye  is  not  satiated  with  seeing,  nor 
the  ear  with  hearing ; something  is  always  wanted. 
Desire  and  hope  never  cease,  but  remain  to  spur  us  on 
to  something  yet  to  be  acquired  ; and,  if  they  could 
cease,  human  happiness  must  end  with  them.  That 
our  desire  and  hope  be  properly  directed,  is  our  part ; 
that  they  can  never  be  extinguished,  is  the  work  of 
nature. 

But  the  pleasure  derived  from  new  objects,  in  many 
cases,  is  not  owing  solely  or  chiefly  to  their  being  new, 
but  to  some  other  circumstance  that  gives  them  value. 
The  new  fashion  in  dress,  furniture,  equipage,  and 
other  accommodations  of  life,  gives  pleasure,  not  so 
much,  as  I apprehend,  because  it  is  new,  as  because  it 
is  a sign  of  rank,  and  distinguishes  a man  from  the 
vulgar. 

In  some  things  novelty  is  due,  and  the  want  of  it  a 
real  imperfection.  Thus,  if  an  author  adds  to  the 
number  of  books  with  which  the  public  is  already 
overloaded,  we  expect  from  him  something  new ; and 
if  he  says  nothing  but  what  has  been  said  before,  in  as 
agreeable  a manner,  we  are  justly  disgusted. 

When  novelty  is  altogether  separated  from  the  con- 
ception of  worth  and  utility,  it  makes  but  a slight  im- 
39^ 


462 


TASTE. 


pression  upon  a truly  correct  taste.  Every  discovery 
in  nature,  in  the  arts,  and  in  the  sciences,  has  a real 
value,  and  gives  a rational  pleasure  to  a good  taste. 
But  things  that  have  nothing  to  recommend  them  but 
novelty  are  fit  only  to  entertain  children,  or  those  who 
are  distressed  from  a vacuity  of  thought.  This  qual- 
ity of  objects  may  therefore  be  compared  to  the  cipher 
in  arithmetic,  which  adds  greatly  to  the  value  of  sig- 
nificant figures,  but,  when  put  by  itself,  signifies  noth- 
ing at  all. 

11.  Second  Object  of  Taste.  — Grandeur.]  We  are 
next  to  consider  what  grandeur  in  objects  is.  To  me 
it  seems  to  be  nothing  else  than  such  a degree  of  excel- 
lence.^  in  one  kind  or  another^  as  merits  our  admiration. 

There  are  some  attributes  of  mind  which  have  a real 
and  intrinsic  excellence,  compared  with  their  contraries, 
and  which,  in  every  degree,  are  the  natural  objects  of 
esteem,  but  in  an  uncommon  degree  are  objects  of  ad- 
miration. We  put  a value  upon  them  because  they 
are  intrinsically  valuable  and  excellent. 

The  spirit  of  modern  philosophy  would  indeed  lead 
us  to  think,  that  the  worth  and  value  we  put  upon 
things  is  only  a sensation  in  our  minds,  and  not  any 
thing  inherent  in  the  object ; and  that  we  might  have 
been  so  constituted  as  to  put  the  highest  value  upon 
the  things  which  we  now  despise,  and  to  despise  the 
qualities  which  we  now  highly  esteem.  But  if  we 
hearken  to  the  dictates  of  common  sense,  we  must  be 
convinced  that  there  is  real  excellence  in  some  things^ 
whatever  our  feelings  or  our  constitution  be.  It  de- 
pends, no  doubt,  upon  our  constitution,  whether  we  do 
or  do  not  perceive  excellence  where  it  really  is  ; but 
the  object  has  its  excellence  from  its  own  constitution, 
and  not  from  ours. 

The  common  judgment  of  mankind  in  this  matter 
sufficiently  appears  in  the  language  of  all  nations,  which 
uniformly  ascribes  excellence,  grandeur,  and  beauty  to 
the  object,  and  not  to  the  mind  that  perceives  it.  And 
I believe  in  this,  as  in  most  other  things,  we  shall  find 


ITS  OBJECTS. GRANDEUR.  463 

the  common  judgment  of  mankind  and  true  philoso- 
phy not  to  be  at  variance. 

Is  not  power  in  its  nature  more  excellent  than  weak- 
ness, knowledge  than  ignorance,  wisdom  than  folly, 
fortitude  than  pusillanimity?  Is  there  no  intriusic  ex- 
cellence in  self-command,  in  generosity,  in  public  spirit  ? 
Is  not  friendship  a better  affection  of  mind  than  hatred, 

— a noble  emulation,  than  envy  ? Let  us  suppose,  if 
possible,  a being  so  constituted  as  to  have  a high  re- 
spect for  ignorance,  weakness,  and  folly ; to  venerate 
cowardice,  malice,  and  envy,  and  to  hold  the  contrary 
qualities  in  contempt ; to  have  an  esteem  for  lying  and 
falsehood,  and  to  love  most  those  who  impose  upon 
him,  and  use  him  worst.  Could  we  believe  such  a 
constitution  to  be  any  thing  else  than  madness  and 
delirium  ? It  is  impossible.  We  can  as  easily  con- 
ceive a constitution  by  which  one  should  perceive  two 
and  three  to  make  fifteen,  or  a part  to  be  greater  than 
the  whole. 

Every  one  who  attends  to  the  operations  of  his  own 
mind  will  find  it  to  be  certainly  true,  as  it  is  the  com- 
mon belief  of  mankind,  that  esteem  is  led  by  opinion, 
and  that  every  person  draws  our  esteem  as  far  only  as 
he  appears,  either  to  reason  or  fancy,  to  be  amiable  and 
worthy. 

There  is,  therefore,  a real  intrinsic  excellence  in  some 
qualities  of  mind,  — as  in  power,  knowledge,  wisdom, 
virtue,  magnanimity.  These  in  every  degree  merit 
esteem ; but  in  an  uncommon  degree  they  merit  admi- 
ration; and  that  which  merits  admiration  we  call  grand. 

In  the  contemplation  of  uncommon  excellence  the 
mind  feels  a noble  enthusiasm,  which  disposes  it  to  the 
imitation  of  what  it  admires.  When  we  contemplate 
the  character  of  Cato,  his  greatness  of  soul,  his  supe- 
riority to  pleasure,  to  toil,  and  to  danger,  his  ardent 
zeal  for  the  liberty  of  his  country,  — when  we  see  him 
standing  unmoved  in  misfortunes,  the  last  pillar  of  the 
liberty  of  Rome,  and  falling  nobly  in  his  country’s  ruin, 

— who  would  not  wish  to  be  Cato,  rather  than  Cfesar 
in  all  his  triumph  ? Such  a spectacle  of  a great  soul 


464 


TASTE. 


struggling  with  misfortune,  Seneca  thought  not  un- 
worthy of  the  attention  of  Jupiter  himself.  Ecce  spec- 
taculum  Deo  dignum^  ad  quod  respiciat  Jupiter  suo  operi 
intentus^  vir  fortis  cum  mala  fortuna  compositus. 

As  the  Deity  is,  of  all  objects  of  thought,  the  most 
grand,  the  descriptions  given  in  Holy  Writ  of  his  attri- 
butes and  works,  even  when  clothed  in  simple  expres- 
sion, are  acknowledged  to  be  sublime.  The  expression 
of  Moses,  “ And  God  said.  Let  there  be  light ; and 
there  was  light,”  * has  not  escaped  the*  notice  of  Lon- 
ginus, a heathen  critic,  as  an  example  of  the  sublime. 

Hitherto  we  have  found  grandeur  only  in  qualities  of 
mind ; but  it  may  be  asked,  Is  there  no  real  grandeur 
in  material  objects  ? 

It  will  perhaps  appear  extravagant  to  deny  that  there 
is  ; yet  it  deserves  to  be  considered,  whether  all  the 
grandeur  we  ascribe  to  objects  of  sense  be  not  derived 
from  something  intellectual,  of  which  they  are  the 
effects  or  signs,  or  to  which  they  bear  some  relation  or 
analogy.  Besides  the  relations  of  effect  and  cause,  of 
sign  and  thing  signified,  there  are  innumerable  simili- 
tudes and  analogies  between  things  of  very  different 
nature,  which  lead  us  to  connect  them  in  our  imagina- 
tion, and  to  ascribe  to  the  one  what  properly  belongs 
to  the  other.  Every  metaphor  in  language  is  an  in- 
stance of  this  ; and  it  must  be  remembered,  that  a very 
great  part  of  language  which  we  now  account  proper 
was  originally  metaphorical ; for  the  metaphorical 
meaning  becomes  the  proper  as  soon  as  it  becomes  the 
most  usual ; much  more,  when  that  which  was  at  first 
the  proper  meaning  falls  into  disuse. 

Thus  the  names  of  grand  and  sublime^  as  well  as 
their  opposites,  mean  and  low^  are  evidently  borrowed 
from  the  dimensions  of  body ; yet  it  must  be  acknowl- 
edged, that  many  things  are  truly  grand  and  sublime, 
to  which  we  cannot  ascribe  the  dimensions  of  height 
and  extension.  Some  analogy  there  is,  without  doubt, 
between  greatness  of  dimension,  which  is  an  object  of 


Better  translated,  “ Be  there  light ; and  light  there  was.” — H. 


ITS  OBJECTS. GRANDEUR. 


465 


external  sense,  and  that  grandeur  which  is  an  object  of 
taste.  On  account  of  tliis  analogy,  the  last  borrows  its 
name  from  the  first ; and  the  name  being  common 
leads  us  to  conceive  that  there  is  something  common  in 
the  nature  of  the  things.  But  we  shall  find  many  qual- 
ities of  mind  denoted  by  names  taken  from  some  qual- 
ity of  body  to  which  they  have  some  analogy^  without 
any  thing  common  in  their  nature. 

Sweetness  and  austerity,  simplicity  and  duplicity, 
rectitude  and  crookedness,  are  names  common  to  cer- 
tain qualities  of  mind,  and  to  qualities  of  body  to  which 
they  have  some  analogy ; yet  he  would  err  greatly  who 
ascribed  to  a body  that  sweetness  or  that  simplicity 
which  are  the  qualities  of  mind.  In  like  manner,  great- 
ness and  meanness  are  names  common  to  qualities 
perceived  by  the  external  sense,  and  to  qualities  per- 
ceived by  taste  ; yet  he  may  be  in  an  error,  who  ascribes 
to  the  objects  of  sense  that  greatness  or  that  meanness 
which  is  only  an  object  of  taste. 

As  intellectual  objects  are  made  more  level  to  our 
apprehension  by  giving  them  a visible  form,  so  the  ob- 
jects of  sense  are  dignified  and  made  more  august  by 
ascribing  to  them  intellectual  qualities  which  have 
some  analogy  to  those  they  really  possess.  The  sea 
rages,  the  sky  lowers,  the  meadows  smile,  the  rivulets 
murmur,  the  breezes  whisper,  the  soil  is  grateful  or  un- 
grateful, — such  expressions  are  so  familiar  in  common 
language,  that  they  are  scarcely  accounted  poetical  or 
figurative ; but  they  give  a kind  of  dignity  to  inanimate 
objects,  and  make  our  conception  of  them  more  agree- 
able. 

When  we  consider  matter  as  an  inert,  extended,  di- 
visible, and  movable  substance,  there  seems  to  be  noth- 
ing in  these  qualities  which  we  can  call  grand ; and 
when  we  ascribe  grandeur  to  any  portion  of  matter, 
however  modified,  may  it  not  borrow  this  quality  from 
something  intellectual^  of  which  it  is  the  effect,  or  sign, 
or  instrument,  or  to  which  it  bears  some  analogy  ? or  it 
may  be  because  it  produces  in  the  mind  an  emotion 
that  has  some  resemblance  to  that  admiration  which 
truly  grand  objects  raise. 


466 


TASTE. 


A very  elegant  writer  on  the  sublime  and  beautiful 
[Burke]  makes  every  thing  grand  or  sublime  that  is 
terrible.  Might  he  not  be  led  to  this  by  the  similarity 
between  dread  and  admiration  ? Both  are  grave  and 
solemn  passions  ; both  make  a strong  impression  upon 
the  mind  ; and  both  are  very  infectious.  But  they 
differ  specifically,  in  this  respect,  that  admiration  sup- 
poses some  uncommon  excellence  in  its  object^  which 
dread  does  not.  We  may  admire  what  we  see  no  rea- 
son to  dread ; and  we  may  dread  what  we  do  not  ad- 
mire. In  dread  there  is  nothing  of  that  enthusiasm 
which  natmally  accompanies  admiration,  and  is  a chief 
ingredient  of  the  emotion  raised  by  what  is  truly  grand 
or  sublime. 

Upon  the  whole,  I humbly  apprehend  that  true  grand- 
eur is  such  a degree  of  excellence  as  is  fit  to  raise  an 
enthusiastical  admiration ; that  this  grandeur  is  found 
originally  and  properly  in  qualities  of  mind ; that  it  is 
discerned  in  objects  of  sense  only  by  reflection,  as  the 
light  we  perceive  in  the  moon  and  planets  is  truly  the 
light  of  the  sun  ; and  that  those  who  look  for  grandeur 
in  mere  matter  seek  the  living  among  the  dead. 

If  this  be  a mistake,  it  ought  at  least  to  be  granted 
that  the  grandeur  which  we  perceive  in  qualities  of 
mind  ought  to  have  a different  name  from  that  which 
belongs  properly  to  the  objects  of  sense,  as  they  are  very 
different  in  their  nature,  and  produce  very  different  emo- 
tions in  the  mind  of  the  spectator. 

III.  Third  Object  of  Taste,  — Beauty,]  All  the  ob- 
jects we  call  beautiful  agree  in  two  things,  which  seem 
to  concur  in  our  sense  of  beauty.  Firsts  when  they  are 
perceived,  or  even  imagined,  they  produce  a certain 
agreeable  emotion  or  feeling  in  the  mind ; and  secondly^ 
this  agreeable  emotion  is  accompanied  with  an  opinion 
or  belief  of  their  having  some  perfection  or  excellence 
belonging  to  them. 

1.  Whether  the  pleasure  ice  feel  in  contemplating 
beautiful  objects  may  have  any  necessary  connection 
with  the  belief  of  their  excellence,  or  whether  that  pleas- 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY. 


467 


ure  be  conjoined  with  this  belief  by  the  good  pleasure 
only  of  our  Maker,  I will  not  determine.  The  reader 
may  see  Dr.  Price’s  sentiments  upon  this  subject,  which 
merit  consideration,  in  the  second  chapter  of  his  Review 
of  the  Questions  concerning'  Morals,  At  any  rate,  the 
pleasure  exists.  “ There  is  nothing,”  says  Mr.  Addison, 
“ that  makes  its  way  more  directly  to  the  soul  than 
beauty,  which  immediately  diffuses  a secret  satisfaction 
and  complacence  through  the  imagination,  and  gives  a 
finishing  to  any  thing  that  is  great  and  uncommon. 
The  very  first  discovery  of  it  strikes  the  mind  with  an 
inward  joy,  and  spreads  a cheerfulness  and  delight 
through  all  its  faculties.” 

As  we  ascribe  beauty,  not  only  to  persons,  but  to  in- 
animate things,  we  give  the  name  of  love  or  liking  to 
the  emotion  which  beauty,  in  both  these  kinds  of  ob- 
jects, produces.  It  is  evident,  however,  that  liking  to  a 
person  is  a very  different  affection  of  mind  from  liking 
to  an  inanimate  thing.  The  first  always  implies  benev- 
olence ; but  what  is  inanimate  cannot  be  the  object  of 
benevolence.  Still,  the  two  affections,  however  differ- 
ent, have  a resemblance  in  some  respects ; and,  on  ac- 
count of  that  resemblance,  have  the  same  name  : and 
perhaps  beauty,  in  these  two  different  kinds  of  objects, 
though  it  has  one  name,  may  be  as  different  in  its  na- 
ture as  the  emotions  which  it  produces  in  us. 

2.  Besides  the  agreeable  emotion  which  beautiful  ob- 
jects produce  in  the  mind  of  the  spectator,  they  produce 
also  an  opinion  or  judg7nent  of  some  perfection  or  excel- 
lence  in  the  object. 

The  feeling  is,  no  doubt,  in  the  mind,  and  so  also  is 
the  judgment  we  form  of  the  object : but  this  judgment, 
like  all  others,  must  be  true  or  false.  If  it  be  a true 
judgment,  there  is  some  real  excellence  in  the  object. 
And  the  use  of  all  languages  shows,  that  the  name  of 
beauty  belongs  to  this  excellence  of  the  object,  and  not 
to  the  feelings  of  the  spectator. 

We  have  reason  to  believe,  not  only  that  the  beau- 
ties we  see  in  nature  are  real,  and  not  fanciful,  but  that 
there  are  thousands  which  our  faculties  are  too  dull  to 


468 


TASTE. 


perceive.  The  man  who  is  skilled  in  painting  or  statuary 
sees  more  of  the  beauty  of  a fine  picture  or  statue  than 
a common  spectator.  The  same  thing  holds  in  all  the 
fine  arts.  The  most  perfect  works  of  art  have  a beauty 
that  strikes  even  the  rude  and  ignorant ; but  they  see 
only  a small  part  of  that  beauty  which  is  seen  in  such 
works  by  those  who  understand  them  perfectly,  and  can 
produce  them.  This  may  be  applied  with  no  less  jus- 
tice to  the  works  of  nature.  They  have  a beauty  that 
strikes  even  the  ignorant  and  inattentive.  But  the 
more  we  discover  of  their  structure,  of  their  mutual  re- 
lations, and  of  the  laws  by  which  they  are  governed, 
the  greater  beauty,  and  the  more  delightful  marks  of 
art,  wisdom,  and  goodness,  we  discern.  Superior  be- 
ings may  see  more  than  we  ; but  He  only  who  made 
them,  and  upon  a review  pronounced  them  all  to  be 
‘‘  very  good,’’  can  see  all  their  beauty. 

Our  determinations  with  regard  to  the  beauty  of  ob- 
jects may,  I think,  be  distinguished  into  two  kinds  ; the 
first  we  may  call  instinctive^  the  other  rational, 

(1.)  Some  objects  strike  us  at  once,  and  appear  beau- 
tiful at  first  sight,  without  any  reflection,  without  our 
being  able  to  say  why  we  call  them  beautiful,  or  being 
able  to  specify  any  perfection  which  justifies  our  judg- 
ment. Something  of  this  kind  there  seems  to  be  in 
brute  animals,  and  in  children  before  the  use  of  reason ; 
nor  does  it  end  with  infancy,  but  continues  through 
life.  In  the  plumage  of  birds,  and  of  butterflies,  in  the 
colors  and  form  of  flowers,  of  shells,  and  of  many  other 
objects,  we  perceive  a beauty  that  delights  ; but  cannot 
say  what  it  is  in  the  object  that  should  produce  that 
emotion. 

The  beauty  of  the  object  may,  in  such  cases,  be 
called  an  occult  quality.  We  know  well  how  it  affects 
our  senses  ; but  what  it  is  in  itself  we  know  not.  But 
this,  as  well  as  other  occult  qualities,  is  a proper  subject 
of  philosophical  disquisition  ; and,  by  a careful  exam- 
ination of  the  objects  to  which  nature  has  given  this 
amiable  quality,  we  may  perhaps  discover  some  real 
excellence  in  the  object,  or  at  least  some  valuable  pur- 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY. 


469 


pose  that  is  served  by  the  effect  which  it  produces 
upon  us. 

This  instinctive  sense  of  beauty,  in  different  species 
of  animals,  may  differ  as  much  as  the  external  sense  of 
taste,  and  in  each  species  be  adapted  to  its  manner  of 
life.  By  this,  perhaps,  the  various  tribes  are  led  to  as- 
sociate with  their  kind,  to  dwell  among  certain  objects 
rather  than  others,  and  to  construct  their  habitation  in 
a particular  manner.  There  seem  likewise  to  be  varie- 
ties in  the  sense  of  beauty  in  the  individuals  of  the 
same  species,  by  which  they  are  directed  in  the  choice 
of  a mate,  and  in  the  love  and  care  of  their  offspring. 

We  see,’’  says  Mr.  Addison,  that  every  different  spe- 
cies of  sensible  creatures  has  its  different  notions  of 
beauty,  and  that  each  of  them  is  most  affected  with  the 
beauties  of  its  own  kind.  This  is  nowhere  more  re- 
markable than  in  birds  of  the  same  shape  and  propor- 
tion, where  we  often  see  the  mate  determined  in  his 
courtship  by  the  single  grain  or  tincture  of  a feather, 
and  never  discoveri  ng  any  charms  but  in  the  color  of  its 
own  species.” 

“ Scit  thalamo  servare  fidem,  sanctasque  veretur 
Connubii  leges  ; non  ilium  in  pectore  candor 
Sollicitat  niveus  ; neque  pravum  accendit  amorem 
Splendida  lanugo,  vel  honesta  in  vertice  crista ; 

Purpureusve  nitor  pennarum  ; ast  agmina  late 
Foeminea  explorat  cautus,  maculasque  requirit 
Cognatas,  paribusque  iuterlita  corpora  guttis: 

Ni  faceret,  pictis  sylvam  circum  undique  monstris 
Confusam  aspiceres  vulgo,  partusque  biformes, 

Et  genus  ambiguum,  et  veneris  monumenta  nefandae. 

Hinc  merula  in  nigro  se  oblectat  nigra  marito  ; 

Hinc  socium  lasciva  petit  philomela  canorum, 

Agnoscitque  pares  sonitus ; hinc  noctua  tetram 
Canitiem  alarum,  et  glaucos  miratur  ocellos. 

Nempe  sibi  semper  constat,  crescitque  qiiotannis 
Lucida  progenies,  castos  confessa  parentes : 

Vere  novo  exultat,  plumasque  decora  juventus 
Explicat  ad  solem,  patriisque  coloribus  ardet.” 

As  far  as  our  determinations  of  the  comparative 
beauty  of  objects  are  instinctive,  they  are  no  subject  of 
reasoning  or  of  criticism ; they  are  purely  the  gift  of 
nature,  and  we  have  no  standard  by  which  they  may 
be  measured. 


40 


470 


TASTE. 


(2.)  But  there  are  judgments  of  beauty  that  may  be 
called  rational^  being  grounded  on  some  agreeable  qual- 
ity of  the  object  which  is  distinctly  conceived,  and  may 
be  specified. 

This  distinction  between  a rational  judgment  of 
beauty  and  that  which  is  instinctive,  may  be  illustrated 
by  an  instance.  In  a heap  of  pebbles,  one  that  is  re- 
markable for  brilliancy  of  color  and  regularity  of  figure 
will  be  picked  out  of  the  heap  by  a child.  He  perceives 
a beauty  in  it,  puts  a value  upon  it,  and  is  fond  of  the* 
property  of  it.  For  this  preference  no  reason  can  be 
given,  but  that  children  are,  by  their  constitution,  fond 
of  brilliant  colors,  and  of  regular  figures.  Suppose, 
again,  that  an  expert  mechanic  views  a well-constructed 
machine.  He  sees  all  its  parts  to  be  made  of  the  fittest 
materials,  and  of  the  most  proper  form  ; notlring  super- 
fluous, nothing  deficient ; every  part  adapted  to  its  use, 
and  the  whole  fitted  in  the  most  perfect  manner  to  the 
end  for  which  it  is  intended.  He  pronounces  it  to  be  a 
beautiful  machine.  He  views  it  with  the  same  agree- 
able emotion  as  the  child  viewed  the  pebble ; but  he 
can  give  a reason  for  his  judgment,  and  point  out 
the  particular  perfections  of  the  object  on  which  it  is 
grounded. 

Although  the  instinctive  and  the  rational  sense  of 
beauty  may  be  perfectly  distinguished  in  speculation, 
yet,  in  passing  judgment  upon  particular  objects,  they 
are  often  so  mixed  and  confounded,  that  it  is  difficult 
to  assign  to  each  its  own  province.  Nay,  it  may  often 
happen,  that  a judgment  of  the  beauty  of  an  object, 
which  was  at  first  merely  instinctive,  shall  afterwards 
become  rational,  when  we  discover  some  latent  perfec- 
tion of  which  that  beauty  in  the  object  is  a sign. 

As  the  sense  of  beauty  may  be  distinguished  into  in- 
stinctive and  rational ; so,  I think,  beauty  itself  may  be 
distinguished  into  original  and  derived. 

The  attributes  of  body  we  ascribe  to  mind,  and  the 
attributes  of  mind  to  material  objects.  To  inanimate 
filings  we  ascribe  life,  and  even  intellectual  and  moral 
qualities.  And  although  the  qualities  that  are  thus 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY.  471 

made  common  belong  to  one  of  the  subjects  in  the 
proper  sense,  and  to  the  other  metaphorically,  these 
different  senses  are  often  so  mixed  in  our  imagination, 
as  to  produce  the  same  sentiment  with  regard  to  both. 
It  is  therefore  natural,  and  agreeable  to  the  strain  of 
human  sentiments  and  of  human  language,  that  in 
many  cases  the  beauty  which  originally  and  properly  is 
in  the  thing  signified,  should  be  transferred  to  the  sign  ; 
that  which  is  in  the  cause,  to  the  effect ; that  which  is 
in  the  end,  to  the  means ; and  that  which  is  in  the 
agent,  to  the  instrument. 

If  what  was  just  said  of  the  distinction  between  the 
grandeur  which  we  ascribe  to  qualities  of  mind,  and 
that  which  we  ascribe  to  material  objects,  be  well 
founded,  this  distinction  of  the  beauty  of  objects  will 
easily  be  admitted  as  perfectly  analogous  to  it.  I shall, 
therefore,  only  illustrate  it  by  an  example. 

There  is  nothing  in  the  exterior  of  a man  more  lovely 
and  more  attractive  than  perfect  good  breeding.  But 
what  is  this  good  breeding  ? It  consists  of  all  the  ex- 
ternal signs  of  due  respect  to  our  superiors,  condescen- 
sion to  our  inferiors,  politeness  to  all  with  whom  we 
converse  or  have  to  do,  joined  in  the  fair  sex  with  that 
delicacy  of  outward  behaviour  which  becomes  them. 
And  how  comes  it  to  have  such  charms  in  the  eyes  of 
all  mankind  ? For  this  reason  only,  as  I apprehend, 
that  it  is  a natural  sign  of  that  temper,  and  those  affec- 
tions and  sentiments  with  regard  to  others,  and  with  re- 
gard to  ourselves,  which  are  in  themselves  truly  amiable 
and  beautiful.  This  is  the  original,  of  which  good 
breeding  is  the  picture  ; and  it  is  the  beauty  of  the 
original  that  is  reflected  to  our  sense  by  the  picture. 
The  beauty  of  good  breeding,  therefore,  is  not  originally 
in  the  external  behaviour  in  which  it  consists,  but  is 
derived  from  the  qualities  of  mind  which  it  expresses. 
And  though  there  may  be  good  breeding  without  the 
amiable  qualities  of  mind,  its  beauty  is  still  derived 
from  what  it  naturally  expresses. 

Having  explained  these  distinctions  of  our  sense  of 
beauty  into  instinctive  and  rational^  and  of  beauty  itself 


472 


TASTE. 


into  original  and  derived^  I would  now  proceed  to  give 
a general  view  of  those  qualities  in  objects  to  which 
we  may  justly  and  rationally  ascribe  beauty,  whether 
original  or  derived. 

But  here  some  embarrassment  arises  from  the  vague 
meaning  of  the  word  beauty^  which  I had  occasion  be- 
fore to  observe.  Sometimes  it  is  extended,  so  as  to 
include  every  thing  that  pleases  a good  taste,  and  so 
comprehends  grandeur  and  novelty,  as  well  as  what  in 
a more  restricted  sense  is  called  beauty.  At  other 
times,  it  is  even  by  good  writers  confined  to  the  objects 
of  sight,  when  they  are  either  seen,  or  remembered,  or 
imagined.  Yet  it  is  admitted  by  all  men,  that  there 
are  beauties  in  music ; that  there  is  beauty  as  well  as 
sublimity  in  composition,  both  in  verse  and  in  prose ; 
that  there  is  beauty  in  characters,  in  affections,  and  in 
actions.  These  are  not  objects  of  sight ; and  a man 
may  be  a good  judge  of  beauty  of  various  kinds,  who 
has  not  the  faculty  of  sight. 

To  give  a determinate  meaning  to  a word  so  va- 
riously extended  and  restricted,  I know  no  better  way 
than  what  is  suggested  by  the  common  division  of  the 
objects  of  taste  into  novelty^  grandeur^  and  beauty. 
Novelty,  it  is  plain,  is  no  quality  of  the  new  object,  but 
merely  a relation  which  it  has  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
person  to  whom  it  is  new.  Therefore,  if  this  general 
division  be  just,  every  quality  in  an  object  that  pleases 
a good  taste  must,  in  one  degree  or  another,  have 
either  grandeur  or  beauty.  It  may  still  be  difficult  to 
fix  the  precise  limit  betwixt  grandeur  and  beauty ; but 
they  must  together  comprehend  every  thing  fitted  by 
its  nature  to  please  a good  taste,  — that  is,  every  real 
perfection  and  excellence  in  the  objects  we  contem- 
plate. 

In  a poem,  in  a picture,  in  a piece  of  music,  it  is  real 
excellence  that  pleases  a good  taste.  In  a person,  every 
perfection  of  the  mind,  moral  or  intellectual,  and  every 
perfection  of  the  body,  gives  pleasure  to  the  spectator 
as  well  as  to  the  owner,  when  there  is  no  envy  or  ma- 
lignity to  destroy  that  pleasure.  It  is  therefore  in  the 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY.  473 

scale  of  perfection  and  real  excellence  that  we  must 
look  for  what  is  either  grand  or  beautiful  in  objects. 
What  is  the  proper  object  of  admiration  is  grand^  and 
what  is  the  proper  object  of  love  and  esteem  is  heautifuL 

This,  I think,  is  the  only  notion  of  beauty  that  corre- 
sponds with  the  division  of  the  objects  of  taste  which 
has  been  generally  received  by  philosophers.  And  this 
connection  of  beauty  with  real  perfection  was  a capital 
doctrine  of  the  Socratic  school.  It  is  often  ascribed 
to  Socrates  in  the  dialogues  of  Plato  and  of  Xeno- 
phon. 

I apprehend,  therefore,  that  it  is  in  the  moral  and  in- 
tellectual perfections  of  mind^  and  in  its  active  powers, 
that  beauty  originally  dwells  ; and  that  from  this,  as 
the  fountain,  all  the  beauty  which  we  perceive  in  the 
visible  world  is  derived. 

This,  I think,  was  the  opinion  of  the  ancient  philoso- 
phers before  named ; and  it  has  been  adopted  by  Lord 
Shaftesbury  and  Dr.  Akenside  among  the  moderns. 

“ Mind^  mind  alone  ! bear  witness  earth  and  heaven, 

The  living  fountains  in  itself  contains 
Of  beauteous  and  sublime.  Here  hand  in  hand 
Sit  paramount  the  graces.  Here  enthroned, 

Celestial  Venus,  with  divinest  airs, 

Invites  the  soul  to  never-fading  joy.” 

But  neither  mind,  nor  any  of  its  qualities  or  powers,  is 
an  immediate  object  of  perception  to  man.  We  are, 
indeed,  immediately  conscious  of  the  operations  of  our 
own  mind;  and  every  degree  of  perfection  in  them 
gives  the  purest  pleasure,  with  a proportional  degree 
of  self-esteem,  so  flattering  to  self-love,  that  the  great 
difficulty  is  to  keep  it  within  just  bounds,  so  that  we 
may  not  think  of  ourselves  above  what  we  ought  to 
think. 

Other  minds  we  perceive  only  through  the  medium 
of  material  objects,  on  which  their  signatures  are  im- 
pressed. It  is  through  this  medium  that  we  perceive 
life,  activity,  wisdom,  and  every  moral  • and  intellectual 
quality  in  other  beings.  The  signs  of  those  qualities 
are  immediately  perceived  by  the  senses  ; by  them  the 
40* 


474 


TASTE. 


qualities  themselves  are  reflected  to  our  understanding; 
and  we  are  very  apt  to  attribute  to  the  sign  the  beauty 
or  the  grandeur  which  is  properly  and  originally  in  the 
things  signified. 

Thus  the  beauties  of  mind,  though  invisible  in  them- 
selves, are  perceived  in  the  objects  of  sense,  on  which 
their  image  is  impressed. 

If  we  consider,  on  the  other  hand,  the  qualities  in 
sensible  objects  to  which  we  ascribe  beauty,  1 appre- 
hend we  shall  find  in  all  of  them  some  relation  to  mind, 
and  the  greatest  in  those  that  are  most  beautiful. 

The  qualities  of  inanimate  matter,  in  which  we  per- 
ceive beauty,  are  sounds  color ^ form^  and  motion;  the 
first  an  object  of  hearings  the  other  three  of  sight; 
which  we  may  consider  in  order. 

1.  In  a single  note^  sounded  by  a very  fine  voice, 
there  is  a beauty  which  we  do  not  perceive  in  the  same 
note,  sounded  by  a bad  voice,  or  an  imperfect  instru- 
ment. I need  not  attempt  to  enumerate  the  perfections 
in  a single  note  which  give  beauty  to  it.  Some  of 
them  have  names  in  the  science  of  music,  and  there 
perhaps  are  others  which  have  no  names.  But  I think 
it  will  be  allowed,  that  every  quality  which  gives  beauty 
to  a single  note  is  a sign  of  some  perfection,  either  in 
the  organ,  whether  it  be  the  human  voice  or  an  instru- 
ment, or  in  the  execution.  The  beauty  of  the  sound 
is  both  the  sign  and  the  effect  of  this  perfection ; and 
the  perfection  of  the  cause  is  the  only  reason  we  can 
assign  for  the  beauty  of  the  effect. 

In  a composition  of  sounds,  or  a piece  of  music,  the 
beauty  is  either  in  the  harmony^  the  melody^  or  the  ex- 
pression. The  beauty  of  expression  must  be  derived 
either  from  the  beauty  of  the  thing  expressed,  or  from 
the  art  and  skill  employed  in  expressing  it  properly. 

In  harmony,  the  very  names  of  concord  and  discord 
are  metaphorical,  and  suppose  some  analogy  between 
the  relations  of  sound,  to  which  they  are  figuratively 
applied,  and  the  relations  of  minds  and  affections  which 
they  originally  and  properly  signify.  As  far  as  I can 
judge  by  my  ear,  when  two  or  more  persons  of  a good 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY. 


475 


voice  and  ear  converse  together  in  amity  and  friend- 
ship, the  tones  of  their  different  voices  are  concordant, 
but  become  discordant  when  they  give  vent  to  angry 
passions;  so  that,  without  hearing  what  is  said,  one 
may  know  by  the  tones  of  the  different  voices  whether 
they  quarrel  or  converse  amicably.  This,  indeed,  is 
not  so  easily  perceived  in  those  who  have  been  taught, 
by  good  breeding,  to  suppress  angry  tones  of  voice, 
even  when  they  are  angry,  as  in  the  lowest  ranks,  who 
express  their  angry  passions  without  any  restraint. 

When  discord  arises  occasionally  in  conversation,  but 
soon  terminates  in  perfect  amity,  we  receive  more 
pleasure  than  from  perfect  unanimity.  In  like  manner, 
in  the  harmony  of  music,  discordant  sounds  are  occa- 
sionally introduced,  but  it  is  always  in  order  to  give  a 
relish  to  the  most  perfect  concord  that  follows. 

Whether  these  analogies  between  the  harmony  of  a 
piece  of  music  and  harmony  in  the  intercourse  of  minds 
be  merely  fanciful,  or  have  any  real  foundation  in  fact, 
I submit  to  those  who  have  a nicer  ear,  and  have  ap- 
plied it  to  observations  of  this  kind.  If  they  have 
any  just  foundation,  as  they  seem  to  me  to  have,  they 
serve  to  account  for  the  metaphorical  application  of 
the  names  of  concord  and  discord  to  the  relations  of 
sounds;  to  account  for  the  pleasure  we  have  from  har- 
mony in  music ; and  to  show  that  the  beauty  of  har- 
mony is  derived  from  the  relation  it  has  to  agreeable 
affections  of  mind. 

With  regard  to  melody,  I leave  it  to  the  adepts  in 
the  science  of  music  to  determine  whether  music,  com- 
posed according  to  the  established  rules  of  harmony 
and  melody,  can  be  altogether  void  of  expression ; and 
whether  music  that  has  no  expression  can  have  any 
beauty.  To  me  it  seems,  that  every  strain  in  melody 
that  is  agreeable  is  an  imitation  of  the  tones  of  the 
human  voice  in  the  expression  of  some  sentiment  or 
passion,  or  an  imitation  of  some  other  object  in  nature ; 
and  that  music,  as  well  as  poetry,  is  an  imitative  art. 

2.  The  sense  of  beauty  in  the  colors  and  in  the  mo- 
tions of  inanimate  objects  is,  I believe,  in  some  cases, 


476 


TASTE. 


instinctive.  We  see  that  children  and  savages  are 
pleased  with  brilliant  colors  and  sprightly  motions.  In 
persons  of  an  improved  and  rational  taste,  there  are 
many  sources  from  which  colors  and  motions  may  de- 
rive their  beauty.  They,  as  well  as  the  forms  of  ob- 
jects, admit  of  regularity  and  variety.  The  motions 
produced  by  machinery  indicate  the  perfection  or  im- 
perfection of  the  mechanism,  and  may  be  better  or 
worse  adapted  to  their  end,  and  from  that  derive  their 
beauty  or  deformity. 

The  colors  of  natural  objects  are  commonly  signs  of 
some  good  or  bad  quality  in  the  object ; or  they  may 
suggest  to  the  imagination  something  agreeable  or  dis- 
agreeable. A number  of  clouds  of  different  and  ever- 
changing  hue,  seen  on  the  ground  of  a serene  azure 
sky  at  the  going  down  of  the  sun,  present  to  the  eye  of 
every  man  a glorious  spectacle.  It  is  hard  to  say, 
whether  we  should  call  it  grand  or  beautiful.  It  is 
both  in  a high  degree.  Clouds  towering  above  clouds, 
variously  tinged,  according  as  they  approach  nearer  to 
the  direct  rays  of  the  sun,  enlarge  our  conceptions  of 
the  regions  above  us.  They  give  us  a view  of  the  fur- 
niture of  those  regions,  which,  in  an  unclouded  air, 
seem  to  be  a perfect  void ; but  are  now  seen  to  contain 
the  stores  of  wind  and  rain,  bound  up  for  the  present, 
but  to  be  poured  down  upon  the  earth  in  due  season. 
Even  the  simple  rustic  does  not  look  upon  this  beauti- 
ful sky  merely  as  a show  to  please  the  eye,  but  as  a 
happy  omen  of  fine  weather  to  come. 

3.  If  we  consider,  in  the  last  place,  the  beauty  of 
form  or  figure  in  inanimate  objects,  this,  according  to 
Dr.  Hutcheson,  results  from  regularity,  mixed  with  va- 
riety. Here  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  regularity,  in 
all  cases,  expresses  design  and  art ; for  nothing  regular 
was  ever  the  work  of  chance ; and  where  regularity  is 
joined  with  variety,  it  expresses  design  more  strongly. 
Besides,  it  has  been  justly  observed,  that  regular  figures 
are  more  easily  and  more  perfectly  comprehended  by 
the  mind  than  the  irregular,  of  which  we  can  never  form 
an  adequate  conception. 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY. 


477 


Although  straight  lines  and  plane  surfaces  have  a 
beauty  from  their  regularity,  they  admit  of  no  variety, 
and  therefore  are  beauties  of  the  lowest  order.  Curve 
lines  and  surfaces  admit  of  infinite  variety,  joined  with 
^every  degree  of  regularity;  and  therefore,  in  many 
cases,  excel  in  beauty  those  that  are  straight. 

But  the  beauty  arising  from  regularity  and  variety 
must  always  yield  to  that  which  arises  from  the  fitness 
of  the  form  for  the  end  intended.  In  every  thing  made 
for  an  end,  the  form  must  be  adapted  to  that  end ; and 
every  thing  in  the  form  that  suits  the  end  is  a beauty ; 
every  thing  that  unfits  it  for  its  end  is  a deformity. 
The  forms  of  a pillar,  of  a sword,  and  of  a balance, 
are  very  different.  Each  may  have  great  beauty ; but 
that  beauty  is  derived  from  the  fitness  of  the  form  and 
of  the  matter  for  the  purpose  intended. 

The  beauties  of  the  vegetable  kingdom  are  far  supe- 
rior to  those  of  inanimate  matter,  in  any  form  which 
human  art  can  give  it.  The  beauties  of  the  field,  of 
the  forest,  and  of  the  flower-garden,  strike  a child  long 
before  he  can  reason.  He  is  delighted  with  what  he 
sees ; but  he  knows  not  why.  This  is  instinct,  but  it 
is  not  confined  to  childhood ; it  continues  through  all 
the  stages  of  life.  It  leads  the  florist,  the  botanist,  the 
philosopher,  to  examine  and  compare  the  objects  which 
nature,  by  this  powerful  instinct,  recommends  to  his 
attention.  By  degrees  he  becomes  a critic  in  beauties 
of  this  kind,  and  can  give  a reason  why  he  prefers  one 
to  another.  In  every  species  he  sees  the  greatest  beauty 
in  the  plants  or  flowers  that  are  most  perfect  in  their 
kind,  which  have  neither  suffered  from  unkindly  soil 
nor  inclement  weather ; which  have  not  been  robbed  of 
their  nourishment  by  other  plants,  nor  hurt  by  any 
accident.  When  he  examines  the  internal  structure  of 
those  productions  of  nature,  and  traces  them  from  their 
embryo  state  in  the  seed  to  their  maturity,  he  sees  a 
thousand  beautiful  contrivances  of  nature,  which  feast 
his  understanding  more  than  their  external  form  de- 
lighted his  eye. 

In  the  animal  kingdom  we  perceive  still  greater  beau- 


478 


TASTE. 


ties  than  in  the  vegetable.  Here  we  observe  life,  and 
sense,  and  activity,  various  instincts  and  affections,  and 
in  many  cases  great  sagacity.  These  are  attributes  of 
mind,  and  have  an  original  beauty.  As  we  allow  to 
brute  animals  a thinking  principle  or  mind,  though  far 
inferior  to  that  which  is  in  man,  and  as,  in  many  of 
their  intellectual  and  active  powers,  they  very  much 
resemble  the  human  species,  their  actions,  their  mo- 
tions, and  even  their  looks,  derive  a beauty  from  the 
powers  of  thought  which  they  express.  There  is  a 
wonderful  variety  in  their  manner  of  life ; and  we  find 
the  powers  they  possess,  their  outward  form,  and  their 
inward  structure,  exactly  adapted  to  it.  In  every  spe- 
cies, the  more  perfectly  any  individual  is  fitted  for  its 
end  and  manner  of  life,  the  greater  is  its  beauty. 

But  of  all  the  objects  of  sense,  the  most  striking  and 
attractive  beauty  is  perceived  in  the  human  species,  and 
particularly  in  woman.  Milton  represents  Satan  him- 
self, in  surveying  the  furniture  of  this  globe,  as  struck 
with  the  beauty  of  the  first  happy  pair. 

“ Two  of  far  nobler  shape,  erect  and  tall, 

Godlike  erect ! with  native  honor  clad 
In  naked  majesty,  seemed  lords  of  all. 

And  worthy  seemed,  for  in  their  looks  divine, 

The  image  of  their  glorious  Maker,  shone 
Truth,  wisdom,  sanctitude  severe  and  pure ; 

Severe,  but  in  true  filial  freedom  placed. 

Whence  true  authority  in  man ; though  both 
Not  equal,  as  their  sex  not  equal,  seemed; 

For  contemplation  he  and  valor  formed. 

For  softness  she,  and  sweet  attractive  grace.” 

In  this  well-known  passage  of  Milton,  we  see  that 
this  great  poet  derives  the  beauty  of  the  first  pair  in 
paradise  from  those  expressions  of  moral  and  intellectual 
qualities  which  appeared  in  their  outward  form  and  de- 
meanour. 

It  cannot,  indeed,  be  denied,  that  the  expression  of  a 
fine  countenance  may  be  unnaturally  disjoined  from 
the  amiable  qualities  which  it  naturally  expresses  : but 
we  presume  the  contrary  till  we  have  clear  evidence  ; 
and  even  then  we  pay  homage  to  the  expression,  as  we 


ITS  OBJECTS. BEAUTY. 


479 


do  to  the  throne  when  it  happens  to  be  unworthily 
filled.* 


* Of  later  works  on  the  philosophy  of  taste,  the  following  are  among 
the  most  important:  — Kant,  Kritik  dev  Urtheilskraft  und  Beohachtungen 
iiher  das  Gefiihl  des  SchOnen  und  Erhabenen  (translated  into  French  by  J. 
Barni,  Critique  du  Jugement^  &c.) ; Schleiermacher,  Vorlesungen  iiber  die 
JEsthetik;  Weisse,  System  der  jEsthetik  als  Wissenschaft  von  der  Idee  der 
SchOnheit ; Hegel,  Cours  d' Esthetique  analyse  et  trodait  de  VAllernand^  par 
M.  Benard ; Jouffroy,  Cours  d Esthetique ; Alison’s  Essays  on  the  Nature 
and  Principles  of  Taste ; Stewart’s  Philosophical  Essays^  Part  II. ; Knight’s 
Analytical  Inquiry  into  the  Principles  of  Taste;  Schiller’s  Esthetic  Letters^ 
Essays^  &c.,  translated  by  J.  Weiss;  Daniel’s  Philosophy  of  the  Beautiful^  ^ 
from  the  French  of  Cousin.  — Ed. 


APPENDIX. 


Sm  W.  HAMILTON’S  DOCTHINE  OF  COMMON  SENSE  AND 
THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION.  — NATURAL  REALISM.— 
PRESENTATIVE  KNOWLEDGE.* 


Our  cognitions,  it  is  evident,  are  not  all  at  second  hand. 
Consequents  cannot,  by  an  infinite  regress,  be  evolved  out  of 
antecedents,  which  are  themselves  only  consequents.  Demon- 
stration, if  proof  be  possible,  behooves  to  repose  at  last  on 
propositions,  which,  carrying  their  own  evidence,  necessitate 
their  own  admission ; and  which  being,  as  primary,  inexplica- 
ble, as  inexplicable,  incomprehensible,  must  consequently  mani- 
fest themselves  less  in  the  character  of  cognitions  than  of  facts^ 
of  which  consciousness  assures  us  under  the  simple  form  of 
feeling  or  belief 

Without  at  present  attempting  to  determine  the  cha'racter, 
number,  and  relations  — waiving,  in  short,  all  attempt  at  an 
articulate  analysis  and  classification  — of  the  primary  elements 
of  cognition,  as  carrying  us  into  a discussion  beyond  our  limits, 
and  not  of  indispensable  importance  for  the  end  we  have  in 
view  ; t it  is  sufficient  to  have  it  conceded,  in  general,  that  such 


* This  Appendix  consists  of  selections  from  the  Supplementary  Disser- 
tations to  Hamilton’s  edition  of  Reid,  Notes  A,  B,  and  C.  They  will  give, 
it  is  hoped,  a faithful  sketch  of  his  doctrine  on  some  of  the  cardinal  points 
in  his  system  5 hut  justice  to  the  author  — one  of  the  most  acute  philoso- 
phers of  the  present  age,  and  one  of  the  most  erudite  philosophers  of  any 
age  — requires  that  they  should  be  read  and  studied  in  the  connection  in 
which  they  stand.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  references  of  the  author  to  his 
own  Notes  are  retained,  though  but  a small  proportion,  numerically  con- 
sidered, have  as  yet  appeared.  — Ed. 

t Such  an  analysis  and  classification  is,  however,  in  itself  certainly  one 
of  the  most  interesting  and  important  problems  of  philosophy;  and  it  is 

41 


482 


APPENDIX. 


elements  there  are  ; and  this  concession  of  their  existence  being 
supposed,  I shall  proceed  to  hazard  some  observations,  princi- 
pally in  regard  to  their  authority  as  warrants  and  criteria  of 
truth.  Nor  can  this  assumption  of  the  existence  of  some  origi- 
nal bases  of  knowledge  in  the  mind  itself  be  refused  by  any. 
For  even  those  philosophers  who  profess  to  derive  all  our 
knowledge  from  experience,  and  who  admit  no  universal  truths 
of  intelligence  but  such  as  are  generalized  from  individual 
truths  of  fact,  — even  these  philosophers  are  forced  virtually  to 
acknowledge,  at  the  root  of  the  several  acts  of  observation  from 
which  their  generalization  starts,  some  law  or  principle  to  which 
they  can  appeal  as  guaranteeing  the  procedure,  should  the 
validity  of  these  primordial  acts  themselves  be  called  in  ques- 
tion. This  acknowledgment  is,  among  others,  made  even  by 
Locke  ; and  on  such  fundamental  guarantee  of  induction  he 
even  bestows  the  name  of  Common  Sense. 

Limiting,  therefore,  our  consideration  to  the  question  of  au- 
thority, how,  it  is  asked,  do  these  primary  propositions,  these 
cognitions  at  first  hand,  these  fundamental  facts,  feelings,  be- 
liefs, certify  us  of  their  own  veracity  ? To  this  the  only  pos- 
sible answer  is,  that,  as  elements  of  our  mental  constitution,  as 
the  essential  conditions  of  our  knowledge,  they  must  by  us  be 


one  in  which  much  remains  to  be  accomplished.  Principles  of  cognition, 
which  now  stand  as  ultimate,  may,  I think,  be  reduced  to  simpler  ele- 
ments ; and  some,  which  are  now  viewed  as  direct  and  positive,  may  be 
shown  to  be  merely  indirect  and  negative ; their  cogency  depending,  not 
on  the  immediate  necessity  of  thinking  them,  — for  if  carried  uncondition- 
ally out  they  are  themselves  incogitable,  — but  in  the  impossibility  of 
thinking  something  to  which  they  are  directly  opposed,  and  from  which 
they  are  the  immediate  recoils.  An  exposition  of  the  axiom,  — that  posi- 
tive thought  lies  in  the  limitation  or  conditioning  of  one  or  other  of  two 
opposite  extremes,  neither  of  which,  as  unconditioned,  can  be  realized  to 
the  mind  as  possible,  and  yet  of  which,  as  contradictories,  one  or  other 
must,  by  the  fundamental  laws  of  thought,  be  recognized  as  necessary;  — 
the  exposition  of  this  great  but  unenounced  axiom  would  show  that  some 
of  the  most  illustrious  principles  are  only  its  subordinate  modifications,  as 
applied  to  certain  primary  notions,  intuitions,  data,  forms,  or  categories  of 
intelligence,  as  Existence,  Quantity  (protensive.  Time  ; extensive.  Space  ; 
intensive,  Degree),  Quality,  &c.  Such  modifications,  for  example,  are  the 
principles  of  Cause  and  Effect,  Substance  and  Phenomenon,  &c. 

I may  here  also  observe,  that,  though  the  primary  truths  of  fact  and  the 
primary  truths  of  intelligence  (the  contingent  and  necessary  truths  of  Reid) 
form  two  very  distinct  classes  of  the  original  beliefs  or  intuitions  of  con- 
sciousness, there  appears  no  sufficient  ground  to  regard  their  sources  as 
different,  and  therefore  to  be  distinguished  by  different  names.  In  this  I 
regret  that  I am  unable  to  agree  with  Mr.  Stewart.  See  his  Elements^ 
Vol.  II.  Chap.  I.,  and  his  Account  of  Reid,  Sect  II.,  near  the  end. 


COMMON  SENSE. 


483 


accepted  as  true.  To  suppose  their  falsehood  is  to  suppose 
that  we  are  created  capable  of  intelligence  in  order  to  be  made 
the  victims  of  delusion ; that  God  is  a deceiver,  and  the  root 
of  our  nature  a lie.  But  such  a supposition,  if  gratuitous,  is 
manifestly  illegitimate.  For,  on  the  contrary,  the  data  of  our 
original  consciousness  must,  it  is  evident,  in  the  first  instance^ 
he  presumed  true.  It  is  only  if  proved  false,  that  their  authority 
can,  in  consequence  of  that  proofs  be,  in  the  second  instance, 
disallowed. 

Speaking,  therefore,  generally,  to  argue  from  common  sense 
is  simply  to  show,  that  the  denial  of  a given  proposition  would 
involve  the  denial  of  some  original  datum  of  consciousness.  In 
this  case,  as  every  original  datum  of  consciousness  is  to  be  pre- 
sumed true,  the  proposition  in  question,  as  dependent  on  such 
a principle,  must  be  admitted. 

This  being  understood,  the  following  propositions  are  either 
self-evident,  or  admit  of  easy  proof : — 

1.  The  end  of  philosophy  is  truth ; and  consciousness  is  the 
instrument  and  criterion  of  its  acquisition.  In  other  words, 
philosophy  is  the  development  and  application  of  the  consti- 
tutive and  normal  truths  which  consciousness  immediately  re- 
veals. 

2.  Philosophy  is  thus  wholly  dependent  upon  consciousness  ; 
the  possibility  of  the  former  supposing  the  trustworthiness  of  the 
latter. 

3.  Consciousness  is  to  be  presumed  trustworthy,  until  proved 
mendacious. 

4.  The  mendacity  of  consciousness  is  proved,  if  its  data,  im- 
mediately in  themselves,  or  mediately  in  their  necessary  conse- 
quences, be  shown  to  stand  in  mutual  contradiction. 

5.  The  immediate  or  mediate  repugnance  of  any  two  of  its 
data  being  established,  the  presumption  in  favor  of  the  general 
veracity  of  consciousness  is  abolished,  or  rather  reversed.  For 
while,  on  the  one  hand,  all  that  is  not  contradictory  is  not  there- 
fore true ; on  the  other,  a positive  proof  of  falsehood,  in  one 
instance,  establishes  a presumption  of  probable  falsehood  in 
all  ; for  the  maxim,  “ Falsus  in  uno^  falsus  in  omnibus  f must 
determine  the  credibility  of  consciousness,  as  the  credibility  of 
every  other  witness. 

6.  No  attempt  to  show  that  the  data  of  consciousness  are 
(either  in  themselves  or  in  their  necessary  consequences)  mu- 
tually contradictory  has  yet  succeeded  ; and  the  presumption  in 
favor  of  the  truth  of  consciousness  and  the  possibility  of  phi- 


484 


APPENDIX. 


losophy  has,  therefore,  never  been  redargued.  In  other  words, 
an  original,  universal,  dogmatic  subversion  of  knowledge  has 
hitherto  been  found  impossible. 

7.  No  philosopher  has  ever  formally  denied  the  truth  or  dis- 
claimed the  authority  of  consciousness ; but  few  or  none  have 
been  content  implicitly  to  accept  and  consistently  to  follow  out 
its  dictates.  Instead  of  humbly  resorting  to  consciousness,  to 
draw  from  thence  his  doctrines  and  their  proof,  each  dogmatic 
speculator  looked  only  into  consciousness,  there  to  discover  his 
preadopted  opinions.  In  philosophy,  men  have  abused  the  code 
of  natural,  as,  in  theology,  the  code  of  positive,  revelation  ; and 
the  epigraph  of  a great  Protestant  divine  on  the  book  of  Scrip- 
ture is  certainly  not  less  applicable  to  the  book  of  conscious- 
ness : — 


“ Hie  liber  est  in  quo  quserit  sua  dogmata  quisque ; 

Invenit,  et  pariter  dogmata  quisque  sua.” 

8.  The  first  and  most  obtrusive  consequence  of  this  procedure 
has  been,  the  multiplication  of  philosophical  systems  in  every 
conceivable  aberration  from  the  unity  of  truth. 

9.  The  second,  but  less  obvious,  consequence  has  been,  the 
virtual  surrender,  by  each  several  system,  of  the  possibility  of 
philosophy  in  general.  For,  as  the  possibility  of  philosophy 
supposes  the  absolute  truth  of  consciousness,  every  system 
which  proceeded  on  the  hypothesis,  that  even  a single  deliver- 
ance of  consciousness  is  untrue,  did,  however  it  might  eschew 
the  overt  declaration,  thereby  invalidate  the  general  credibility 
of  consciousness,  and  supply  to  the  skeptic  the  premises  he 
required  to  subvert  philosophy,  in  so  far  as  that  system  repre- 
sented it. 

10.  And  yet,  although  the  past  history  of  philosophy  has,  in 
a great  measure,  been  only  a history  of  variation  and  error 
{variasse  erroris  est) ; yet,  the  cause  of  this  variation  being 
known,  we  obtain  a valid  ground  of  hope  for  the  destiny  of 
philosophy  in  future.  Because,  since  philosophy  has  hitherto 
been  inconsistent  with  itself  only  in  being  inconsistent  with  the 
dictates  of  our  natural  beliefs,  — 

“For  Truth  is  catholic  and  Nature  one,” — 

it  follows,  that  philosophy  has  simply  to  return  to  natural  con- 
sciousness, to  return  to  unity  and  truth. 

In  doing  this,  we  have  only  to  attend  to  the  three  following 
maxims  or  precautions  : — 


THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION, 


485 


1°,  That  we  omit  nothing,  not  either  an  original  datum  of 
consciousness,  or  the  legitimate  consequence  of  such  a datum  ; 

2°,  That  we  embrace  all  the  original  data  of  consciousness, 
and  all  their  legitimate  consequences  ; and, 

3°,  That  we  exhibit  each  of  these  in  its  individual  integrity, 
neither  distorted  nor  mutilated,  and  in  its  relative  place,  whether 
of  preeminence  or  subordination. 

Nor  can  it  be  contended  that  consciousness  has  spoken  in  so 
feeble  or  ambiguous  a voice,  that  philosophers  have  misappre- 
hended or  misunderstood  her  enouncements.  On  the  contrary, 
they  have  been  usually  agreed  about  the  fact  and  purport  of  the 
deliverance,  differing  only  as  to  the  mode  in  which  they  might 
evade  or  qualify  its  acceptance. 

This  I shall  illustrate  by  a memorable  example,  — by  one  in 
reference  to  the  very  cardinal  point  of  philosophy.  In  the  act 
of  sensible  perception,  I am  conscious  of  two  things ; — of  my- 
self as  the  perceiving  subject^  and  of  an  external  reality^  in 
relation  with  my  sense,  as  the  object  perceived.  Of  the  exist- 
ence of  both  these  things  I am  convinced  ; because  I am  con- 
scious of  knowing  each  of  them,  not  mediately  in  something 
else,  as  represented.,  but  immediately  in  itself,  as  existing.  Of 
their  mutual  independence  I am  no  less  convinced  ; because 
each  is  apprehended  equally,  and  at  once,  in  the  same  indivisi- 
ble energy,  the  one  not  preceding  or  determining,  the  other 
not  following  or  determined  ; and  because  each  is  apprehended 
out  of,  and  in  direct  contrast  to^  the  other. 

Such  is  the  fact  of  perception,  as  given  in  consciousness,  and 
as  it  affords  to  mankind  in  general  the  conjunct  assurance  they 
possess  of  their  own  existence,  and  of  the  existence  of  an  ex- 
ternal world.  Nor  are  the  contents  of  the  deliverance,  con- 
sidered as  a phenomenon.,  denied  by  those  who  still  hesitate  to 
admit  the  truth  of  its  testimony. 

The  contents  of  the  fact  of  perception,  as  given  in  con- 
sciousness, being  thus  established,  what  are  the  consequences 
to  philosophy,  according  as  the  truth  of  its  testimony  (I.)  or 
(II.)  is  not.,  admitted  7 

1.  On  the  former  alternative,  the  veracity  of  consciousness, 
in  the  fact  of  perception,  being  unconditionally  acknowledged, 
we  have  established  at  once,  without  hypothesis  or  demonstra- 
tion, the  reality  of  mind  and  the  reality  of  matter;  while  no 
concession  is  yielded  to  the  skeptic,  through  which  he  may  sub- 
vert philosophy  in  manifesting  its  self-contradiction.  The  one 

Al* 


486 


APPENDIX. 


legitimate  doctrine,  thus  possible,  may  be  called  Natural  Real- 
ism or  Natural  Dualism. 

II.  On  the  latter  alternative.  Jive  great  variations  from  truth 
and  nature  may  be  conceived,  — and  all  of  these  have  actually 
found  their  advocates,  — according  as  the  testimony  of  con- 
sciousness, in  the  fact  of  perception,  (A.)  is  wholly.,  or  (B.)  is 
jpartially.,  rejected. 

A.  If  wholly  rejected,  that  is,  if  nothing  but  the  phenomenal 
reality  of  the  fact  itself  be  allowed,  the  result  is  Nihilism.  This 
may  be. conceived  either  as  a dogmatical  or  as  a skeptical  opin- 
ion ; and  Hume  and  Fichte  have  competently  shown,  that,  if 
the  truth  of  consciousness  be  not  unconditionally  recognized, 
Nihilism  is  the  conclusion  in  which  our  speculation,  if  consist- 
ent with  itself,  must  end. 

B.  On  the  other  hand,  if  partially  rejected,  four  schemes 
emerge,  according  to  the  way  in  which  the  fact  is  tampered 
with. 

i.  If  the  veracity  of  consciousness  be  allowed  to  the  equi- 
poise of  the  subject  and  object  in  the  act,  but  disallowed  to  the 
reality  of  their  antithesis,  the  system  of  Absolute  Identity 
(whereof  Pantheism  is  the  corollary)  arises,  which  reduces 
mind  and  matter  to  phenomenal  modifications  of  the  same  com- 
mon substance. 

ii. ,  iii.  Again,  if  the  testimony  of  consciousness  be  refused 
to  the  equal  originality  and  reciprocal  independence  of  the  sub- 
ject and  object  in  perception,  two  Unitarian  schemes  are  deter- 
mined, according  as  the  one  or%s  the  other  of  these  correlatives 
is  supposed  the  prior  and  genetic.  Is  the  object  educed  from 
the  subject } Idealism ; is  the  subject  educed  from  the  object } 
Materialism.,  is  the  result. 

iv.  Finally,  if  the  testimony  of  consciousness  to  our  knowl- 
edge of  an  external  world  existing  be  rejected,  with  the  Idealist, 
but,  with  the  Realist,  the  existence  of  that  world  be  affirmed  ; 
we  have  a scheme  which,  as  it  by  many  various  hypotheses 
endeavours,  on  the  one  hand,  not  to  give  up  the  reality  of  an 
unknown  material  universe,  and,  on  the  other,  to  explain  the 
ideal  illusion  of  its  cognition,  may  be  called  the  doctrine  of 
Cosmothetic  Idealism.,  Hypothetical  Realism.,  or  Hypothetical 
Dualism.  This  last,  though  the  most  vacillating,  inconsequent, 
and  self-contradictory  of  all  systems,  is  the  one  which,  as  less 
obnoxious  in  its  acknowledged  consequences  (being  a kind  of 
compromise  between  speculation  and  common  sense),  has 
found  favor  with  the  immense  majority  of  philosophers. 


THEORY  OF  PERCEPTION. 


487 


From  the  rejection  of  the  fact  of  consciousness  in  this  ex- 
ample of  perception,  we  have  thus,  in  the  first  place,  multi- 
plicity, speculative  variation,  error  ; in  the  second,  systems 
practically  dangerous ; and,  in  the  third,  the  incompetence  of 
an  appeal  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind  by  any  of  these 
systems  against  the  conclusions  of  others. 

Now,  there  are  only  two  of  the  preceding  theories  of  percep- 
tion, with  one  or  other  of  which  Reid’s  doctrine  can  possibly  be 
identified.  He  is  a Dualist ; — and  the  only  doubt  is,  whether 
he  be  a Natural  Realist^  or  a Hypothetical  Realist^  under  the 
finer  form  of  Egoistical  Represent ationism. 

The  cause  why  Reid  left  the  character  of  his  doctrine  am- 
biguous on  this  the  very  cardinal  point  of  his  philosophy,  is  to 
be  found  in  the  following  circumstances  : — 

1°,  That,  in  general,  (although  the  same  may  be  said  of  all 
other  philosophers,)  he  never  discriminated,  either  speculatively 
or  historically,  the  three  theories  of  Real  Presentationism,  of 
Egoistical,  and  of  Non-Egoistical,  Representationism. 

2^^,  That,  in  particular,  he  never  clearly  distinguished  the  first 
and  second  of  these,  as  not  only  different,  but  contrasted,  theo- 
ries. 

3'’,  That,  while  right  in  regarding  philosophers,  in  general,  as 
Cosmothetic  Idealists,  he  erroneously  supposed  that  they  were 
all,  or  nearly  all,  Non-Egoistical  Representationists.  And, — 

4°,  That  he  viewed  the  theory  of  Non-Egoistical  Represen- 
tationism as  that  form  alone  of  Cosmothetic  Idealism  which, 
when  carried  to  its  legitimate  issue,  ended  in  Absolute  Idealism  ; 
whereas  the  other  form  of  Cosmothetic  Idealism,  the  theory  of 
Egoistical  Representationism,  whether  speculatively  or  histori- 
cally considered,  is,  with  at  least  equal  rigor,  to  be  developed 
into  the  same  result. 

Dr.  Thomas  Brown  considers  Reid  to  be,  like  himself,  a 
Cosmothetic  Idealist,  under  the  finer  form  of  Egoistical  Repre- 
sentationism ; but  without  assigning  any  reason  for  this  belief, 
except  one  which,  as  I have  elsewhere  shown,  is  altogether 
nugatory.*  For  my  own  part,  I am  decidedly  of  opinion,  that. 


^ Edinburgh  Review^  Vol.  LII.  pp.  173-175.  In  saying,  however,  on 
that  occasion,  that  Dr.  Brown  was  guilty  of  “ a reversal  of  the  real  and 
even  unambiguous  import  ” of  Reid’s  doctrine  of  perception,  I feel  called 
upon  to  admit  that  the  latter  epithet  is  too  strong ; — for,  on  grounds 
totally  different  from  the  untenable  one  of  Brown,  I am  now  about  to 
show  that  Reid’s  doctrine  on  this  point  is  doubtful.  This  admission  does 


488 


APPExNDIX. 


as  the  great  end,  the  governing  principle,  of  Reid’s  doctrine 
was  to  reconcile  philosophy  with  the  necessary  convictions  of 
mankind,  he  intended  a doctrine  of  natural.,  consequently  a 
doctrine  of  presentative.,  realism  ; and  that  he  would  have  at 
once  surrendered,  as  erroneous,  every  statement  which  was 
found  at  variance  with  such  a doctrine. 

The  distinction  of  immediate  and  mediate  cognition  it  is  of 
the  highest  importance  to  establish  ; for  it  is  one  without  which 
the  whole  philosophy  of  knowledge  must  remain  involved  in 
ambiguities.  What,  for  example,  can  be  more  various,  vacil- 
lating, and  contradictory,  than  the  employment  of  the  all-impor- 
tant terms  object  and  objective.,  in  contrast  to  subject  and  subjec- 
tive., in  the  writings  of  Kant  ? — though  the  same  is  true  of  those 
of  other  recent  philosophers.  This  arose  from  the  want  of  a pre- 
liminary determination  of  the  various,  and  even  opposite,  mean- 
ings of  which  these  terms  are  susceptible,  — a selection  of  the 
one  proper  meaning,  — and  a rigorous  adherence  to  the  mean- 
ing thus  preferred.  But,  in  particular,  the  doctrine  of  Natural 
Realism  cannot,  without  this  distinction,  be  adequately  under- 
stood, developed,  and  discriminated.  Reid,  accordingly,  in 
consequence  of  the  want  of  it,  has  not  only  failed  in  giving  to 
his  philosophy  its  precise  and  appropriate  expression,  he  has 
failed  even  in  withdrawing  it  from  equivocation  and  confusion  ; 
— insomuch,  that  it  even  remains  a question,  whether  his  doc- 
trine be  one  of  Natural  Realism  at  all.  The  following  is  a 
more  articulate  development  of  this  important  distinction  than 
that  which  I gave  some  ten  years  ago  ; and  since,  by  more  than 
one  philosopher,  adopted.* * 

1.  A thing  is  known  immediately  or  proximately .,  when  we 
cognize  it  in  itself ; mediately  or  remotely.,  when  we  cognize  it 
in  or  through  something  numerically  different  from  itself.  Im- 
mediate cognition,  thus  the  knowledge  of  a thing  in  itself,  in- 
volves the  fact  of  its  existence  ; mediate  cognition,  thus  the 
knowledge  of  a thing  in  or  through  something  not  itself,  involves 
only  the  possibility  of  its  existence.  * 

2.  An  immediate  cognition,  inasmuch  as  the  thing  known  is 


not,  however,  imply  that  Brown  is  not,  from  first  to  last,  — is  not  in  one 
and  all  of  his  strictures  on  Reid’s  doctrine  of  perception,  as  there  shown,  — 
wholly  in  error. 

* See  Edinburgh  Review,  Yol.  LII.  p.  166  et  seq.  ; Cross’s  Selections  from 
the  Edinburgh  Review,  Vol.  III.  p.  200  et  seq.;  IdQissQ,  Fragments  Philoso- 
phiques,  p.  75  et  seq. 


PRESENTATIVE  KNOWLEDGE. 


489 


itself  'presented  to  observation,  may  be  called  a presentative^ 
and  inasmuch  as  the  thing  presented  is,  as  it  were,  viewed  hy 
the  mind  face  to  face^  may  be  called  an  intuitive^  cognition.  — 
A mediate  cognition,  inasmuch  as  the  thing  known  is  held  up 
or  mirrored  to  the  mind  in  a vicarious  representation^  may  be 
called  a representative  * cognition. 

3.  A thing  known  is  called  an  object  of  knowledge. 

4.  In  a presentative  or  immediate  cognition  there  is  one  sole 
object ; the  thing  (immediately)  known  and  the  thing  existing 
being  one  and  the  same.  — In  a representative  or  mediate  cog- 
nition there  may  be  discriminated  two  objects ; the  thing  (imme- 
diately) known  and  the  thing  existing  being  numerically  dif- 
ferent. 

5.  A thing  known  in  itself  is  the  (sole)  presentative  or  in- 
tuitive object  of  knowledge,  or  the  (sole)  object  of  a presenta- 
tive or  intuitive  knowledge,  — A thing  known  in  and  through 
something  else  is  the  primary mediate r emote real,,  existent,, 
or  represented  object  of  (mediate)  knowledge,  — objectum  quod  ; 
and  a thing  through  which  something  else  is  known  is  the  sec- 
ondary,, immediate,,  proximate,,  ideal  vicarious,  or  representa- 
tive object  of  (mediate)  knowledge,  — objectum  quo,  or  per  quod. 
The  former  may  likewise  be  styled  objectum  entitativum, 

6.  The  Ego  as  the  subject  of  thought  and  knowledge  is  now 
commonly  styled  by  philosophers  simply  the  Subject ; and 
Subjective  is  a familiar  expression  for  what  pertains  to  the  mind 
or  thinking  principle.  In  contrast  and  correlation  to  these,  the 
terms  Object  and  Objective  are,  in  like  manner,  now  in  general 
use  to  denote  the  Non-Ego,  its  affections  and  properties,  — and 
in  general  the  Really  existent  as  opposed  to  the  Ideally  known. 
These  expressions,  more  especially  Object  and  Objective,  are 
ambiguous  ; for  though  the  Non-Ego  may  be  the  more  frequent 


* The  term  Representation  I employ  always  strictly,  as  in  contrast  to 
Presentation,  and  therefore  with  exclusive  reference  to  individual  objects, 
and  not  in  the  vague  generality  of  Representatio  or  Vorstellung  in  the  Leib- 
nitzian  and  subsequent  philosophies  of  Germany,  where  it  is  used  for  any 
cognitive  act,  considered,  not  in  relation  to  what  knows,  but  to  what  is 
known ; that  is,  as  the  genus,  including  under  it  Intuitions,  Perceptions, 
Sensations,  Conceptions,  Notions,  Thoughts  proper,  &c.,  as  species. 

t I eschew,  in  general,  the  employment  of  the  words  Idea  and  Ideal,  — 
they  are  so  vague  and  various  in  meaning.  (See  Note  G.)  But  they  can- 
not always  be  avoided,  as  the  conjugates  of  the  indispensable  term  Ideal- 
ism. Nor  is  there,  as  I use  them,  any  danger  from  their  ambiguity ; for  I 
always  manifestly  employ  them  simply  for  subjective  (what  is  in  or  of  the 
mind),  in  contrast  to  objective  (what  is  out  of,  or  external  to,  the  mind). 


490 


APPENDIX. 


and  obtrusive  object  of  cognition,  still  a mode  of  mind  consti- 
tutes an  ohject  of  thought  and  knowledge,  no  less  than  a mode 
of  matter.  Without,  therefore,  disturbing  the  preceding  no- 
menclature, which  is  not  only  ratified,  but  convenient,  I would 
propose  that,  when  we  wish  to  be  precise,  or  where  any  am- 
biguity is  to  be  dreaded,  we  should  employ,  — on  the  one  hand, 
either  the  terms  subject-object^  or  subjective  object  (and  this  we 
could  again  distinguish  as  absolute  or  as  relative)^  — on  the 
other,  either  object- object^  or  objective  object. 

7.  If  the  representative  object  be  supposed  (according  to  one 
theory)  a mode  of  the  conscious  mind  or  self,  it  may  be  dis- 
tinguished as  Egoistical;  if  it  be  supposed  (according  to 
another)  something  numerically  different  from  the  conscious 
mind  or  self,  it  may  be  distinguished  as  Non- Egoistical.  The 
former  theory  supposes  two  things  numerically  different ; — 
1°,  the  object  represented  ; 2°,  the  representing  and  cognizant 
mind:  the  latter  three; — 1°,  the  object  represented;  2°,  the 
object  representing  ; 3°,  the  cognizant  mind.  Compared  merely 
with  each  other,  the  former,  as  simpler,  may,  by  contrast  to 
the  latter,  be  considered,  but  still  inaccurately,  as  an  imme- 
diate cognition.  The  latter  of  these,  as  limited  in  its  applica- 
tion to  certain  faculties,  and  now  in  fact  wholly  exploded,  may 
be  thrown  out  of  account. 

8.  External  Perception.^  or  Perception  simply,  is  the  faculty 
presentative  or  intuitive  of  the  phenomena  of  the  Non-Ego  or 
Matter,  — if  there  be  any  intuitive  apprehension  allowed  of  the 
Non-Ego  at  all.  Internal  Perception  or  Self-Consciousness  is 
the  faculty  presentative  or  intuitive  of  the  phenomena  of  the 
Ego  or  Mind. 

9.  Imagination  or  Phantasy.^  in  its  most  extensive  meaning, 
is  the  faculty  representative  of  the  phenomena  both  of  the  ex- 
ternal and  internal  worlds. 

10.  A representation  considered  as  an  object  is  logically,  not 
really,  different  from  a representation  considered  as  an  act. 
Here  object  and  act  are  merely  the  same  indivisible  mode  of 
mind  viewed  in  two  different  relations.  Considered  by  refer- 
ence to  a (mediate)  object  represented,  it  is  a representative 
object ; considered  by  reference  to  the  mind  representing  and 
contemplating  the  representation,  it  is  a representative  act.  A 
representative  object.^  being  viewed  as  posterior  in  the  order  of 
nature,  but  not  of  time,  to  the  representative  act.,  is  viewed  as 
a product ; and  the  representative  act  being  viewed  as  prior  in 
the  order  of  nature,  though  not  of  time,  to  the  representative 


PRESENTATIVE  KNOWLEDGE. 


491 


object,  is  viewed  as  a producing  process.  The  same  may  be 
said  of  Image  and  Imagination. 

11.  A thing  to  be  known  in  itself  must  be  known  as  actually 
existing ; and  it  cannot  be  known  as  actually  existing  unless  it 
be  known  as  existing  in  its  When  and  its  Where.  But  the 
When  and  Where  of  an  object  are  immediately  cognizable  by 
the  subject  only  if  the  When  be  now  (i.  e.  at  the  same  moment 
with  the  cognitive  act),  and  the  Where  be  here  (i.  e.  within 
the  sphere  of  the  cognitive  faculty)  ; therefore  a presentative 
or  intuitive  knowledge  is  only  competent  of  an  object  present 
to  the  mind,  both  in  time  and  in  space, 

12.  E converse,,  — whatever  is  known,  but  not  as  actually 
existing  noio  and  here^  is  known  not  in  itself,  as  the  presentative 
object  of  an  intuitive,  but  only  as  the  remote  object  of  a repre- 
sentative, cognition. 

13.  A representative  object,  considered  irrespectively  of  wbat 
it  represents,  and  simply  as  a mode  of  the  conscious  subject,  is 
an  intuitive  or  presentative  object.  For  it  is  known  in  itself,  as 
a mental  mode,  actually  existing  now  and  here. 

14.  Consciousness  is  a knowledge  solely  of  what  is  now  and 
here  present  to  the  mind.  It  is  therefore  only  intuitive,  and  its 
objects  exclusively  presentative.  Again,  Consciousness  is  a 
knowledge  of  all  that  is  now  and  here  present  to  the  mind  : 
every  immediate  object  of  cognition  is  thus  an  object  of  con- 
sciousness, and  every  intuitive  cognition  itself,  simply  a special 
form  of  consciousness. 

15.  Consciousness  comprehends  every  cognitive  act ; in  other 
words,  whatever  we  are  not  conscious  of,  that  we  do  n^t  know. 
But  consciousness  is  an  immediate  cognition.  Therefore  all 
our  mediate  cognitions  are  contained  in  our  immediate, 

16.  The  actual  modifications,  the  present  acts  and  afiectipns, 
of  the  Ego  are  objects  of  immediate  cognition,  as  themselves 
objects  of  consciousness.  (Pr.  14.)  The  past  and  possible 
modifications  of  the  Ego  are  objects  of  mediate  cognition,  as 
represented  to  consciousness  in  a present  or  actual  modification. 

17.  The  Primary  Qualities  of  matter  or  body.,  now  and  here,, 
that  is,  in  proximate  relation  to  our  organs,  are  objects  of  imme- 
diate cognition  to  the  Natural  Realists ; of  mediate,  to  the  Cos- 
mothetic  Idealists : the  former,  on  the  testimony  of  conscious- 
ness, asserting  to  mind  the  capability  of  intuitively  perceiving 
what  is  not  itself ; the  latter  denying  this  capability,  but  assert- 
ing to  the  mind  the  power  of  representing,  and  truly  represent- 
ing, what  it  does  not  know.  To  the  Absolute  Idealists  matter 


492 


APPENDIX. 


has  no  existence  as  an  object  of  cognition,  either  immediate  or 
mediate. 

18.  The  Secondary  Qualities  of  body  now  and  Tiere^  as  only 
present  affections  of  the  conscious  subject,  determined  by  an 
unknown  external  cause,  are,  on  every  theory,  now  allowed  to 
be  objects  of  immediate  cognition.  (Pr.  16.) 

19.  As  not  now  present  in  time^  an  immediate  knowledge  of 
the  past  is  impossible.  The  past  is  only  mediately  cognizable 
in  and  through  a present  modification  relative  to,  and  represent- 
ative of,  it,  as  having  been.  To  speak  of  an  immediate  knowl- 
edge of  the  past  involves  a contradiction  in  adjecto.  For  to 
know  the  past  immediately,  it  must  be  known  in  itself;  — and 
to  be  known  in  itself,  it  must  be  known  as  now  existing.  But 
the  past  is  just  a negation  of  the  now-existent ; its  very  notion, 
therefore,  excludes  the  possibility  of  its  being  immediately 
known.  — So  much  for  Memory,  or  Recollective  Imagination. 

20.  In  like  manner,  supposing  that  a knowledge  of  future 
were  competent,  this  can  only  be  conceived  possible  in  and 
through  a now  present  representation  ; that  is,  only  as  a medi- 
ate cognition.  For,  as  not  yet  existent,,  the  future  cannot  be 
known  in  itself,  or  as  actually  existent.  As  not  here  present,, 
an  immediate  knowledge  of  an  object  distant  in  space  is  like- 
wise impossible.*  For,  as  beyond  the  sphere  of  our  organs 
and  faculties,  it  cannot  be  known  by  them  in  itself ; it  can  only, 
therefore,  if  known  at  all,  be  known  through  something  differ- 
ent from  itself,  that  is,  mediately,  in  a reproductive  or  a con- 
structive act  of  imagination. 

21.  A possible  object  — an  ens  rationis  - — is  a mere  fabri- 
cation of  the  mind  itself ; it  exists  only  ideally  in  and  through 
an  act  of  imagination,  and  has  only  a logical  existence,  apart 
from  that  act  with  which  it  is  really  identical.  (Pr.  10.)  It  is 
therefore  an  intuitive  object  in  itself ; but  in  so  far  as  not  involv- 
ing a contradiction,  it  is  conceived  as  prefiguring  something 
which  may  possibly  exist  somewhere  and  some-when,  — this 
something,  too,  being  constructed  out  of  elements  which  had 
been  previously  given  in  Presentation,  — it  is  Representative. 
See  Note  C,  § 1. 


* On  the  assertions  of  Reid,  Stewart,  &c.,  that  the  mind  is  immediately 
percipient  of  distant  objects,  see  Note  B,  § 2,  and  Note  C,  § 2. 


THE  END. 


■IS 


I 


I 


