THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

EDITED    BY 

T.  E.  PAGE,  UTT.D. 
E.  CAPPS,  PH.D.,  LL.D.  W.  H.  D.  ROUSE,  litt.d. 


SENECA 

MORAL   ESSAYS 

I 


i: 


ipssr^^ 


SENECA 

MOEAL   ESSAYS 

WITH  AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION  BY 

JOHN  W.  BASORE,  Ph.D. 

PRIXCETOS    CXIVERSITY 

IN  THREE  VOLUMES 
I 


LONDON  :  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN  LTD 
NEW  YORK:    G.  P.  PUTNAM'S   SONS 

MCMXXVIII 


fin 


Printed  in  Great  Britain 


CONTENTS   OF   VOLUME   I 


Introduction  . 
De  Providentia 
De  Constantia 
De  Ira   . 
De  Clementia   ■^ 
Index  of  Names 


PAGE 

vii 


48 
106 
356 
450 


INTRODUCTION 


Sprung  from  the  rich  and  talented  Spanish  family 
of  the  Annaei,  Lucius  Annaeus  Seneca,  second  son  of 
Seneca  the  rhetorician,  became  the  most  important 
public  and  literary  figure  at  Rome  in  the  age  of  Nero. 
His  mother  was  Helvia,  a  lady  of  native  intelligence, 
some  culture,  and  many  \irtues.  An  elder  brother, 
Novatus,  known  after  his  adoption  as  Galho,  was 
governor  of  Achaia  under  Claudius,  and  sur\ives  in 
Christian  annals  (Acts  xviii.  12-17)  with  undeserved 
odium  as  the  Roman  official  before  whom  the  apostle 
Paul  was  arraigned.  Mela,  the  younger  brother,  of 
more  retiring  disposition,  but  rated  by  his  father 
as  the  ablest  of  the  three,  lives  only  as  the  father 
of  a  famous  son — the  epic  poet  Lucan,  whose 
precocious  and  flamboyant  powers  marked  him  out 
as  the  prodigy  of  his  distinguished,  but  ill-fated, 
family,  of  which  no  chief  member  survived  the 
catastrophe  of  the  Pisonian  conspiracy.  Lucan,  his 
father,  and  both  his  uncles  were  all  objects  of 
Nero's  vengeance. 

The  career  of  Seneca  himself  was  marked  by 
spectacular  shifts  of  fortune,  amid  which  he  appears 
a  puzzHng  and  at  times  a  pathetic  figure — the 
victim  alike  of  imperial  hostility  and  favour.     Born 


INTRODUCTION 

at  Corduba  about  4  B.C.,  he  was  brought  to  Rome 
while  still  a  child  in  arms.  There,  carefully  nurtured 
and  broadly  trained  in  rhetoric  and  philosophy, 
he  entered  upon  the  senatorial  career  and  gained 
the  quaestorship  probably  under  Tiberius.  By  his 
eloquence  in  the  Senate,  he  is  said  to  have  aroused 
the  jealousy  of  Caligula  and  to  have  escaped  death 
only  because,  it  was  averred,  he  was  already  doomed 
by  ill-health  to  die.  Of  his  ill-health  we  hear  much 
in  his  writings,  but  he  outlived  Caligula  and  missed 
no  opportunity  to  take  pitiless  revenge  upon  him 
with  his  pen.  Under  Claudius  he  fell  upon  actual 
disaster.  Through  the  agency  of  the  empress  Mes- 
sahna,  Seneca,  now  estabhshed  as  a  man  of  letters 
and,  apparently,  of  fashion,  was  accused  of  an  intrigue 
with  the  notorious  Julia  Livilla,  sister  of  Caligula, 
whom  her  uncle  promptly  upon  his  accession  had 
recalled  from  exile,  and  both  were  banished.  After 
he  had  spent  eight  weary  and  fretful  years  in  dismal 
Corsica,  during  which,  however,  he  found  some  solace 
in  writing  and  study,  Agrippina,  now  the  wife  of 
Claudius,  secured  his  recall  in  a.d.  49,  and  raised  him 
to  the  post  of  tutor  to  her  young  son,  the  future 
emperor  Nero.  A  year  later  he  was  praetor.  From 
this  time  Seneca's  fortunes  were  linked  with  those 
of  Nero.  He  grew  in  honour,  wealth,"  and  power,  and 
for  five  years  after  Nero's  accession  was,  along  with 
Burrus,  the  virtuous  old  praetorian,  the  emperor's 
acknowledged  confidant  and  guide.  But  gradually 
his  influence  weakened,  and  after  the  death  of 
Burrus  in  a.d.  62  he  sought  unavailingly  for  obscurity 

"  There  are  many  references  to  the  lordly  wealth  which 
Seneca  amassed.      Cf.  Tac.  Ann.  xiii.  42.6;   Juv.  x.  16; 
Dio,  Ixi.  10.  2. 
viii 


INTRODUCTION 

in  retirement.  Three  years  later,  charged  with 
comphcity  in  the  conspiracy  of  Piso,  he  was  forced 
to  commit  suicide,  and  met  death  with  dignity  and 
Stoic  fortitude. 

The  special  significance  of  Seneca  is,  in  brief, 
that  he  revived  the  subject  of  philosophy  in  Latin 
hterature,  spiritualized  and  humanized  Stoicism,  and 
became  the  exponent  of  a  new  style,  that  exploited 
the  short  sentence,  rhetoric,  and  declamation.  The 
artificiahties  of  his  pointed  style  have  found  many 
critics,  both  early  and  late.  Cahgula«  called  his 
speeches — not  now  extant — "  prize  declamations, 
sand  without  hme,"  the  archaist  Gelhus  ^  condemns 
his  influence,  and  Fronto  '^  censures  his  literary  affecta- 
tions. QuintiUan**  with  truer  discernment  indicts 
more  severely  his  taste  than  his  methods,  for  it  is 
in  the  excesses  of  rhetoric  that  he  most  often  offends.* 
That  he  was  the  most  brilliant  vvriter,  as  well  as  the 
most  independent  thinker,  of  his  day  fevv  will  now 
deny. 

In  philosophy  Seneca's  interests  were  purely 
ethical.  He  was  a  bold,  but  inconsistent,  moraUst — 
a  preacherrather  than  an  exemplar  of  Stoic  virtue. 
His  discourses  are,  in  the  end.  Stoic  sermons,  informal 
in  structure,  lacking  too  often  the  marks  of  ordered 
presentation,  but  usually  effective  in  the  quickness 
of  their  appeal.  While  ostensibly  an  adherent  of 
Stoic  materiahsm,  he  shows  the  independence  of  an 
eclectic  and  becomes  particularly  noteworthy  in  his 

"  Suet.  Calig.  53.  "  xii.  2. 

«  Epist.  p.  156  (Naber).  <*  x.  1.  130. 

'  An  admirable  analysis  and  discussion  of  Seneca's  style 
will  be  found  in  the  Introductions  A  and  B  of  Mr.  Summers's 
edition  of  Select  Letters. 


INTRODUCTION 

conception  of  deity  and  the  kindred  doctrine  of  the 
brotherhood  of  man,  in  both  of  which  he  went  far 
beyond  his  times.  Although,  utiUzing  the  Stoic 
doctrine  of  a  Unity  out  of  a  plurality  of  gods  (as, 
while  there  are  many  vii'tues,  Virtue  is  one),  he  causes 
confusion  by  his  terminology,  yet  he  verges  con- 
stantly toward  the  representation  of  God  as  a  moral 
and  spiritual  being,  a  beneficent  Providence,  instinct 
with  fatherly  regard  for  the  human  race.  Closely 
linked  with  this  conception  is  a  bitter  condemnation 
of  gladiatorial  contests,  slavery,  and  any  form  of 
cruelty  of  man  to  fellow  man. 

Seneca  was  a  voluminous  writer  of  both  prose  and 
poetry.  Besides  some  epigrams,  ten  extant  tragedies 
are  associated  with  his  name,  though  one,  the  Octavia, 
appears  from  internal  evidence  to  be  unmistakably 
the  work  of  a  later  poet.  The  other  nine  plays 
are  unique  and  notable  specimens  of  Roman  tragedy 
adapted  from  Greek  originals,  of  which,  however, 
they  appear  to  be  little  more  than  rhetorical  tra- 
vesties. But  their  influence  upon  the  dramatic 
literature  of  Italy,  France,  and  England,  though  dis- 
torting, was  profound.  His  extant  prose  works  com- 
prise a  significant  group  of  writings  that  are  moral 
in  purpose,  a  quasi-scientific  treatise — the  Naturales 
Quaestiones  in  seven  books  — and  the  Apocolocyntosis, 
a  satirical  skit  on  the  apotheosis  of  the  emperor 
Claudius.  To  the  group  of  moral  writings  belong  the 
twenty  books  of  the  Epistulae  Morales,  a  unit  by 
reason  of  their  form,  and  a  series  of  more  formal  com- 
positions, which,  developed  with  vague  consciousness 
of  an  argumentative  second  person,  are  likewise 
united  by  a  similarity  of  form.  These  quasi-dialogues 
are  the  twelve  treatises  grouped  together  in   the 


INTRODUCTION 

Ambrosian  manuscript  iinder  the  title  Dialogi "  and 
traditionally  known  as  Dialogues,  the  De  dementia, 
originally  in  three  books,  and  the  seven  books  of 
the  De  Beneficiis,  all  of  which  it  has  been  convenient 
for  the  purpose  in  hand  to  combine  under  the  com- 
prehensive title  of  Moral  Essays. 

The  chronology  of  Seneca's  writings  is  in  most 
cases  doubtful.  Of  the  essays  included  in  this  volume, 
the  De  Provideniia  and  the  De  Constantia  are  associated 
by  Waltz  ^  with  the  early  years  of  the  exile  (a. d,  41-42), 
but  equally  -wise  conjecture  will  place  them  later. 
When  Seneca  Avrote  the  De  Ira,  Cahgula  was  un- 
doubtedly dead,  and  Novatus,  to  whom  it  was  dedi- 
cated, had  not  yet  been  adopted  by  Junius  Galho. 
It  shows  bitter  hostiUty  to  CaUgula,  and  may  well 
have  been  ^^Titten  when  the  memorj-  of  his  excesses 
was  fresh.  By  reason  of  the  allusion  to  the  age  of 
Nero  (i.  9-  l)j  the  De  dementia  may  be  definitely 
assigned  to  the  year  a.d.  55  or  5Q. 

Concerning  LuciUus,  to  whom  the  De  Provideniia, 
the  Naturales  Quaestiones,  and  the  Epistulae  are  ad- 
dressed, Seneca  himself  supplies  incidental  informa- 
tion. A  native,  probably,  of  Naples  or  Pompeii,  by 
his  own  energy  he  attained  equestrian  rank  and 
was  appointed  procurator  of  Sicily.  He  was  a 
student  of  philosophy,  -vWth  a  leaning  toward  Epi- 
cureanism, and  a  writer  of  both  prose  and  poetry. 
His  name  has  gained  some  importance  in  literar}' 
histon*'  as  the  conjectural  author  of  the  Aetna,  a 
philosophical  poem  ascribed  in  the  manuscripts  to 

"  Quintilian  used  the  term  (x.  1.  129),  but  that  he  applied 
it  only  to  the  treatises  of  the  Ambrosian  corpus  may  be 
doubted. 

*   Vie  de  Seneque,  p.  7,  note. 


INTRODUCTION 

Virgil.  Younger  than  Seneca,  he  seems  to  have 
maintained  with  him  a  long  friendship  of  pecuhar 
loyalty.  If,  as  Waltz  supposes,  the  De  Providentia 
belongs  to  the  early  years  of  the  exile,  Seneca's 
own  fortunes  may  well  have  called  forth  the  question- 
ing of  Lucilius  concerning  the  ways  of  Providence 
which  gave  excuse  for  the  essay.  In  treating  his 
subject  Seneca  elaborates  the  thesis  that  no  evils 
can  befall  the  good  man,  by  interpreting  adversities, 
not  as  evils,  but  as  wholesome  opportunities  provided 
by  a  beneficent  deity  for  the  testing  of  virtue.  The 
discourse  closes  with  a  passage  of  restrained  rhetoric, 
giving  Stoic  approval  of  suicide  as  a  reasonable 
departure  from  trials  too  great. 

Annaeus  Serenus,  the  young  friend,  or  relative,  of 
Seneca  to  whom  are  addressed  the  De  Constantia 
and  two  other  treatises,  is  said  to  have  been  prefect 
of  Nero's  nightwatchmen  {praefectus  Neronis  vigilum). 
He  is  mentioned  by  Tacitus  "  as  an  intimate  friend 
of  Seneca,  who  with  a  show  of  loyalty  screened  the 
indiscretions  of  Nero  in  his  aflPair  with  Acte.  Seneca 
had  for  him  the  deepest  affection  and  counselled  him 
in  philosophy  with  fatherly  solicitude.  He  apparently 
was  an  Epicurean.  Though  much  younger  than 
Seneca,  he  died  first,  probably  in  a.d.  62.  Seneca 
descants  upon  his  premature  death  in  one  of  his 
Letters  (Ixiii.  14),  and  refers  feelingly  to  the  bitter- 
ness of  his  grief. 

The  essay  itself  is  exceptional  in  its  orderly  ar- 
rangement. After  affirming  the  superiority  of  the 
Stoics  over  other  schools  of  philosophy,  the  author 
takes  as  his  text  the  Stoic  paradox  that  the  wise  man 
can  receive  no  injury.  This  he  proceeds  to  relieve 
"  Ann.  xiii.  13. 


INTRODUCTION 

by  an  exposition  of  the  true  inwardness  of  the  wise 
man's  fortunes.  Setting  up  a  distinction  between 
"  injury  "  and  "  insult,"  he  shows  seriatim  the 
invulnerabihty  of  the  wise  man  to  both,  and  after 
conditioned  praise  of  Epicurus 's  \iew,  closes  the 
discussion  with  a  justification  of  the  Stoic  position. 

Of  Seneca's  brother  Novatus,  to  whom  the  De  Ira 
is  addressed,  something  has  already  been  said.  He 
was  much  beloved  for  his  amiabiUty,  was  an  eminent 
declaimer,  if  we  are  to  trust  Jerome,"  and  at  an 
unkno>\'n  date  was  adopted  by  the  rhetorician  Junius 
Galho.  He  reached  the  consulship,  was  governor  of 
Achaia  in  a.d.  52,  and  died  by  his  o^^ti  hand  in  66. 

Seneca  used  authorities  assiduously,  and  for  the 
elaborate  disquisition  On  Anger  had  several  avail- 
able ;  Sotion,  his  master  in  philosophy,  had  -sATitten 
— e/jt  opy/}?,  and  may  well  have  been  one.  Though  the 
arrangement  of  the  essay  is  noticeably  faulty,*  and  j. 
its  style  is  fer\id  with  rhetoric,  the  wealth  of  its  TC 
illustrative  matter  gives  it  unusual  interest.  Book  I. 
deals  with  the  outward  aspects,  the  harm,  and  the 
various  definitions  of  anger  ;  Book  II.  discusses  its 
origin,  its  nature,  and  its  remedies  ;  Book  III.  repeats 
much  that  has  been  said  before,  and  continues  >\ith 
the  new  topic  of  how  to  check  the  anger  of  others. 

The  De  dementia,  addressed  to  the  emperor  Nero, 
was  written  just  after  the  young  prince  had  finished 
his  eighteenth  year,  and  was  intended  to  gxiide  him 
toward  the  ideal  of  a  merciful  and  popular  ruler.  It 
gives  interesting  evidence  of  Seneca's   own  pubhc 

»  In  the  statement  of  Jerome  (ad  a.  Abr.  2080)  the  son 
may  be  confused  with  his  adoptive  father. 

"  Compare  the  similarity  of  the  topical  divisions  in  ii.  18. 1 
and  iii.  5.  2. 


INTRODUCTION 

wisdom,  of  his  tendency  to  flattery,  and  of  his  method 
in  dealing  with  his  difficult  pupil.  Unfortunately, 
more  than  half  of  the  work  has  been  lost. 

The  most  important  manuscript  of  the  Dialogues 
is  the  Codex  Ambrosianus,  at  Milan,  belonging  to  the 
tenth  or  the  eleventh  century.  This  has  been  de- 
signated A,  and  the  readings  of  its  later  correctors, 
A  ^"^.  An  additional  manuscript  available  for  the 
De  Ira  is  the  Codex  Laurentianus  (designated  L)  of  the 
twelfth  or  thirteenth  century.  The  best  manuscript 
of  the  De  dementia  is  the  Codex  Nasarianus  (desig- 
nated N)  in  the  Palatine  collection  of  the  Vatican. 
This  belongs  to  the  eighth  or  ninth  century.  Two 
others  of  the  twelfth  century  are  the  Codex  Amplo- 
nianus  at  Erfurt  (designated  A),  which  is  not  com- 
plete, and  the  Codex  Parisinus  8542  (designated  T). 
In  the  critical  notes  O  is  used  to  designate  a  con- 
sensus of  N,  A,  and  other  principal  manuscripts. 
For  the  complete  apparatus  the  editions  of  Hermes 
and  Hosius  may  be  consulted. 

The  texts  adopted  for  translation  are,  for  the 
Dialogues,  that  of  Hermes,  Leipzig,  1905,  for  the 
De  Clementia,  that  of  Hosius,  Leipzig,  IPOO.  Except 
minor  changes  in  punctuation  and  orthography, 
divergencies  from  these  have  been  duly  recorded 
in  the  critical  notes. 

J.  W.  B. 

Princeton,  N.J. 


SELECT  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Editions  and  Translations 

The  editio  princeps  was  published  at  Naples  in  1475. 
This  omitted  the  Apocolocyntosis,  but  contained  some 
spurious  works  along  with  some  of  the  works  of  the  elder 
Seneca.  Famous  editions  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth 
centuries  were  those  of  Erasmus,  Justus  Lipsius,  and  J.  F. 
Gronovius. 

Noteworthy  are  the  more  recent  editions  of : 

F.  E.  Ruhkopf,  Leipzig,  1797-1811. 

C.  R.  Fickert,  Leipzig,  1842-1845. 

F.  Haase,  Leipzig  (Teubner),  1852. 

M.  C.  Gertz,  De  Beneficiis  and  De  dementia,  Berlin, 
1876  ;  Diaiogi  XII.,  Copenhagen,  1886. 

C.  Hosius,  De  Beneficiis  and  De  dementia,  Leipzig 
(Teubner),  1900. 

E.  Hermes,  Diaiogi  XII.,  Leipzig  (Teubner),  1905. 

Select  essays,  with  commentary,  appear  in  the  editions 
of  Hurst  and  ^Vhiting  (New  York,  1884),  A.  P.  Ball  ^'ew 
York,  1908),  and  J.  D.  Duff  (Cambridge,  1915). 

WeU  known  are  the  older  translations  of  Thomas  Lodge 
(London,  1614)  and  Roger  L'Estrange  (London,  1673). 


Works  for  Reference 

E.  V.  Arnold,  Roman  Stoicism,  Cambridge,  1911. 
A.  Bougery,  Seneque  prosateur,  Paris,  1922,  pp.  1-205  (a 
discussion  of  Seneca's  art  and  influence). 
S.  Dill,  Roman  Society  from  Nero  to  Marcus  Aurelius, 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

London,  1904  (particularly  the  chapter  on  the  "  Philosophic 
Director  "). 

F.  W.  Farrar,  Seekers  after  God  (Seneca,  Epictetus,  and 
Marcus  Aurelius),  London,  1874. 

R.  M.  Gummere,  Seneca  the  Philosopher  and  his  Modern 
Message,  Boston,  1922. 

F.  L.  Lucas,  Seneca  and  Elizabethan  Tragedy,  Cambridge, 
1922,  pp.  25-52  ("  Seneca  the  Man  "), 

C.  Martha,  Les  Moralistes  sous  V Empire  Remain,  Paris, 
1907. 

W.  C.  Summers,  The  Silver  Age  of  Latin  Literature, 
London,  1920,  pp.  175  ff. 

Ren4  Waltz,  Vie  de  Seneque,  Paris,  1909  (the  best  life  of 
Seneca). 


SENECA 
MORAL  ESSAYS 


VOL.  I 


L.  ANNAEI  SENECAE  DIALOGORVM 

LIBER  I 

AD   LVCILIVM 

QVARE  ALIQVA  INCOMMODA  BONIS  VIRIS 
ACCIDANT,  CVM  PROVIDENTIA  SIT 

(De  Providentia) 

1  1.  Quaesisti  a  me,  Lucili,  quid  ita,  si  providentia 
mundus  regeretur,  multa  bonis  viris  mala  acciderent. 
Hoc  commodius  in  contextu  operis  redderetur,  cum 
praeesse  universis  providentiara  probaremus  et  inter- 
esse  nobis  deum  ;  sed  quoniam  a  toto  particulam 
revelli  placet  et  unam  contradictionem  manente  lite 
integra  solvere,  faciam  rem  non  difficilem,  causam 
deorum  agam. 
2  Supervacuum  est  in  praesentia  ostendere  non  sine 
aliquo  custode  tantum  opus  stare  nee  hunc  siderum 
coetum  discursumque  fortuiti  impetus  esse,  et  quae 
casus  incitat  saepe  turbari  et  cito  arietare,  banc  in- 
oflFensam  velocitatemprocedere  aeternae  legis  imperio 

2 


THE  DIALOGUES  OF 
LUCIUS  ANNAEUS  SENECA 

BOOK  I 

TO  LUCILIUS  ON  PROVIDENCE 

Why,  though  there  is  a  Providence,  some  Misfortunes 
befall  Good  Men. 

You  have  asked  me,  Lucilius,  why,  if  a  Providence 
rules  the  world,  it  still  happens  that  many  evils  befall 
good  men.  This  would  be  more  fittingly  answered 
in  a  coherent  work  designed  to  pynve  thfiti  {\  Prnvi- 
dence  does  presiHe  nvpr  the  universe,  and  that  God 


concerns  himself  with  us.  But  since  it  is  your  wish 
that  a  part  be  severed  from  the  whole,  and  that  I 
refute  a  single  objection  while  the  main  question  is 
left  untouched,  I  shall  do  so  ;  the  task  is  not  difficult, 
— I  shall  be  pleading  the  cause  of  the  gods. 

For  the  present  purpose  it  is  unnecessary  to  show 
that  this  mighty  structure  of  the  world  does  not 
endure  without  some  one  to  guard  it,  and  that  the 
assembhng  and  the  separate  flight  of  the  stars  above 
are  not  due  to  the  workings  of  chance ;  that  while 
bodies  which  owe  their  motion  to  accident  often  fall 
into  disorder  and  quickly  colhde,  this  swift  revolu- 
tion of  the  heavens,  being  ruled  by  eternal  law,  goes 

3 


SENECA 

tantum   rerum   terra   marique   gestantem,   tantum    '■ 
clarissimorum  luminum  et  ex  disposito  relueentium  ;    i 
non  esse  materiae  errantis  hunc  ordinem  nee  quae    ; 
temere  coierunt  tanta  arte  pendere,  ut  terrarum 
gravissimum  pondus  sedeat  immotum   et  circa  se 
properantis  caeli  fugam  spectet,  ut  infusa  vallibus 
maria  molliant  terras  nee  ullum  incrementum  flumi-    : 
num  sentiant,  ut  ex  minimis  seminibus  nascantur    i 

3  ingentia.     Ne  ilia  quidem  quae  videntur  confusa  et 
incerta,  pluvias  dico  nubesque  et  elisorum  fulminum   ; 
iactus  et  incendia  ruptis  montium  verticibus  eflfusa,! 
tremores  labantis  soli  aliaque  quae  tumultuosa  pars 
rerum  circa  terras  movet,  sine  ratione,  quamvis  subita 
sint,  accidunt,  sed  suas  et  ilia  causas  habent  non 
minus  quam  quae  alienis  locis  conspecta  miraculo    | 
sunt,  ut  in  mediis  fluctibus  calentes  aquae  et  nova 

4  insularum  in  vasto  exsilientiiun  mari  spatia.  lam 
vero  si  quis  observaverit  nudari  litora  pelago  in  se 
recedente  eademque  intra  exigumn  tempus  operirij 
credet  caeca  quadam  volutatione  mode  contrahi  imdas 
et  introrsum  agi,  modo  ermnpere  et  magno  cursu 
repetere  sedem  suam,  cum  interim  illae  portionibus 
crescunt  et  ad  horam  ac  diem  subeunt  ampliores 


"  Seneca's  rhetoric  omits  the  intermediate  step  of  the 
transformation  into  rain. 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  i.  2-4 

on  unhindered,  producing  so  many  things  on  land 
and  sea,  so  many  brilhant  Ughts  in  the  sky  all  shining 
in  fixed  array  ;  that  this  regularity  does  not  belong 
to  matter  moving  at  random,  and  that  whatever 
combinations  result  from  chance  do  not  adjust  them- 
selves with  that  artistry  whereby  the  earth,  the 
heaviest  in  weight,  abides  immovable  and  beholds 
the  flight  of  the  sky  as  it  wliirls  around  it,  and  the 
seas,  flooding  <*  the  valleys,  soften  the  land,  and 
feel  no  increase  from  the  rivers,  and  whereby  huge 
gro>vths  spring  up  from  the  tiniest  seeds.  Even  those 
phenomena  which  seem  irregular  and  undetermined 
— I  mean  showers  and  clouds,  the  stroke  of  crashing 
thunderbolts  and  the  fires  that  belch  from  the  riven 
peaks  of  mountains,  tremors  of  the  quaking  ground, 
and  the  other  disturbances  wliich  the  turbulent  ele- 
ment in  nature  sets  in  motion  about  the  earth,  these, 
no  matter  how  suddenly  they  occur,  do  not  happen 
without  a  reason  ;  nay,  they  also  are  the  result  of 
special  causes,  and  so,  in  like  manner,  are  those 
things  which  seem  miraculous  by  reason  of  the  in- 
congruous situations  in  which  they  are  beheld,  such 
as  warm  waters  in  the  midst  of  the  sea-waves,  and 
the  expanses  of  new  islands  that  spring  up  in  the 
wide  ocean.  Moreover,  if  any  one  observes  how  the 
shore  is  laid  bare  as  the  sea  withdraws  into  itself, 
and  how  within  a  short  time  the  same  stretch  is 
covered  over  again,  he  will  suppose  that  it  is  some 
blind  fluctuation  which  causes  the  waves  now  to 
shrink  and  flow  inwards,  now  to  burst  forth  and  in 
mighty  sweep  seek  their  former  resting-place, 
whereas  in  fact  they  increase  by  degrees,  and  true 
to  the  hour  and  the  day  they  approach  in  proper- 


SENECA 

minoresque,  prout  illas  lunare  sidus  elicuit,  ad  cuius 
arbitrium  oceanus  exundat.  Suo  ista  tempori  re- 
serventur,  eo  quidem  magis  quod  tu  non  dubitas  de 

6  providentia  sed  quereris.  In  gratiam  te  reducam  cvun 
diis  adversus  optimos  optimis.  Neque  enim  rerum 
natura  patitur  ut  umquam  bona  bonis  noceant ;  inter 
bonos  viros  ac  deos  amicitia  est  conciliante  virtute. 

Amicitiam  dico  ?  Immo  etiam  necessitudo  et  simili- 
tudo,  quoniam  quidem  bonus  tempore  tantum  a  deo 
differt,  discipulus  eius  aemulatorque  et  vera  progenies, 
quam    parens    ille    magnificus,    virtutum    non   lenis 

6  exactor,  sicut  severi  patres,  durius  educat.  Itaque 
ciun  videris  bonos  viros  acceptosque  diis  laborare, 
sudare,  per  arduum  escendere,  malos  autem  lascivire 
et  voluptatibus  fluere,  cogita  filiorum  nos  modestia 
delectari,  vernularum  licentia,  illos  disciplina  tristiori 
contineri,  horum  ali  audaciam.  Idem  tibi  de  deo 
liqueat  Bonum  virum  in  deUciis  non  habet,  experitur, 
indurat,  sibi  ilium  parat. 

1  2.  "  Quare  multa  bonis  viris  adversa  eveniunt  ?  " 
Nihil  accidere  bono  viro  maH  potest ;  non  miscentur 
contraria,  Quemadmodmn  tot  amnes,  tantum  superne 
deiectorum  imbrivun,  tanta  medicatorum  vis  fontimn 
non  mutant  saporem  maris,  ne  remittunt  quidem,  ita 
adversarum  impetus  rerum  viri  fortis  non  vertit  ani- 
6 


I 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  i.  4-ii.  1 

tionately  larger  or  smaller  volume  according  as  they 
are  attracted  by  the  star  we  call  the  moon,  at  whose 
bidding  the  ocean  surges.  But  let  such  matters  be 
kept  for  their  fitting  time, — all  the  more  so,  indeed, 
because  y_mi  c\n  nnt  lack  faith  in  Prn\-idence,  but 
complain  of  it.  I  shall  reconcile  you  with  the  gods, 
who  are  ever  best  to  those  who  are  best.  For 
Nfttnrp  npvpr  permits  gnnrl  to  be  injured  by  good  ; 
between  good  men  and  the  gods  there  exists  a 
friendship  brought  about  by  virtue. 

Friendship,  do  I  say  ?  Nay,  rather  there  is  a  tie 
of  relationship  and  a  likeness,  since,  in  truth,  a  good_ 
man  differs  from  God  in  the  element  of  time  only  ; 
he  is  God's  pupil,  his  imitator,  and  true  offspring, 
whom  his  all-glorious  parent,  being  no  mild  task- 
master of  \artues,  rears,  as  strict  fathers  do,  vriih 
much  severity.  And  so,  when  you  see  that  men  who 
are  good  and  acceptable  to  the  gods  labour  and 
sweat  and  have  a  difficult  road  to  climb,  that  the 
wicked,  on  the  other  hand,  make  merry  and  abound 
in  pleasures,  reflect  that  our  children  please  us  by 
their  modesty,  but  slave-boys  by  their  forwardness  ; 
that  we  hold  in  check  the  former  by  sterner  dis- 
ciphne,  while  v,'e  encourage  the  latter  to  be  bold. 
Be  assured  that  the  same  is  true  of  God.  He  does 
not  make  a  spoiled  pet  of  a  good  man  ;  he  tests 
him,  hardens  him,  and  fits  him  for  his  own  service. 

You  ask,  "  Why  do  many  adversities  come  to  good 
men  ?  "  No  evil  can  befall  a  good  man  ;  nppo^itps 
do  not  mingle.  Just  as  the  countless  rivers,  the  vast 
fall  of  rain  from  the  sky,  and  the  huge  volume  of 
mineral  springs  do  not  change  the  taste  of  the  sea, 
do  not  even  modify  it,  so  the  assaults  of  adversity 
do  not  weaken  the  spirit  of  a  brave  man.     It  always 

7 


SENECA 

mum.     Manet  in  statu  et  quicquid  evenit  in  suum 
colorem  trahit ;  est  enim  omnibus  externis  potentibr. 

2  Nee  hoc  dico  :  non  sentit  ilia,  sed  vincit  et  alioqui 
quietus  placidusque  contra  incurrentia  attollitur. 
Omnia  adversa  exercitationes  putat.  Quis  autem,  vir 
modo  et  erectus  ad  honesta,  non  est  laboris  adpetens 
iusti  et  ad  officia  cum  periculo  promptus  ?     Cui  non 

3  industrio  otium  poena  est  ?  Athletas  videmus,  quibus 
virium  cura  est,  cum  fortissimis  quibusque  confligere 
et  exigere  ab  is  per  quos  certamini  praeparantur,  ut 
totis  contra  ipsos  viribus  utantur  ;  caedi  se  vexarique 
patiuntur  et  si  non  inveniunt  singulos  pares,  pluribus 

4  simul  obiciuntur.  Marcet  sine  adversario  virtus ; 
tunc  apparet  quanta  sit  quantumque  polleat,  cum 
quid  possit  patientia  ostendit.  Scias  licet  idem  viris 
bonis  esse  faciendima,  ut  dura  ac  difficilia  non  refor- 
mident  nee  de  fato  querantur,  quicquid  accidit  boni 
consulant,  in  bonum  vertant.  Non  quid  sed  quemad- 
modum  feras  interest. 

5  Non  vides  quanto  aliter  patres,  aliter  matres  indul- 
geant  ?  Illi  excitari  iubent  liberos  ad  studia  obeunda 
mature,  feriatis  quoque  diebus  non  patiuntiu:  esse 
otiosos  et  sudorem  illis  et  interdum  lacrimas  ex- 
cutiunt ;  at  matres  fovere  in  sinu,  continere  in  umbra 
volunt,  numquam  contristari,  numquam  flere,  num- 

6  quam  laborare.  Patrium  deus  habet  adversus  bonos 
8 


1 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  n.  1-6 

maintains  its  poise,  and  it  gives  its  o'vm  colour  to 
everj'thing  that  happens  ;  for  jt  is  mightier  than  all 
external  things.  And  yet  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that 
the  brave  man  is  insensible  to  these,  but  that  he 
overcomes  them,  and  being  in  all  else  unmovedand 
calm  rises  to  meet  whatever  assails  Tiim.  All  his 
adversities  he  counts  mere  training.  WTio,  moreover, 
if  he  is  a  man  and  intent  upon  the  right,  is  not  eager 
for  reasonable  toil  and  ready  for  duties  accompanied 
by  danger  ?  To  what  energetic  man  is  not  idleness 
a  pimishment  ?  Wrestlers,  who  make  strength  of 
body  their  chief  concern,  we  see  pitting  themselves 
against  none  but  the  strongest,  and  they  require  of 
those  who  are  preparing  them  for  the  arena  that  they 
use  against  them  all  their  strength  ;  they  submit  to 
blows  and  hurts,  and  if  they  do  not  find  their  match 
in  single  opponents,  they  engage  -with  several  at  a 
time.  Without  an  adversary,  prowess  shrivels.  We 
see  how  great  and  how  efficient  it  really  is,  only 
when  it  shows  by  endurance  what  it  is  capable  of. 
Be  assured  that  good  men  ought  to  act  hkewise  ;  they 
should  not  shrink  from  hardships  and  difficulties,  nor 
complain  against  fate  ;   they  should  take  in  good  part 

whatever  h^^ppP^gj    ^"^    C>ir>n1^    tui-r.    if    tr^   g^r>^  ]SJot 

-what  you  endure^  but  how  you  endure,  is  important. 
Do  you  not  see  how  fathers  show  their  love  in  one 
way,  and  mothers  in  another  ?  The  father  orders 
his  children  to  be  aroused  from  sleep  in  order  that 
they  may  start  early  upon  their  pursuits, — even  on 
holidays  he  does  not  permit  them  to  be  idle,  and  he 
draws  from  them  sweat  and  sometimes  tears.  But 
the  mother  fondles  them  in  her  lap,  wishes  to  keep 
them  out  of  the  sun,  wishes  them  never  to  be  un- 
^^PPy>  never  to  cry,  never  to  toil.     Toward  good 

9 


SENECA 

viros  animum  et  illos  fortiter  amat  et  "  Operibus," 
inquit,  "  doloribus,  damnis  exagitentur,  ut  verum 
colligantrobur."  Languentper inertiam  saginatanec 
labore  tantum  sed  motu  et  ipso  sui  onere  deficiunt. 
Non  fert  ullum  ictum  inlaesa  felicitas  ;  at  cui  assidua 
fuit  cum  incommodis  suis  rixa,  callum  per  iniurias 
duxit  nee  ulli  malo  cedit  sed  etiam  si  cecidit  de 

7  genu  pugnat.  Miraris  tu,  si  deus  ille  bonorum 
amantissimus,  qui  illos  quam  optimos  esse  atque  ex- 
cellentissimos  vult,  fortunam  illis  cum  qua  exerceantur 
adsignat  ?  Ego  vero  non  miror,  si  aHquando  impetum 
capiunt   spectandi    magnos    viros    conluctantis    cum 

8  aliqua  calamitate.  Nobis  interdum  voluptati  est,  si 
adulescens  constantis  animi  irruentem  feram  vena- 
bulo  excepit,  si  leonis  incursum  interritus  pertulit, 
tantoque  hoc  spectaculum  est  gratius,  quanto  id 
honestior  fecit.  Non  sunt  ista,  quae  possint  deorum 
in  se  vultum  convertere,  puerilia  et  humanae  oblecta- 

9  menta  levitatis.  Ecce  spectaculum  dignum  ad  quod 
respiciat  intentus  operi  suo  deus,  ecce  par  deo 
dignum,  vir  fortis  cum  fortuna  mala  compositus, 
utique  si  et  provocavit.  Non  video,  inquam,  quid 
habeat  in  terris  luppiter  pulchrius,  si  eo^  convertere 
animum  velit,  quam  ut  spectet  Catonem  iam  partibus 
non  semel  fractis  stantem  nihilo  minus  inter  ruinas 

10  publicas  rectum.     "  Licet,"  inquit,  "  omnia  in  unius 

^  eo  added  by  Goerenz. 
10 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  it.  6-10 

men  God  has  the  mind  of  a_^th£r,  he  cherishes  for 
them  a  manly  love,  and  he  says,  "  Let  them  be 
harassed  by  toil,  by  suffering,  by  losses,  in  order  that 
they  may  gather  true  strength."  Bodies  gro-vvTi  fat 
through  sloth  are  weak,  and  not  only  laboiu-,  but 
even  movement  and  their  very  weight  cause  them 
to  break  do-ft-n.  Unimpaired  prosperity  cannot  with- 
stand a  single  blow  ;  but  he  who  has  struggled 
constantly  %vith  his  ills  becomes  hardened  through 
suffering,  and  pelds  to  no  misfortune  ;  nay,  even  if 
he  falls,  he  still  fights  upon  his  knees.  Do  you  wonder 
if  that  God,  who  most  dearly  loves  the  good,  who 
wishes  them  to  become  supremely  good  and  \artuous, 
allots  to  them  a  fortune  that  will  make  them  struggle  ? 
For  my  part,  I  do  not  wonder  if  sometimes  the  gods 
arp  mnT-Pfl  hy  the  Hpsjre  to  bchold  great  men  WTCstle 
•^th  some  calamity.  We  men  at  times  are  stirred 
with  pleasure  if  a  youth  of  steady  courage  meets 
with  his  spear  an  onrushing  wild  beast,  if  unterrified 
he  sustains  the  charge  of  a  Hon.  And  the  more 
honourable  the  youth  who  does  this,  the  more  pleas- 
ing this  spectacle  becomes.  But  these  are  not  the 
things  to  draw  down  the  gaze  of  the  gods  upon  us 
— they  are  childish,  the  pastimes  of  man's  frivolity. 
But  lo  !  here  is  a  spectacle  worthy  of  the  regard  of 
God  as  he  contemplates  his  works  ;  lo  !  here  a  con- 
test worthy  of  God, — a  brave  man  matched  against 
ill-fortune,  and  doubly  so  if  his  also  was  the  challenge. 
I  do  not  know,  I  say,  what  nobler  sight  the  Lord 
of  Heaven  could  find  on  earth,  should  he  wish  to 
tiurn  his  attention  there,  than  the  spectacle  of  Cato, 
after  his  cause  had  already  been  shattered  more 
than  once,  nevertheless  standing  erect  amid  the 
ruins  of  the  commonwealth.     "  Although,"  said  he, 

11 


SENECA 

dicionem  concesserint,  custodiantur  legionibus  terrae, 
classibus  maria,  Caesarianus  portas  miles  obsideat  ; 
Cato  qua  exeat  habet  ;  una  manu  latam  libertati 
viam  faciei.  Ferrum  istud,  etiam  civili  bello  purum 
et  innoxium,  bonas  tandem  ae  nobiles  edet  operas  : 
libertatem,  quam  patriae  non  potuit,  Catoni  dabit. 
Aggredere,  anime,  diu  meditatum  opus,  eripe  te 
rebus  humanis.  lam  Petreius  et  luba  concucur- 
rerunt  iacentque  alter  alterius  manu  caesi.  Fortis 
et  egregia  fati  conventio,  sed  quae  non  deceat  magni- 
tudinem  nostram  ;  tam  turpe  est  Catoni  mortem  ab 

11  ullo  petere  quam  vitam."  Liquet  mihi  cum  magno 
spectasse  gaudio  deos,  dum  ille  vlr,  acerrimus  sui  vin- 
dex,  alienae  saluti  consulit  et  instruit  discedentium 
fugam,  dum  studia  etiam  nocte  ultima  tractat,  dum 
gladium  sacro  pectori  infigit,  dum  viscera  spargit  et 
illam  sanctissimam  animam  indignamque  quae  ferro 

12  contaminaretur  manu  educit.  Inde  crediderim  fuisse 
parum  certum  et  efficax  vulnus  ;  non  fuit  diis  immor- 
talibus  satis  spectare  Catonem  semel.  Retenta  ac 
revocata  virtus  est,  ut  in  difficiliore  parte  se  osten- 
deret  ;  non  enim  tam  magno  animo  mors  initur  quam 
repetitur.  Quidni  libenter  spectarent  alumnum  suum 
tam  claro  ac  memorabili  exitu  evadentem  ?  Mors  illos 
consecrat,  quorum  exitum  et  qui  timent  laudant. 

1      3.  Sed  iam  procedente  oratione  ostendam,  quam 

"  After  Caesar's  victory  at  Thapsus  (46  b.c),  these  two 
supporters  of  the  opposition,  despairing  of  pardon,  sought 
death  in  hand-to-hand  combat.  Seneca  accords  with 
Cassius  Dio  (xHii.  8.  4)  in  placing  the  incident  before  the 
suicide  of  Cato  at  Utica. 

*  Cato    stabbed    himself,   but    accomplished   death   by 
tearing  open  the  hideous  wound  which  his  physician  had 
attempted    to    dress    (Plutarch,   Cato   the    Younger,   Ixx. ; 
Cassius  Dio,  xliii.  11.  5). 
12 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  ii.  lO-iii.  i 

"  all  the  world  has  fallen  under  one  man's  sway, 
although  Caesar's  legions  guard  the  land,  his  fleets 
the  sea,  and  Caesar's  troops  beset  the  city  gates, 
yet  Cato  has  a  way  of  escape ;  with  one  single 
hand  he  will  open  a  wide  path  to  freedom.  This 
sword,  unstained  and  blameless  even  in  civil  war, 
shall  at  last  do  good  and  noble  service  :  the  freedom 
which  it  could  not  give  to  his  country  it  shall  give 
to  Cato !  Essay,  my  soul,  the  task  long  planned  ; 
deUver  yourself  from  human  affairs.  Already  Petreius 
and  Juba  have  met  and  he  fallen,  each  slain  by  the 
other's  hand."  Their  compact  with  Fate  was  brave 
and  noble,  but  for  my  greatness  such  would  be  unfit. 
For  Cato  it  were  as  ignoble  to  beg  death  from  any 
man  as  to  beg  hfe."  I  am  sure  that  the  gods  looked 
on  with  exceeding  joy  while  that  hero,  most  ruthless 
in  avenging  himself,  took  thought  for  the  safety  of 
others  and  arranged  the  escape  of  his  departing 
followers  ;  while  even  on  his  last  night  he  pursued 
his  studies  ;  while  he  drove  the  sword  into  his  sacred 
breast ;  while  he  scattered  his  vitals,  and  drew  forth 
by  his  hand  that  hohest  spirit,  too  noble  to  be  defiled 
by  the  steel.*  I  should  hke  to  beheve  that  this  is 
why  the  wound  was  not  well-aimed  and  efficacious — 
it  was  not  enough  for  the  immortal  gods  to  look  but 
once  on  Cato .  His  virtue  was  held  in  check  and  called 
back  that  it  might  display  itself  in  a  harder  role  ; 
for  to  seek  death  needs  not  so  great  a  soul  as  to 
reseek  it.  Surely  the  gods  looked  with  pleasure 
upon  their  pupil  as  he  made  his  escape  by  so 
glorious  and  memorable  an  end !  Death  con- 
secrates those  whose  end  even  those  who  fear  must 
praise. 

But  as  the  discussion  progresses,  I  shall  show  how 

13 


SENECA 

non  sint  quae  videntur  mala.  Nunc  illud  dico,  ista 
quae  tu  vocas  aspera,  quae  adversa  et  abominanda, 
primum  pro  ipsis  esse  quibus  accidunt,  deinde  pro  uni- 
versis,  quorum  maior  diis  cura  quam  singulorum  est, 
post  hoc  volentibus  accidere  ac  dignos  malo  esse,  si 
nolint.  His  adiciam  fato  ista  sic  et  recte^  eadem  lege 
bonis  evenire  qua  sunt  boni.  Persuadebo  deinde  tibi, 
ne  umquam  boni  viri  miserearis ;  potest  enim  miser 
dici,  non  potest  esse. 
2  Difficillimum  ex  omnibus  quae  proposui  ^videtur 
quod  primum  dixi,  pro  ipsis  esse  quibus  eveniunt 
ista  quae  horremus  ac  tremimus.  "  Pro  ipsis  est," 
inquis,  "  in  exiliiun  proici,  in  egestatem  deduci,  libe- 
ros  coniugem  ecferre,  ignominia  affici,  debilitari  ?  " 
Si  miraris  haec  pro  aliquo  esse,  miraberis  quosdam 
ferro  et  igne  curari  nee  minus  fame  ac  siti.  Sed  si 
cogitaveris  tecum  remedii  causa  quibusdam  et  radi 
ossa  et  legi  et  extrahi  venas  et  quaedam  amputari 
membra  quae  sine  totius  pernicie  corporis  haerere  non 
poterant,  hoc  quoque  patieris  probari  tibi,  quaedam 
incommoda  pro  is    esse   quibus  accidunt,   tam  me 

^  et  recte  Petschenig  from  A  :  ire  et  Madvig. 
14 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iii.  1-2 

the  things  that  seem  to  be  evils  are  not  really  so. 
This  much  I  now  say, — that  those  things  which  you 
call  hardships,  which  you  call  adversities  and  accursed, 
are,  in  the  first  place,  for  the  good  of  the  persons 
themselves  to  whom  they  come  ;  in  the  second  place, 
that  they  are  for  the  good  of  the  whole  hiunan 
family,  for  which  the  gods  have  a  greater  concern -h- 
than  for  single  persons  ;  again,  I  say  that  good  men 
are  wilUng  that  these  things  should  happen  and,  if 
they  are  unwilling,  that  they  deserve  misfortune. 
I  shall  add,  further,  that  these  things  happen  thus 
by  destiny,  and  that  they  rightly  befall  good  men 
by  the  same  law  which  makes  them  good.  I  shall 
induce  you,  in  fine,  never  to  commiserate  a  good  man. 
For  he  can  be  called  miserable,  but  he  cannot  be  so. 
Of  all  the  propositions  which  I  have  advanced, 
the  most  difficult  seems  to  be  the  one  stated  first, — 
that  those  things  which  Ave  all  shudder  and  tremble 
at  are  for  the  good  of  the  persons  themselves  to 
whom  they  come.  "  Is  it,"  you  ask,  "  for  their  own 
good  that  men  are  driven  into  exile,  reduced  to 
want,  that  they  bear  to  the  grave  Avife  or  children, 
that  they  suffer  pubhc  disgrace,  and  are  broken  in 
health  ?  "  If  you  are  surprised  that  these  things  are 
for  any  man's  good,  you  must  also  be  surprised  that 
by  means  of  surgery  and  cautery,  and  also  by  fasting 
and  thirst,  the  sick  are  sometimes  made  well.  But 
if  you  will  reflect  that  for  the  sake  of  being  cured 
the  sick  sometimes  have  their  bones  scraped  and 
removed,  and  their  veins  pulled  out,  and  that  some- 
times members  are  amputated  which  could  not  be  left 
without  causing  destruction  to  the  whole  body,  you 
will  allow  yourself  to  be  convinced  of  this  as  well, — 
that  iUs  are  sometimes  for  the  good  of  those  to  whom 

15 


SENECA 

hercules  quam  quaedam  quae  laudantur  atque  ap- 
petuntur  contra  eos  esse  quos  delectaverunt,  simillima 
cruditatibus  ebrietatibusque  et  ceteris  quae  necant 

3  per  voluptatem.  Inter  multa  magnifica  Demetri 
nostri  et  haec  vox  est,  a  qua  recens  sum  ;  sonat 
adhuc  et  vibrat  in  auribus  meis  :  "  Nihil,"  inquit, 
"  mihi  videtur  infelicius  eo,  cui  nihil  umquam  evenit 
adversi."  Non  hcuit  enim  illi  se  experiri.  Ut  ex 
voto  ilU  fluxerint  omnia,  ut  ante  votum,  male  tamen 
de  illo  dii  iudicaverunt.  Indignus  visus  est  a  quo 
vinceretur  aliquando  fortuna,  quae  ignavissimum 
quemque  refugit,  quasi  dicat  :  "  Quid  ego  istum  mihi 
adversarium  adsumam  ?  Statim  arma  submittet ;  non 
opus  est  in  ilium  tota  potentia  mea,  levi  comminatione 
pelletur,  non  potest  sustinere  vultum  meum.  Alius 
circumspiciatur  ciun  quo  conferre  possimus  manum  ; 

4  pudet  congredi  cum  homine  vinci  parato."  Ignomi- 
niam  iudicat  gladiator  cum  inferiore  componi  et  scit 
eum  sine  gloria  vinci,  qui  sine  periculo  vincitur.  Idem 
facit  fortuna  :  fortissimos  sibi  pares  quaerit,  quosdam 
fastidio  transit.  Contumacissimum  quemque  et  rectis- 
simum  aggreditur,  adversus  quem  vim  suam  intendat : 
ignem  experitur  in  Mucio,  paupertatem  in  Fabricio, 
exihum  in  Rutilio,  tormenta  in  Regulo,  venenum  in 
Socrate,  mortem  in  Catone.  Magnum  exemplum  nisi 
mala  fortuna  non  invenit. 

"  A  catalogue  of  stock  types  of  virtue ;  see  Index  under 
the  names. 

16 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iii.  2-4 

they  come  ;  just  as  much  so,  my  word  for  it,  as  that 
things  which  are  lauded  and  sought  after  are  some- 
times to  the  hurt  of  those  who  dehght  in  them, 
being  verj'  much  hke  over-eating,  drunkenness,  and 
the  other  indulgences  which  kill  by  giving  pleasure. 
Among  the  many  fine  sayings  of  our  friend  Demetrius 
there  is  this  one,  which  I  have  just  heard  ;  it  still 
rings  in  my  ears.  "  No  man,"  said  he,  "  seems  to 
me  more  unhappy  than  one  who  has  never  met  with 
adversity."  For  such  a  man  has  never  had  an 
opportunity  to  test  himself.  Though  all  things  have 
flowed  to  him  according  to  his  prayer,  though  even 
before  his  prayer,  nevertheless  the  gods  have  passed 
an  adverse  judgement  upon  him.  He  was  deemed 
unworthy  ever  to  gain  the  victory  over  Fortune, 
who  draws  back  from  all  cowards,  as  if  she  said, 
"  Why  should  I  choose  that  fellow  as  my  adversary  ? 
He  will  straightway  drop  his  weapons  ;  against  him 
I  have  no  need  of  all  my  power — he  will  be  routed 
by  a  paltry  threat ;  he  cannot  bear  even  the  sight 
of  my  face.  Let  me  look  around  for  another  with 
whom  to  join  in  combat.  I  am  ashamed  to  meet 
a  man  who  is  ready  to  be  beaten."  A  gladiator 
counts  it  a  disgrace  to  be  matched  vWth  an  inferior, 
and  knows  that  to  vfin  vvithout  danger  is  to  win 
without  glory.  The  same  is  true  of  Fortune.  She 
seeks  out  the  bravest  men  to  match  with  her  ;  some 
she  passes  by  in  disdain.  Those  that  are  most 
stubborn  and  unbending  she  assails,  men  against 
whom  she  may  exert  all  her  strength.  Mucins  she 
tries  by  fire,  Fabricius  by  poverty,  Rutihus  by 
exile,  Regulus  by  torture,  Socrates  by  poison, 
Cato  *  by  death.  It  is  only  evil  fortune  that  dis- 
covers a  great  exemplar. 

VOL.  1  c  17 


SENECA 

6  Infelix  est  Mucius,  quod  dextra  ignes  hostium 
premit  et  ipse  a  se  exigit  erroris  sui  poenas  ?  Quod 
regem,  quem  armata  manu  non  potuit,  exusta  fugat  ? 
Quid  ergo  ?  Felicior  esset,  si  in  sinu  amicae  foveret 
manum  ? 

6  Infelix  est  Fabricius,  quod  rus  suum,  quantum  a  re 
publica  vacavit,  fodit  ?  Quod  helium  tarn  cum  Pyrrho 
quam  cum  divitiis  gerit  ?  Quod  ad  focum  cenat 
illas  ipsas  radices  et  herbas  quas  in  repurgando  agro 
triumphalis  senex  vulsit  ?  Quid  ergo  ?  Felicior  esset, 
si  in  ventrem  suum  longinqui  litoris  pisces  et  pere- 
grina  aucupia  congereret,  si  conchylis  superi  atque 
inferi  maris  pigritiam  stomachi  nausiantis  erigeret,  si 
ingenti  pomorum  strue  cingeret  primae  formae  feras, 
captas  multa  caede  venantium  ? 

7  Infelix  est  Rutilius,  quod  qui  ilium  damnaverunt 
causam  dicent  omnibus  saeculis  ?  Quod  aequiore 
animo  passus  est  se  patriae  eripi  quam  sibi  exiBum  ? 
QuodSullae  dictatori  solus  aliquid  negavit  et  revocatus 
tantum  non  retro  cessit  et  longius  fugit  ?  "  Viderint," 
inquit,  "  isti  quos  Romae  deprehendit  felicitas  tua. 
Videant  largum  in  foro  sanguinem  et  supra  Servilianum 
lacum  (id  enim  proscriptionis  Sullanae  spoliarium  est) 


"  An  ironical  allusion  to  Sulla's  assumption  of  the  title 
of  Felix. 

18 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  in.  5-7 

Is  Mucius  unfortunate  because  he  grasps  the 
flames  of  the  enemy  with  his  right  hand  and  forces 
himself  to  pay  the  penalty  of  his  mistake  ?  because 
■with  his  charred  hand  he  routs  the  king  whom  with 
his  armed  hand  he  could  not  rout  ?  Tell  me,  then, 
would  he  be  happier  if  he  were  warming  his  hand  in 
his  mistress's  bosom  ? 

Is  Fabricius  unfortunate  because,  whenever  he 
has  leism-e  from  affairs  of  state,  he  tills  liis  fields  ? 
because  he  wages  war  not  less  on  riches  than  on 
Pyrrhus  ?  because  the  roots  and  herbs  on  which  he 
dines  beside  his  hearth  are  those  that  he  himself, 
an  old  man  and  honoured  by  a  triumph,  grubbed  up 
in  cleaning  off  his  land  ?  Tell  me,  then,  would  he 
be  happier  if  he  loaded  his  beUy  Avith  fish  from  a 
distant  shore  and  with  birds  from  foreign  parts  ?  if 
he  aroused  the  sluggishness  of  his  loathing  stomach 
with  shell-fish  from  the  eastern  and  the  western  sea  ? 
if  he  had  game  of  the  first  order,  which  had  been 
captured  at  the  cost  of  many  a  hunter's  hfe,  served 
with  fruit  piled  high  around  ? 

Is  Rutilius  unfortunate  because  those  who  con- 
demned him  will  have  to  plead  their  cause  through 
all  the  ages  ?  because  he  was  more  content  to 
endure  that  his  country  should  be  robbed  of  him 
than  that  he  should  be  robbed  of  exile  ?  because 
he  was  the  only  one  who  refused  anything  to  the 
dictator  Sulla,  and  when  recalled  from  exile  all  but 
drew  back  and  fled  farther  away  ?  "  Let  those," 
says  he,  "whom  your  'happy'  era"  has  caught  at 
Rome,  behold  it.  Let  them  see  the  forum  streaming 
with  blood,  and  the  heads  of  senators  placed  above 
the  pool  of  ServiUus — for  there  the  victims  of  Sulla's 
proscriptions  are  stripped, — and  bands  of  assassins 

19 


SENECA 

senatorum  capita  et  passim  vagantis  per  urbem  per- 
cussorum  greges  et  multa  milia  civium  Romanorum 
uno  loco  post  fidem,  immo  per  ipsam  fidem  trucidata  ; 

8  videant  ista  qui  exulare  non  possunt."  Quid  ergo  ? 
Felix  est  L.  Sulla,  quod  illi  descendenti  ad  forum  gladio 
summovetur,  quod  capita  sibi  consularium  virorum 
patitur  ostendi  et  pretium  caedis  per  quaestorem  ac 
tabulas  publicas  numerat  ?  Et  haec  omnia  facit  ille, 
ille  qui  legem  Corneliam  tulit  ! 

9  Veniamus  ad  Regulum  :  quid  illi  fortuna  nocuit, 
quod  ilium  documentum  fidei,  documentum  patientiae 
fecit  ?  Figunt  cutem  clavi  et  quocumque  fatigatum 
corpus  reclinavit,  vulneri  incumbit,  in  perpetuam 
vigiliam  suspensa  sunt  lumina.  Quanto  plus  tormenti 
tanto  plus  erit  gloriae.  Vis  scire  quam  non  paeniteat 
hoc  pretio  aestimasse  virtutem  ?    Refice  ilium  et  mitte 

10  in  senatum  ;  eandem  sententiam  dicet.  Feliciorem 
ergo  tu  Maecenatem  putas,  cui  amoribus  anxio  et 
morosae  uxoris  cotidiana  repudia  deflenti  somnus  per 
symphoniarum  cantum  ex  longinquo  lene  resonan- 
tium  quaeritur  ?  Mero  se  licet  sopiat  et  aquarum 
fragoribus  avocet  et  mille  voluptatibus  mentem 
anxiam  fallat,  tam  vigil abit  in  pluma  quam  ille  in 
cruce  ;  sed  illi  solacium  est  pro  honesto  dura  tolerare 
et  ad  causam  a  patientia  respicit,  hunc  voluptatibus 
marcidum  et  felicitate  nimia  laborantem  magis  his 


"  The  lex  Cornelia  de  sicariis  et  veneficis,   which  was 
passed  under  Sulla  and  provided   severe  punishment  for 
murder,  gives  point  to  Seneca's  sneer. 
20 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  m.  7-10 

roaming  at  large  throughout  the  city,  and  many 
thousands  of  Roman  citizens  butchered  in  one  spot 
after,  nay,  by  reason  of,  a  promise  of  security, — let 
those  who  cannot  go  into  exile  behold  these  things  !  " 
Is  Lucius  Sulla  happy  because  his  way  is  cleared 
by  the  sword  when  he  descends  to  the  forum  ? 
because  he  suffers  the  heads  of  consulars  to  be 
shown  him  and  has  the  treasurer  pay  the  price  of 
their  assassination  out  of  the  pubUc  funds  ?  And 
these  all  are  the  deeds  of  that  man — that  man  who 
proposed  the  Cornehan  Law  !  " 

Let  us  come  now  to  Regulus  :  what  injury  did 
Fortune  do  to  him  because  she  made  him  a  pattern 
of  loyalty,  a  pattern  of  endurance  ?  Nails  pierce 
his  skin,  and  wherever  he  rests  his  wearied  body  he 
Hes  upon  a  wound  ;  his  eyes  are  stark  in  eternal 
sleeplessness.  But  the  greater  his  torture  is,  the 
greater  shall  be  his  glory.  Would  you  hke  to  know 
how  httle  he  regrets  that  he  rated  \Trtue  at  such  a 
price  ?  Make  him  whole  again  and  send  him  back 
to  the  senate  ;  he  will  express  the  same  opinion. 
Do  you,  then,  think  Maecenas  a  happier  man,  who, 
distressed  by  love  and  grie\^ng  over  the  daily  repulses 
of  his  wayward  vrife,  courted  slumber  by  means  of 
harmonious  music,  echoing  faintly  from  a  distance  ? 
Although  he  drugs  himself  yviih.  wine,  and  diverts 
his  worried  mind  with  the  sound  of  ripphng  waters, 
and  beguiles  it  \\ith  a  thousand  pleasures,  yet  he, 
upon  his  bed  of  down,  will  no  more  close  his  eyes' 
than  that  other  upon  his  cross.  But  while  the 
one,  consoled  by  the  thought  that  he  is  suffering 
hardship  for  the  sake  of  right,  turns  his  eyes  from 
his  suffering  to  its  cause,  the  other,  jaded  vnih 
pleasures  and  struggling  with  too  much  good  fortune, 

21 


SENECA 

11  quae  patitur  vexat  causa  patiendi.  Non  usque  eo  in 
possessionem  generis  humani  vitia  venerunt,  ut 
dubium  sit  an  electione  fati  data  plures  nasci  Reguli 
quam  Maecenates  velint ;  aut  si  quis  fuerit,  qui  audeat 
dicere  Maecenatem  se  quam  Regulum  nasci  maluisse, 
idem  iste,  taceat  licet,  nasci  se  Terentiam  maluit ! 

12  Male  tractatum  Socratem  iudicas,  quod  illam  potio- 
nem  publice  mixtam  non  aliter  quam  medicamentum 
immortalitatis  obduxit  et  de  morte  disputavit  usque 
ad  ipsam  ?  Male  cum  illo  actum  est,  quod  gelatus 
est  sanguis  ac  paulatim  frigore  inducto  venarura  vigor 

13  constitit  ?  Quanto  magis  huic  invidendum  est  quam 
illis  quibus  gemma  ministratur,  quibus  exoletus  omnia 
pati  doctus  exsectae  virilitatis  aut  dubiae  suspensam 
auro  nivem  diluit !  Hi  quicquid  biberunt  vomitu 
remetientur  tristes  et  bilem  suam  regustantes,  at  ille 
venenum  laetus  et  libens  hamiet. 

14  Quod  ad  Catonem  pertinet,  satis  dictum  est  sum- 
mamque  illi  felicitatem  contigisse  consensus  hominum 
fatebitur,  quem  sibi  rerum  natura  delegit  cum  quo 
metuenda  conlideret.  "  Inimicitiae  potentium  graves 
sunt ;  opponatur  simul  Pompeio,  Caesari,  Crasso. 
Grave  est   a   deterioribus  honore  anteiri ;    Vatinio 


"  The  difficult  and  none  too  admirable  wife  of  Maecenas. 
Seneca  {Epist.  cxiv.  6)  remarks  caustically  upon  their 
relations  that  "  Maecenas  married  his  wife  a  thousand 
times  though  he  never  had  but  one."  Here  the  rhetorical 
types  are  in  descending  scale:  the  heroic  Regulus,  the 
effeminate  Maecenas,  the  contemptible  Terentia  ! 

*  The  cup  of  hemlock  which  Socrates  drained  with  good 
cheer  after  discoursing  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul. 
See  the  account  in  Plato's  Phaeclo. 

"  As  the  pohtical  tool  of  Caesar  he  defeated  Cato  in  the 
candidature  for  the  praetorship  in  55  B.C. 
22 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  in.  11-14 

is  harassed  less  by  what  he  suffers  than  by  the  reason 
for  his  suffering.  Surely  the  human  race  has  not 
come  so  completely  under  the  sway  of  vice  as  to 
cause  a  doubt  whether,  if  Fate  should  give  the 
choice,  more  men  would  rather  be  born  a  Regulus 
than  a  Maecenas  ;  or  if  there  shoxild  be  one  bold 
enough  to  say  that  he  would  rather  have  been  born 
a  Maecenas  than  a  Regulus,  the  fellow,  although  he 
may  not  admit  it,  would  rather  have  been  born  a 
Terentia  "  ! 

Do  you  consider  that  Socrates  was  ill-used  because 
he  drank  doAvn  that  draught  ^  which  the  state  had 
brewed  as  if  it  were  an  ehxir  of  immortal  life,  and 
up  to  the  point  of  death  discoursed  on  death  ?  Was 
he  ill-treated  because  his  blood  grew  cold,  and,  as 
the  chill  spread,  gradually  the  beating  of  his  pulses 
stopped  ?  How  much  more  should  we  envy  him 
than  those  who  are  served  in  cups  of  precious  stone, 
whose  wine  a  catamite — a  tool  for  anything,  an 
unsexed  or  sexless  creature — dilutes  \vith  snow  held 
above  in  a  golden  vessel !  They  will  measure  out 
afresh  all  their  drink  in  vomit,  with  WTy  faces  tasting 
in  its  stead  their  own  bile  ;  but  he  will  quaff  the 
poison  gladly  and  with  good  cheer. 

Touching  Cato,  enough  has  been  said,  and  it  will 
be  granted  by  the  consensus  of  mankind  that  that 
great  man  reached  the  pinnacle  of  happiness, — he 
whom  Nature  chose  to  be  the  one  with  whom  her 
dread  power  should  clash.  "  The  enmity  of  the 
powerful,"  said  she,  "  is  a  hardship  ;  then  let  him 
match  himself  at  one  and  the  same  time  against 
Pompey,  Caesar,  and  Crassus.  It  is  a  hardship  to 
be  outstripped  by  an  inferior  in  the  candidacy  for 
ofl&ce  ;  then  let  him  be  defeated  by  Vatinius."     It  is 

23 


SENECA 

postferatur.  Grave  est  civilibus  bellis  interesse ; 
toto  terrarum  orbe  pro  causa  bona  tam  infeliciter 
quam  pertinaciter  militet.  Grave  est  manus  sibi 
afferre ;  faciat.  Quid  per  haec  consequar  ?  Ut 
omnes  sciant  non  esse  haec  mala  quibus  ego  dignum 
Catonem  putavi." 

1  4.  Prosperae  res  et  in  plebem  ac  vilia  ingenia 
deveniunt ;  at  calamitates  terroresque  mortalium  sub 
iugum  mittere  proprium  magni  viri  est.  Semper  vero 
esse  felicem  et  sine  morsu  animi  transire  vitam  igno- 

2  rare  est  rerum  naturae  alteram  partem.  Magnus  vir 
es  ;  sed  unde  scio,  si  tibi  fortuna  non  dat  facultatem 
exhibendae  virtutis  ?  Descendisti  ad  Olympia,  sed 
nemo  praeter  te  ;  coronam  habes,  victoriam  non 
habes  Non  gratulor  tamquam  viro  forti,  sed  tan- 
quam    consulatum    praeturamve    adepto ;     honore 

3  auctus  es.  Item  dicere  et  bono  viro  possum,  si  illi 
nullam  occasionem  difficilior  casus  dedit  in  qua  una* 
vim  animi  sui  ostenderet  :  "  Miserum  teiudico,  quod 
numquam  fuisti  miser.  Transisti  sine  adversario 
vitam  ;  nemo  sciet  quid  potneris,  ne  tu  quidem  ipse." 
Opus  est  enim  ad  notitiam  sui  experimento  ;  quid 
qmsque  posset  nisi  temptando  non  didicit.  Itaque 
quidam  ipsi  ultro  se  cessantibus  malis  obtulerunt  et 
virtuti   iturae   in   obscurum    occasionem   per   quam 

4  enitesceret  quaesierunt.  Gaudent,  inquam,  magni 
viri  aliquando  rebus  adversis,  non  aliter  quam  fortes 

^  una  Gertz  and  Hermes  omit, 

24 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  in.  l4-iv.  4 

a  hardship  to  engage  in  civil  war  ;  then  let  him 
fiffht  the  whole  world  over  for  a  just  cause,  ever 
th  ill  success  but  with  equal  stubbornness.  It 
.--  a  hardsliip  to  lay  hand  upon  oneself  ;  then  let  him 
do  it.  And  what  shall  I  gain  thereby  ?  that  all  may 
know  that  these  things  of  which  I  have  deemed  Cato 
worthy  are  not  real  ills." 

Success  comes  to  the  conmion  man,  and  even  to 
nunonplace  abiUty  ;  but  to  triumph  over  the 
calamities  and  terrors  of  mortal  hfe  is  the  part  of  a 
great  man  only.  Truly,  to  be  always  happy  and  to 
pass  through  Ufe  v\-ithout  a  mental  pang  is  to  be 
ignorant  of  one  half  of  nature.  You  are  a  great 
man  ;  but  how  do  I  know  it  if  Fortune  gives  you 
no  opportunity  of  shoAving  j'our  worth  ?  You  have 
entered  as  a  contestant  at  the  Olympic  games,  but 
none  other  besides  you  ;  you  gain  the  crown,  the 
victory  you  do  not  gain.  /  You  have  my  congratula- 
tions— not  as  a  brave  mail,  but  as  if  you  had  obtained 
the  consulship  or  praetorship  ;  you  have  enhanced 
your  prestige.  In  hke  manner,  also,  I  may  say  to  a 
Efood  man,  if  no  harder  circumstance  has  given  him 
e  opportunity  whereby  alone  he  might  show  the 
length  of  his  mind,  "  I  judge  you  unfortimate 
because  you  have  never  been  unfortunate  ;  you 
have  passed  through  hfe  without  an  antagonist  ;  no 
one  \n\\  know  what  you  can  do, — not  even  yourself." 
For  if  a  man  is  to  know  himself,  he  must  be  tested  ; 
no  one  finds  out  what  he  can  do  except  by  trjang. 
And  so  some  men  have  presented  themselves  volun- 
tarily to  laggard  misfortune,  and  have  sought  an 
opportunity  to  blazon  forth  their  worth  when  it  was 
about  to  pass  into  obscurity.  Great  men,  I  say, 
rejoice  oft-times  in  adversity,  as  do  brave  soldiers  in 

25 


SENECA 

milites  bello.  Triumphum  ego  murmillonem  sub 
Tib.  Caesare  de  raritate  munerum  audivi  querentem  : 
"  Quam  bella,"  inquit,  "  aetas  perit !  " 

Avida  est  periculi  virtus  et  quo  tendat,  non  quid 
passura  sit  cogitat,  quoniam  etiam  quod  passura  est 
gloriae  pars  est.  Militares  viri  gloriantur  vulneribus, 
laeti  fluentem  meliori  casu  sanguinem  ostentant ; 
idem  licet  fecerint  qui  integri  revertuntur  ex  acie, 

5  magis  spectatur  qui  saucius  redit.  Ipsis,  inquam, 
deus  consulit,  quos  esse  quam  honestissimos  cupit, 
quotiens  illis  materiam  praebet  aliquid  animose 
fortiterque  faciendi,  ad  quam  rem  opus  est  aliqua 
rerum  difficultate.  Gubernatorem  in  tempestate,  in 
acie  militem  intellegas.  Unde  possum  scire  quantum 
adversus  paupertatem  tibi  animi  sit,  si  divitiis  diffluis  ? 
Unde  possum  scire  quantum  adversus  ignominiam  et 
infamiam  odiumque  populare  constantiae  habeas,  si 
inter  plausus  senescis,  si  te  inexpugnabilis  et  in- 
clinatione  quadam  mentium  pronus  favor  sequitur  ? 
Unde  scio  quam  aequo  animo  laturus  sis  orbitatem, 
si  quoscimique  sustulisti  vides  .''  Audivi  te,  cimi  alios 
consolareris  :  tunc  conspexissem,  si  te  ipse  consolatus 

6  esses,  si  te  ipse  dolere  vetuisses.  Nolite,  obsecro  vos, 
expavescere  ista,  quae  dii  immortales  velut  stimulos 
admovent  animis  :  calamitas  virtutis  occasio  est. 
lUos  merito  quis  dixerit  miseros  qui  nimia  felicitate 
26 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iv.  4-6 

warfare.  I  once  heard  Triumphus,  a  gladiator  in 
the  time  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  complaining  of  the 
scarcity  of  shows  :  "  How  fair  an  age,"  he  said, 
"  has  passed  away  !  " 

True  worth  is  eager  for  danger  and  thinks  rather 
of  its  goal  than  of  what  it  may  have  to  suffer,  since 
even  what  it  will  have  to  suffer  is  a  part  of  its 
glory.  Warriors  glory  in  their  wounds  and  rejoice  to 
display  the  blood  spilled  with  luckier  fortune.  Those 
who  return  from  the  battle  unhurt  may  have  fought 
as  well,  but  the  man  who  returns  with  a  wound  wins 
the  greater  regard.  God,  I  say,  is  shomng  favour 
to  those  whom  he  wills  shall  achieve  the  highest 
possible  virtue  whenever  he  gives  them  the  means 
of  doing  a  courageoiis  and  brave  deed,  and  to  this 
end  they  must  encounter  some  difficulty  in  life. 
You  learn  to  know  a  pilot  in  a  storm,  a  soldier  in 
the  battle-hne.  How  can  I  know  with  what  spirit 
you  will  face  poverty,  if  you  wallow  in  wealth  ? 
How  can  I  know  Avith  what  firmness  you  ^vill  face 
disgrace,  ill  fame,  and  pubhc  hatred,  if  you  attain  to 
old  age  amidst  rounds  of  applause, — if  a  popularity 
attends  you  that  is  irresistible,  and  flows  to  you 
from  a  certain  leaning  of  men's  minds  ?  How  do  I 
know  with  what  equanimity  you  would  bear  the  loss 
of  childi'en,  if  you  see  around  you  all  that  you  have 
fathered  ?  I  have  heard  you  offering  consolation  to 
others.  If  you  had  been  offering  it  to  yourself,  if 
you  had  been  telhng  yourself  not  to  grieve,  then  I 
might  have  seen  your  true  character.  Do  not,  I 
beg  of  you,  shrink  in  fear  from  those  things  which 
the  immortal  gods  apply  hke  spurs,  as  it  were,  to 
our  souls.  Disaster  is  Virtue's  opportunity.  Justly 
may  those  be  termed  unhappy  who  are  dulled  by 

27 


SENECA 

torpescunt,   quos   velut  in   mari   lento   tranquillitas 
iners  detinet ;   quicquid  illis  incident,  novum  veniet. 

7  Magis  virgent  saeva  inexpertos,  grave  est  tenerae 
cervici  iugum.  Ad  suspicionem  vulneris  tiro  pallescit, 
audacter  veteranus  cruorem  suum  spectat,  qui  scit  se 
saepe  vicisse  post  sanguinem.  Hos  itaque  deus  quos 
probat,  quos  amat,  indurat,  recognoscit,  exercet ; 
eos  autem  quibus  indulgere  videtur,  quibus  parcere, 
molles  Venturis  malis  servat.  Erratis  enim,  si  quern 
iudicatis  exceptum.  Veniet  et^  ad  ilium  diu  felicem 
sua  portio  ;    quisquis  videtur  dimissus  esse,  dilatus 

8  est.  Quare  deus  optimum  quemque  aut  mala  vali- 
tudine  aut  luctu  aut  aliis  incommodis  afficit  ?  Quia 
in  castris  quoque  periculosa  fortissimis  imperantur  ; 
dux  lectissimos  mittit,  qui  nocturnis  hostes  aggredian- 
tur  insidiis  aut  explorent  iter  aut  praesidium  loco 
deiciant.  Nemo  eorum  qui  exeunt  dicit :  "  Male  de 
me  imperator  meruit,"  sed  "  bene  iudicavit."  Item 
dicant  quicumque  iubentur  pati  timidis  ignavisque 
flebilia  :  "  Digni  visi  sumus  deo  in  quibus  experiretur 
quantum  humana  natura  posset  pati." 

9  Fugite  delicias,  fugite  enervantem  felicitatem,  qua 
animi  permadescunt  et  nisi  aliquid  intervenit  quod 
humanae  sortis  admoneat,  manent^  velut  perpetua 
ebrietate  sopiti.     Quem  specularia  semper  ab  afflatu 

^  et  Gruter  inserts.  *  manent  Hermes  inserts. 

28 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iv.  6-9 

an  excess  of  good  fortune,  who  rest,  as  it  were,  in 
dead  calm  upon  a  quiet  sea  ;  whatever  happens  will 
come  to  them  as  a  change.  Cruel  fortune  bears 
hardest  upon  the  inexperienced  ;  to  the  tender  neck 
tlie  yoke  is  heavy.  The  raw  recruit  turns  pale  at 
the  thought  of  a  wound,  but  the  veteran  looks  un- 
daunted upon  his  own  gore,  knowing  that  blood  has 
often  been  the  price  of  his  victory.  In  like  manner  - 
God  hardens,  reviews,  and  disciplines  those  whom 
he  approves,  whom  he  loves.  Those,  however,  whom 
he  seems  to  favom-,  whom  he  seems  to  spare,  he  is 
really  keeping  soft  against  ills  to  come.  For  you 
are  >\Tong  if  you  suppose  that  any  one  is  exempt 
from  ill.  Even  the  man  who  has  prospered  long  will 
have  his  share  some  day  ;  whoever  seems  to  have 
been  released  has  only  been  reprieved.  Why  is  it 
that  God  afflicts  the  best  men  with  ill  health,  or 
sorrow,  or  some  other  misfortune  ?  For  the  same 
reason  that  in  the  army  the  bravest  men  are  assigned 
to  the  hazardous  tasks  ;  it  is  the  picked  soldier  that 
a  general  sends  to  surprise  the  enemy  by  a  night 
attack,  or  to  reconnoitre  the  road,  or  to  dislodge  a 
garrison.  Not  a  man  of  these  will  say  as  he  goes, 
My  commander  has  done  me  an  ill  turn,"  but 
instead,  "  He  has  paid  me  a  comphment."  In  hke 
manner,  all  those  who  are  called  to  suffer  what  would 
make  cowards  and  poltroons  weep  may  say,  "  God 
has  deemed  us  worthy  instruments  of  his  purpose  to  - 
discover  how  much  human  nature  can  endure." 

Flee  luxury,  flee  enfeebhng  good  fortune,  from 
which  men's  minds  grow  sodden,  and  if  nothing 
intervenes  to  remind  them  of  the  common  lot, 
they  sink,  as  it  were,  into  the  stupor  of  unending 
drunkenness.     The  man  who  has  always  had  glazed 

29 


SENECA 

vindicaverunt,  cuius  pedes  inter  fomenta  subinde 
mutata  tepuerunt,  cuius  cenationes  subditus  et  parie- 
tibus  circumfusus  calor  temperavit,  hunc  levis  aura  non 

10  sine  periculo  stringet.  Cum  omnia  quae  excesserunt 
modum  noceant,  periculosissima  felicitatis  intemperan- 
tia  est  :  movet  cerebrum,  in  vanas  mentes  imagines 
evocat,  multum  inter  falsum  ac  verum  mediae  cali- 
ginis  fundit.  Quidni  satius  sit  perpetuam  infelici- 
tatem  advocata  virtute  sustinere  quam  infinitis  atque 
immodicis  bonis  rumpi  ?  Lenior  ieiunio  mors  est, 
cruditate  dissiliunt. 

11  Hanc  itaque  rationem  dii  sequuntur  in  bonis  viris 
quam  in  discipulis  suis  praeceptores,  qui  plus  laboris 
ab  is  exigunt,  in  quibus  certior  spes  est.  Numquid 
tu  invisos  esse  Lacedaemoniis  liberos  suos  credis, 
quorum  experiuntur  indolem  publice  verberibus  ad- 
motis  ?  Ipsi  illos  patres  adhortantur,  ut  ictus 
flagellorum  fortiter  perferant,  et  laceros  ac  semi- 
animes  rogant,  perseverent  vulnera  praebere  vulne- 

12  ribus.  Quid  mirum,  si  dure  generosos  spiritus  deus 
temptat  ?  Numquam  virtutis  molle  documentum  est. 
Verberat  nos  et  lacerat  fortuna  ;  patiamur  !  Non 
est  saevitia,  certamen  est,  quod  quo^  saepius  ad- 
ierimus,  fortiores  erimus.  Solidissima  corporis  pars  est 
quam  frequens  usus  agitavit.  Praebendi  fortunae 
sumus,  ut  contra  illam  ab  ipsa  duremur  ;  paulatim 
nos  sibi  pares  faciet,  contemptum  periculorum  ad- 

13  siduitas  periclitandi  dabit.     Sic  sunt  nauticis  corpora 

^  quod  quo  Hermes,  after  Thomas  :   quo  id  Gertz  :   quod 
A^ :  quod  si  A^. 

30 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iv.  9-13 

windows  to  shield  him  from  a  draught,  whose  feet  have 
been  kept  warm  by  hot  apphcations  renewed  from 
time  to  time,  whose  dining-halls  have  been  tempered 
bv  hot  air  passing  beneath  the  floor  and  circulating 
round  the  walls, — this  man  will  run  great  risk  if  he 
is  brushed  by  a  gentle  breeze.  While  all  excesses 
are  hurtful,  the  most  dangerous  is  unhmited  good 
fortune.  It  excites  the  brain,  it  evokes  vain  fancies 
in  the  mind,  and  clouds  in  deep  fog  the  boundary 
between  falsehood  and  truth.  Would  it  not  be 
better,  summoning  virtue's  help,  to  endure  ever- 
lasting ill  fortune  than  to  be  bursting  Avith  unhmited 
and  immoderate  blessings  ?  Death  from  starvation 
comes  very  gently,  but  from  gorging  men  explode. 

And  so,  in  the  case  of  good  men  the  gods  follow 
the  same  rule  that  teachers  follow  with  their  pupils  ; 
they  require  most  effort  from  those  of  whom  they 
have  the  surest  hopes.  Do  you  imagine  that  the 
Lacedaemonians  hate  their  children  when  they  test 
their  mettle  by  lashing  them  in  public  ?  Their  own 
fathers  call  upon  them  to  endure  bravely  the  blows 
of  the  whip,  and  ask  them,  though  mangled  and 
half-dead,  to  keep  offering  their  wounded  bodies  to 
further  wounds.  Why,  then,  is  it  strange  if  God  tries 
noble  spirits  with  severity  ?  No  proof  of  \irtue  is  ever 
mild.  If  we  are  lashed  and  torn  by  Fortune,  let  us 
bear  it  ;  it  is  not  cruelty  but  a  struggle,  and  the 
oftener  we  engage  in  it,  the  stronger  we  shall  be. 
The  staunchest  member  of  the  body  is  the  one  that 
is  kept  in  constant  use.  We  should  offer  ourselves 
to  Fortune  in  order  that,  struggling  with  her,  we 
may  be  hardened  by  her.  Gradually  she  will  make 
us  a  match  for  herself.  Famiharity  with  exposure 
to  danger  will  give  contempt  for  danger.  '  So  the 


SENECA 

ferendo  mari  dura,  agricolis  manus  tritae,  ad  ex- 
cutienda  tela  militares  lacerti  valent,  agilia  sunt 
membra  cursoribus  ;  id  in  quoque  solidissimum  est 
quod  exercuit.  Ad  contemnendam  patientiam  ma- 
lorum  animus  patientia  pervenit ;  quae  quid  in  nobis 
efficere  possit  seies,  si  aspexeris  quantum  nationibus 

14  nudis  et  inopia  fortioribus  labor  praestet.  Omnes 
considera  gentes  in  quibus  Romana  pax  desinit, 
Germanos  dico  et  quicquid  circa  Histrum  vagarum 
gentium  occursat.  Perpetua  illos  hiemps,  triste 
caelum  premit,  maligne  solum  sterile  sustentat ; 
imbrem  culmo  aut  fronde  defendunt,  super  durata 
glacie  stagna  persultant,  in  alimentum  feras  captant. 

15  Miseri  tibi  videntur  ?  Nihil  miserum  est  quod  in 
naturam  consuetudo  perduxit ;  paulatim  enim 
voluptati  sunt  quae  necessitate  coeperunt.  Nulla 
illis  domicilia  nullaeque  sedes  sunt  nisi  quas  lassitude 
in  diem  posuit  ;  vilis  et  liic  quaerendus  manu  victus, 
horrenda  iniquitas  caeli,  intecta  corpora  ;  hoc  quod 
tibi  calamitas  videtur  tot  gentium  vita  est  !     Quid 

16  miraris  bonos  viros,  ut  confirmentur,  concuti  ?  Non 
est  arbor  solida  nee  fortis  nisi  in  quam  frequens 
ventus  inciu'sat ;  ipsa  enim  vexatione  constringitur 
et  radices  certius  figit ;  fragiles  sunt  quae  in  aprica 
valle  creverunt.  Pro  ipsis  ergo  bonis  viris  est,  ut 
esse    interriti    possint,    multum    inter    formidolosa 


"  Submission  to  the  course  of  nature  was  a  fundamental 
Stoic  doctrine. 
32 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iv.  13-16 

biidies  of  sailors  are  hardy  from  buffeting  the  sea, 
tb.e  hands  of  farmers  are  callous,  the  soldier's  muscles 
have  the  strength  to  hurl  weapons,  and  the  legs  of 
;i  runner  are  nimble.  In  each,  his  staamchest  member 
is  the  one  that  he  has  exercised. /By  enduring  ills 
the  mind  attains  contempt  for  the  endurance  of 
them ;  you  will  know  what  this  can  accomphsh  in 
our  own  case,  if  you  will  observe  how  much  the 
peoples  that  are  destitute  and,  by  reason  of  their 
want,  more  sturdy,  secure  by  toil.  Consider  all  the 
tribes  whom  Roman  civilization  does  not  reach — I 
mean  the  Germans  and  all  the  nomad  tribes  that 
assail  us  along  the  Danube.  They  are  oppressed  by 
eternal  winter  and  a  gloomy  sky,  the  barren  soil 
grudges  them  support,  they  keep  off  the  rain  with 
thatch  or  leaves,  they  range  over  ice-bound  marshes, 
and  hunt  wild  beasts  for  food.  Are  they  unhappy, 
do  you  think  ?  There  is  no  unhappiness  for  those 
whom  habit  has  brought  back  to  nature.**  For  what 
they  begin  from  necessity  becomes  gradually  a 
pleasure.  They  have  no  homes  and  no  resting- 
places  except  those  wliich  weariness  allots  for  the 
day  ;  their  food  is  mean  and  must  be  got  by  the 
hand ;  terrible  harshness  of  climate,  bodies  un- 
clothed,— such  for  countless  tribes  is  the  life  which 
seems  to  you  so  calamitous  !  Why,  then,  do  you 
wonder  that  good  men  are  shaken  in  order  that  they 
may  grow  strong  ?  No  tree  becomes  rooted  and 
sturdy  unless  many  a  wind  assails  it.  For  by  its 
very  tossing  it  tightens  its  grip  and  plants  its  roots 
more  securely  ;  the  fragile  trees  are  those  that  have 
grown  in  a  sunny  valley.  It  is,  therefore,  to  the 
advantage  even  of  good  men,  to  the  end  that  they 
may  be  unafraid,  to  live  constantly  amidst  alarms 
VOL.  I  D  33 


SENECA 

versari  et  aequo  animo  ferre  quae  non  sunt  mala 
nisi  male  sustinenti. 

1  5.  Adice  nunc,  quod  pro  omnibus  est  optimum 
quemque,  ut  ita  dicam,  militare  et  edere  operas. 
Hoc  est  propositum  deo  quod  sapienti  viro,  ostendere 
haec  quae  vulgus  appetit,  quae  reformidat,  nee  bona 
esse  nee  mala  ;  apparebit  autem  bona  esse,  si  ilia 
non  nisi  bonis  viris  tribuerit,  et  mala  esse,  si  tantum 

2  malis  irrogaverit.  Detestabilis  erit  caecitas,  si  nemo 
oculos  perdiderit,  nisi  cui  eruendi  sunt  :  itaque 
careant  luce  Appius  et  Metellus.  Non  sunt  divitiae 
bonum  ;  itaque  habeat  illas  et  Elius  leno,  ut  homines 
pecuniam,  cum  in  templis  consecraverint,  videant  et 
in  fornice.  Nullo  modo  magis  potest  deus  concupita 
traducere,   quam   si   ilia   ad   turpissimos   defert,   ab 

3  optimis  abigit.  "  At  iniquum  est  virum  bonum 
debilitari  aut  configi  aut  alligari,  malos  integris  cor- 
poribus  solutos  ac  delicatos  incedere."  Quid  porro  ? 
Non  est  iniquum  fortes  viros  arma  sumere  et  in  castris 
pernoctare  et  pro  vallo  obligatis  stare  vulneribus, 
interim  in  urbe  securos  esse  percisos  et  professos 
impudicitiam  ?  Quid  porro  ?  Non  est  iniquum  no- 
bilissimas  virgines  ad  sacra  facienda  noctibus  excitari, 

4  altissimo  somno  inquinatas  frui  ?  Labor  optimos 
citat.  Senatus  per  totum  diem  saepe  consulitur, 
cum  illo  tempore  vilissimus  quisque  aut  in  campo 


"  In  Stoic  dogma  virtus  was  the  sole  good  and  dedectis 
the  sole  evil.  All  things  not  related  to  these  standards 
were  considered  neither  good  nor  evil,  and,  consequently, 
negligible  {a5id((>opa). 

*  The  Vestal    Virgins,    who    maintained    the    public 
worship  of  Vesta. 
34 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  iv.  16-v.  4 

and  to  bear  -with  patience  the  happenings  which  are 
ills  to  him  only  who  ill  supports  them. 

Consider,  too,  that  it  is  for  the  common  good  to 
have  the  best  men  become  soldiers,  so  to  speak,  and 
do  service.     It  is  God's  purpose,  and  the  wise  man's 
as  well,  to  show  that  those  things  which  the  ordinary 
man  desires  and  those  which  he  dreads  are  really 
neither  goods  nor   evils."     It  vnW  appear,  however, 
that  there  are  goods,  if  these  are  bestowed  only  on 
good  men,  and  that  there  are  evils,  if  these  are  in- 
flicted only  on  the  evil.     Blindness  will  be  a  curse  if 
no  one  loses  his  eyes  but  the  man  who  deserves  to 
have  them  torn  out  ;   therefore  let  an  Appius  and  a 
Metellus  be  deprived  of  the  light.     Riches  are  not 
a  good  ;  therefore  let  even  the  panderer  EUus  possess 
them  in  order  that  men,  though  they  hallow  wealth 
in  temples,  may  see  it  also  in  a  brothel.     In  no 
better  way  can  God  discredit  what  we  covet  than 
by  bestowing  those  things  on  the  basest  men  while 
withholding  them  from  the  best.     "  But,"  you  say, 
"it  is  unjust  that  a  good  man  be  broken  in  health 
or    transfixed    or    fettered,    while    the    wicked    are 
pampered   and   stalk   at   large   with   whole    skins." 
What  then  ?     Is  it  not  unjust  that  brave  men  should 
take  up  arms,  and  stay  all  night  in  camp,  and  stand 
with  bandaged  wounds  before  the  rampart,  while 
perverts  and  professional  profligates  rest  secure  within 
the  city  ?     What  then  ?     Is  it  not  unjust  that  the 
noblest  maidens  ^  should  be  aroused  from   sleep  to 
perform  sacrifices  at  night,  while  others  stained  with 
sin    enjoy    soundest    slumber  ?     Toil    summons    the 
best  men.     The  senate  is  often  kept  in  session  the 
whole  day  long,  though  all  the  while  every  worthless 
fellow  is  either  amusing  himself  at  the  recreation- 

35 


SENECA 

otium  suum  oblectet  aut  in  popina  lateat  aut  tempus 
in  aliquo  circulo  terat.  Idem  in  hac  magna  re  publica 
fit  ;  boni  viri  laborant,  impendunt,  impenduntur  et 
volentes  quidem  ;  non  trahuntur  a  fortuna,  sequuntur 
illam  et  aequant  gradus.     Si  scissent,  antecessissent. 

5  Hanc  quoque  animosam  Demetri  fortissimi  viri  vocem 
audisse  me  memini :  "  Hoc  unum,"  inquit,  "  de  vobis, 
di  immortales,  queri  possum,  quod  non  ante  mihi 
notam  voluntatem  vestram  fecistis  ;  prior  enim  ad 
ista  venissem,  ad  quae  nunc  vocatus  adsum.  Vultis 
liberos  siunere  ?  vobis  illos  sustuli.  Vultis  aliquam 
partem  corporis  ?  sumite  ;  non  magnam  rem  pro- 
mitto,  cito  totum  relinquam.  Vultis  spiritum  ?  quidni  ? 
nuUam   moram   faciam,   quo   minus   recipiatis   quod 

6  dedistis.  A  volente  feretis  quicquid  petieritis.  Quid 
ergo  est  ?  Maluissem  offerre  quam  tradere.  Quid 
opus  fuit  auferre  ?  Accipere  potuistis  ;  sed  ne  nunc 
quidem  auferetis,  quia  nihil  eripitur  nisi  retinenti." 

Nihil  cogor,  nihil  patior  invitus  nee  servio  deo  sed 
assentior,  eo  quidem  magis,  quod  scio  omnia  certa  et 

7  in  aeternum  dicta  lege  decurrere.  Fata  nos  ducunt 
et  quantum  cuique  temporis  restat  prima  nascentium 
hora  disposuit.     Causa  pendet  ex  causa,  privata  ac 

S6 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  v.  4-7 

ground,  or  lurking  in  an  eating-house,  or  wasting  his 

time  in  sonae  gathering.     The  same  is  true  in  this 

great    commonwealth    of    the    world.     Good    men 

labour,  spend,  and  are  spent,  and  withal  willingly. 

Fortune  does  not  drag  them — they  follow  her,  and 

match   her   pace.     If  they   had   knowm   how,   they 

would    have     outstripped    her.     Here     is     another 

spirited  utterance  which,  I  remember,  I  heard  that 

most  valiant  man,   Demetrius,  make  :    "  Immortal 

gods,"  he  said,  "  I  have  this  one  complaint  to  make 

against  you,  that  you  did  not  earlier  make  known 

vour  will  to  me  ;  for  I  should  have  reached  the  sooner 

that  condition  in  which,  after  being  summoned,  I 

now  am.     Do  you  wish  to  take  my  children  ? — it  was 

for  you  that  I  fathered  them.     Do  you  wish  to  take 

some   member   of  my   body  ? — take   it  ;    no   great 

thing  am  I  offering  you  ;   very  soon  I  shall  leave  the 

whole.     Do  you  wish  to  take  my  life  ? — why  not  ?     I 

shall  make  no  protest  against  your  taking  back  what 

once  you  gave.     With  my  free  consent  you  shall  have 

whatever  you  may  ask  of  me.     What,  then,  is  my 

trouble  ?     I  should  have  preferred  to  offer  than  to 

relinquish.     What  was  the  need  to  take  by  force  ? 

You  might  have  had  it  as  a  gift.     Yet   even  now 

you  will  not  take  it  by  force,  because  nothing  can  be 

wTenched  away  from  a  man  unless  he  withholds  it." 

I  am  under  no  compulsion,  I  suffer  nothing  against 

my  will,  and  I  am  not  God's  slave  but  liis  follower, 

and   the    more    so,    indeed,    because    I    know    that 

everything  proceeds  according  to  law  that  is  fixed 

and  enacted  for  all  time.     Fate   guides  us,  and  it 

was  settled  at  the  first  hour  of  birth  what  length 

of  time   remains  for    each.     Cause    is   linked  with 

cause,  and  all  pubUc  and  private  issues  are  directed 

37 


SENECA 

publica  longus  ordo  rerum  trahit.  Ideo  fortiter  omne 
patiendum  est,  quia  non,  ut  putamus,  incidunt  cuncta 
sed  veniunt.  Olim  constitutum  est  quid  gaudeas, 
quid  fleas,  et  quamvis  magna  videatur  varietate 
singulorum  vita  distingui,  summa  in  unum  venit  ; 

8  aceipimus  peritura  perituri.  Quid  itaque  indignamur  ? 
Quid  querimur  ?  Ad  hoc  parti  ^  sumus.  Utatur  ut 
vult  suis  natura  corporibus  ;  nos  laeti  ad  omnia  et 
fortes  cogitemus  nihil  perire  de  nostro. 

Quid  est  boni  viri  ?  Praebere  se  fato.  Grande 
solacium  est  cum  universo  rapi  ;  quicquid  est  quod 
nos  sic  vivere,  sic  mori  iussit,  eadem  necessitate  et 
deos  alhgat.  Irrevocabilis  humana  pariter  ac  divina 
cursus  vehit.  Ille  ipse  omnium  conditor  et  rector 
scripsit   quidem  fata,   sed   sequitur  ;  semper  paret, 

9  semel  iussit.  "  Quare  tamen  deus  tam  iniquus  in 
distributione  fati  fuit,  ut  bonis  viris  paupertatem  et 
vulnera  et  acerba  funera  ascriberet  ?  "  Non  potest 
artifex  mutare  materiam  ;  hoc  passa  est.  Quaedam 
separari  a  quibusdam  non  possunt,  cohaerent,  in- 
dividua  sunt.  Languida  ingenia  et  in  somnum  itura 
aut  in  vigiham  somno  similUmam  inertibus  nectuntur 
elementis  ;  ut  efficiatur  vircumcuradicendus,fortiore 
fato   opus   est.     Non   erit  ilh   planum   iter  ;  sursum 

^  parti  Hermes  :  parati  A. 
38 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  v.  7-9 

bv  a  long  sequence  of  events.  Therefore  everything 
sliould  be  endured  with  fortitude,  since  things  do 
not,  as  we  suppose,  simply  happen — they  all  come. 
Long  ago  it  was  determined  what  would  make  you 
rejoice,  what  would  make  you  weep,  and  although 
the  hves  of  individuals  seem  to  be  marked  by  great 
dissimilarity,  yet  is  the  end  one — we  receive  what 
is  perishable  and  shall  ourselves  perish.  Why, 
therefore,  do  we  chafe  ?  why  complain  ?  For  this 
were  we  born.  Let  Nature  deal  with  matter,  whichf 
is  her  own,  as  she  pleases ;  let  us  be  cheerful  and 
brave  in  the  face  of  everything,  reflecting  that  it  is 
nothing  of  our  own  that  perishes. 

What,  then,  is  the  part  of  a  good  man  ?  To  offer 
himself  to  Fate.  It  is  a  great  consolation  that  it  is 
together  with  the  universe  we  are  swept  along ; 
whatever  it  is  that  has  ordained  us  so  to  hve,  so  to 
die,  bv  the  same  necessity  it  binds  also  the  gods. 
One  unchangeable  course  bears  along  the  affairs  of  ' 
men  and  gods  alike.  Although  the  great  creator 
and  ruler  of  the  universe  himself  WTote  the  decrees 
of  Fate,  yet  he  follows  them.  He  obeys  for  ever,  he  ' 
decreed  but  once.  "  Why,  however,"  do  you  ask, 
"  was  God  so  unjust  in  his  allotment  of  destiny  as 
to  assign  to  good  men  poverty,  wounds,  and  painful 
death?  "  It  is  impossible  for  the  moulder  to  alter 
matter ;  to  this  law  it  has  submitted.  Certain 
qualities  cannot  be  separated  from  certain  others  ; 
they  cling  together,  are  indivisible.  Natures  that 
are  listless,  that  are  prone  to  sleep,  or  to  a  kind  of 
wakefulness  that  closely  resembles  sleep,  are  com- 
posed of  sluggish  elements.  It  takes  sterner  stuflF  to 
make  a  man  who  deserves  to  be  mentioned  >vith 
consideration.     His  course  will  not  be  the  level  way  ; 

39 


SENECA 

oportet  ac  deorsum  eat,  fluctuetur  ac  navigium  in 
turbido  regat.  Contra  fortunam  illi  tenendus  est 
cursus  ;  multa  accident  dura,  aspera,  sed  quae  molliat 

10  et  complanet  ipse.  Ignis  aurum  probat,  miseria  fortes 
viros.  Vide  quam  alte  escendere  debeat  virtus  ;  scies 
illi  non  per  secura  vadendum  : 

Ardua  prima  via  est  et  quam  vix  mane  recentes 
enituntur  equi ;  medio  est  altissima  caelo, 
unde  mare  et  terras  ipsi  mihi  saepe  videre 
sit  timor  et  pavida  trepidet  formidine  pectus, 
ultima  prona  via  est  et  eget  moderamine  certo  ; 
tunc  etiam  quae  me  subiectis  excipit  undis, 
ne  ferar  in  praeceps,  Tethys  solet  ima  vereri. 

11  Haec  cum  audisset  ille  generosus  adulescens  : 
"  Placet,"  inquit,  "  via  ;  escendo.  Est  tanti  per  ista 
ire  casuro."  Non  desinit  acrem  animum  metu 
territare  : 

Utque  viam  teneas  nulloque  errore  traharis, 
per  tamen  adversi  gradieris  cornua  tauri 
Haemoniosque  arcus  violentique  ora  leonis. 

Post  haec  ait  :  "  lunge  datos  currus  !  His  quibus 
deterreri  me  putas  incitor.  Libet  illic  stare  ubi  ipse 
Sol  trepidat."  Humilis  et  inertis  est  tuta  sectari  ; 
per  alta  virtus  it. 
I  6.  "  Quare  tamen  bonis  viris  patitur  aliquid  mali 
deus  fieri  ?  "     Ille  vero  non  patitur.     Omnia  mala 

"  Ovid,  Met.  ii.  63  sqq.    The  speaker  is  Phoebus,  thej 
Sun-god,  who  seeks  to   dissuade  the  youthful  Phaethoi 
from  his  desire  to  drive  the  chariot  of  the  Sun. 

''  Ovid,  Met.  ii.  79  sqq. 

40 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  v.  9-vi.  1 

uphill  and  dowTihill  must  he  go,  be  tossed  about, 
and  guide  his  bark  through  stormy  waters  ;  he  must 
keep  his  course  in  spite  of  fortune.  Much  that  is 
hard,  much  that  is  rough  will  befall  him,  but  he 
himself  vnW  soften  the  one,  and  make  the  other 
siuooth.  Fire  tests  gold,  misfortune  brave  men.  See 
to  what  a  height  virtue  must  cHmb  !  you  viiW  find  that 
it  has  no  safe  road  to  tread  : 

The  way  is  steep  at  first,  and  the  coursers  strain 

To  climb  it,  fresh  in  the  early  morn.     They  gain 

The  crest  of  heaven  at  noon  ;  from  here  I  gaze 

Adown  on  land  and  sea  with  dread  amaze, 

And  oft  my  heart  will  beat  in  panic  fear. 

The  roadwaj'  ends  in  sharp  descent — keep  here 

A  sure  control ;  'twill  happen  even  so 

That  Tethys,  stretching  out  her  waves  below. 

Will  often,  while  she  welcomes,  be  affright 

To  see  me  speeding  downward  from  the  height." 

Ha%ing  heard  the  words,  that  noble  youth  replied, 
■  I  like  the  road,  I  shall  mount  ;  even  though  I  fall, 
it  ^^^ll  be  worth  while  to  travel  through  such  sights." 
But  the  other  did  not  cease  from  trying  to  strike  his 
bold  heart  with  fear  : 

And  though  you  may  not  miss  the  beaten  track, 
Nor,  led  to  wander,  leave  the  zodiac. 
Yet  through  the  Bull's  fierce  horns,  the  Centaur's  bow 
And  raging  Lion's  jaws  you  still  must  go.* 

In  reply  to  this  he  said,  "  Harness  the  chariot  you 
offered  ;  the  very  things  that  you  think  affright  me 
urge  me  on.  I  long  to  stand  aloft  where  even  the 
Sun-god  quakes  ^vith  fear."  The  groveller  and  the 
coward  ^^•ill  follow  the  safe  path  :  ^^rtue  seeks  the 
heights. 

"  But  why,"  you  ask,  "  does  God  sometimes  allow 
evil  to  befall  good  men  ?  "     Assuredly  he  does  not. 

41 


SENECA 

ab  illis  removit,  seel  era  et  flagitia  et  cogitationes  im- 
probas  et  avida  consilia  et  libidinem  caecam  et  alieno 
imminentem  avaritiam  ;  ipsos  tuetur  ac  vindieat  : 
numquid  hoc  quoque  aliquis  a  deo  exigit,  ut  bonorum 
virorum  etiam  sareinas  servet  ?     Remittunt  ipsi  hanc 

2  deo  curara  :  externa  contemnunt.  Democritus  divitias 
proiecit  onus  illas  bonae  mentis  existimans.  Quid 
ergo  miraris,  si  id  deus  bono  viro  accidere  patitur 
quod  vir  bonus  aliquando  vult  sibi  accidere  ?  Filios 
amittunt  viri  boni  ;  quidni,  cum  aliquando  et  occi- 
dant  ?  In  exilium  mittuntur ;  quidni,  cum  aliquando 
ipsi  patriam  non  repetituri  relinquant  ?  Occiduntur  ; 
quidni,  cum  aliquando  ipsi  sibi  manus  afFerant  ?  Quare 

3  quaedam  dura  patiuntur  ?  Ut  alios  pati  doceant ; 
nati  sunt  in  exemplar.     Puta  itaque  deum  dicere  : 

Quid  habetis  quod  de  me  queri  possitis,  vos, 
quibus  recta  placuerunt  ?  Aliis  bona  falsa  circumdedi 
et  animos  inanes  velut  longo  fallacique  somnio 
lusi.     Auro  illos  et  argento  et  ebore  adornavi,  intus 

4  boni  nihil  est.  Isti  quos  pro  felicibus  aspicis,  si  non 
qua  occurrunt  sed  qua  latent  videris,  miseri  sunt, 
sordidi,  turpes,  ad  similitudinem  parietum  suoruni 
extrinsecus  culti  ;  non  est  ista  solida  et  sincera 
felicitas  ;  crusta  est  et  quidem  tenuis.  Itaque  dum 
illis  licet  stare  et  ad  arbitrium  suum  ostendi,  nitent 


"  As,  notably,  did  Lucius  Junius  Brutus  and  Manlius 
Torquatus,  exalting  public  duty. 

*  Cato  is  the  favourite  exemplar. 
42 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  vi.  1^ 

E\  il  of  every  sort  he  keeps  far  from  them — sin  and 

crime,  evil  counsel  and  schemes  for  greed,  blind  lust 

and  avarice  intent  upon  another's  goods.     The  good 

man  himself  he  protects  and  delivers  :     does   any 

>' t"  require    of  God  that  he  should  also  guard  the 

d  man's  luggage  ?     Nay,  the  good  man  himself 

eves  God  of  this  concern  ;    he  despises  externals.  -^ 

Dcmocritus,  considering  riches  to  be  a  burden  to  the 

virtuous  mind,  renounced  them.     Why,  then,  do  you 

^vonder  if  God  suffers  that  to  be  the  good  man's  lot 

\\  liich   the    good   man    himself   sometimes    chooses 

sliould  be  his  lot  ?     Good  men  lose  their  sons  ;   why 

iii't,  since  sometimes  they  even  slay  them  ?  <•     They 

arc  sent  into  exile  ;    why  not,  since  sometimes  they 

'  untarily  leave  their  native  land,  never  to  return  ? 

.    ey   are   slain  ;     why   not,   since   sometimes   they 

voluntarily  lay  hand  upon   themselves  ? ''     Why  do 

they  suffer  certain  hardships  ?     It  is  that  they  may 

teach  others  to  endure  them  ;   they  were  born  to  be 

a  pattern.     Think,  then,  of  God  as  saying  :   "  What 

possible  reason  have  you  to  complain  of  me,  you 

who    have    chosen   righteousness  ?     Others    I    have 

surrounded   viith   unreal   goods,   and   have   mocked 

their  empty  minds,  as  it  were,  with  a  long,  deceptive 

dream.     I  have  bedecked  them  with  gold,  and  silver, 

and  ivory,  but  within  there  is  nothing  good.     The 

creatures   whom   you   regard   as   fortunate,   if  you 

could  see  them,  not  as  they  appear  to  the  eye,  but 

as  they   are  in  their   hearts,   are   wretched,   filthy, 

base — like  their  own  house-walls,  adorned  only  on 

the  outside.     Sound  and  genuine  such  good  fortune 

is  not ;    it  is  a  veneer,  and  that   a  thin  one.      So 

long,  therefore,  as  they  can  stand  firm  and  make  the 

show  that  they  desire,  they  glitter  and  deceive  ; 

43 


SENECA 

et  imponunt ;  cum  aliquid  incidit  quod  disturbet  ac 
detegat,  tunc  apparet  quantum  altae  ac  verae 
6  foeditatis  alienus  splendor  absconderit.  Vobis  dedi 
bona  certa,  mansura,  quanto  magis  versaverit  aliquis 
et  undique  inspexerit,  meliora  maioraque  :  permisi 
vobis  metuenda  contemnere,  cupiditates  fastidire  ; 
non  fulgetis  extrinsecus,  bona  vestra  introrsus  obversa 
sunt.  Sic  mundus  exteriora  contempsit  spectaculo 
sui  laetus.  Intus  omne  posui  bonum  ;  non  egere 
felicitate  felicitas  vestra  est. 

6  '  At  multa  incidunt  tristia,  horrenda,  dura  toleratu . ' 
Quia  non  poteram  vos  istis  subducere,  animos  vestros 
adversus  omnia  armavi ;  ferte  fortiter.  Hoc  est  quo 
deum  antecedatis  ;  ille  extra  patientiam  malorum  est, 
vos    supra    patientiam,     Contemnite   paupertatem  ; 

•  nemo  tam  pauper  vivit  quam  natus  est.  Contemnite 
dolorem ;  aut  solvetur  aut  solvet.  Contemnite  mortem  ; 
quae  vos  aut  finit  aut  transfert.  Contemnite  for- 
tunam ;  nullum  illi  telum  quo  feriret  animum  dedi. 

7  Ante  omnia  cavi,  ne  quid  vos  teneret  invitos  ;  patet 
exitus.  Si  pugnare  non  vultis,  licet  fugere.  Ideo  ex 
omnibus  rebus  quas  esse  vobis  necessarias  volui  nihil 
feci  facilius  quam  mori.  Prono  animam  loco  posui  ; 
trahitur,  adtendite  modo  et  videbitis  quam  brevis  ad 
libertatem  et  quam  expedita  ducat  via.  Non  tam 
longas  in  exitu  vobis  quam  intrantibus  moras  posui  ; 
alioqui  magnum  in  vos  regnum  fortuna   tenuisset, 

44 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  vi.  4-7 

Mhen,  however,  something  occurs  to  overthrow  and 
uncover  them,  then  you  see  what  deep-set  and 
genuine  ugliness  their  borrowed  splendour  hid.  But 
to  you  I  have  given  the  true  and  enduring  goods, 
wliich  are  greater  and  better  the  more  any  one  turns 
them  over  and  views  them  from  every  side.  I  have 
permitted  you  to  scorn  all  that  dismays  and  to  dis- 
■  n  desires.  Outwardly  you  do  not  shine  ;  your 
.  ds  are  directed  inward.  Even  so  the  cosmos,  re- 
j;  icing  in  the  spectacle  of  itself,  scorns  ever}'1;hing 
outside.  Within  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  every 
good  ;  your  good  fortune  is  not  to  need  good  fortune. 
'  Yet,'  you  say,  '  many  sorrows,  things  dreadful 
and  hard  to  bear,  do  befall  us.'  Yes,  because  I  could 
not  ^vithdraw  you  from  their  path,  I  have  armed 
your  minds  to  \\ithstand  them  all ;  endiu-e  with 
+  "titude.  In  this  you  may  outstrip  God  ;  he  is 
•mp^from  enduring  evil,  while  you  are  superior 
.M  it.  Scorn  poverty  ;  no  one  lives  as  poor  as  he 
was  boni.  Scorn  pain  ;  it  will  either  be  reheved  or 
itrlieve  you.  Scorn  death,  which  either  ends  you  or 
transfers  you.  Scorn  Fortune  ;  I  have  given  her  no 
weapon  with  which  she  may  strike  your  soul.  Above 
all,  I  have  taken  pains  that  nothing  should  keep  you 
here  against  your  ■\\ill ;  the  way  out  hes  open.  If 
you  do  not  choose  to  fight,  you  may  run  away. 
Therefore  of  all  things  that  I  have  deemed  necessary 
for  you,  I  have  made  nothing  easier  than  dying.  I 
have  set  hfe  on  a  downward  slope  :  if  it  is  prolonged, 
only  observe  and  you  will  see  what  a  short  and  easy 
path  leads  to  liberty. '  I  have  not  imposed  upon  you 
at  your  exit  the  weSrisome  delay  you  had  at  en- 
trance. Otherwise,  if  death  came  to  a  man  as 
slowly  as  his  birth,  Fortune  would  have  kept  her 

45 


SENECA 

8  si  homo  tarn  tarde  moreretur  quam  nascitur.  Omne 
temp  us,  omnis  vos  locus  doceat  quam  facile  sit 
renuntiare  naturae  ej  munus  illi  suum  impingere  ; 
inter  ipsa  altaria  et  sollemnes  sacrificantium  ritus, 
dum  optatur  vita,  mortem  condiscite.  Corpora  opima 
taurorum  exiguo  concidunt  vulnere  et  magnarum 
virium  animalia  humanae  manus  ictus  impellit ;  tenui 
ferro  commissura  cervicis  abrumpitur,  et  cum  articulus 
ille  qui  caput  collumque  committit  incisus  est,  tanta 

9  ilia  moles  corruit.  Non  in  alto  latet  spiritus  nee 
utique  ferro  eruendus  est  ;  non  sunt  vulnere  penitus 
impresso  scrutanda  praecordia  :  in  proximo  mors  est. 
Non  certum  ad  hos  ictus  destinavi  locum  ;  quacumque 
vis  pervium  est.  Ipsum  illud  quod  vocatur  mori,  quo 
anima  discedit  a  corpore,  brevius  est  quam  ut  sentiri 
tanta  velocitas  possit.  Sive  fauces  nodus  elisit,  sive 
spiramentum  aqua  praeclusit,  sive  in  caput  lapsos 
subiacentis  soli  duritia  comminuit,  sive  haustus  ignis 
cursum  animae  remeantis  interscidit ;  quicquid  est, 
properat.  Ecquid  erubescitis  ?  Quod  tam  cito  fit, 
timetis  diu  !  " 


I 


46 


ON  PROVIDENCE,  vi.  8-9 

great  dominion  over  you.  Let  every  season,  every 
place,  teach  you  how  easy  it  is  to  renounce  Nature  and 
Hing  her  gift  back  in  her  face.  In  the  very  presence 
(tf  the  altars  and  the  solemn  rites  of  sacrifice,  while 
\(iu  pray  for  life,  learn  well  concerning  death.  The 
fatted  bodies  of  bulls  fall  from  a  paltry  wound,  and 
creatures  of  mighty  strength  are  felled  by  one  stroke 
of  a  man's  hand  ;  a  tiny  blade  mil  sever  the  sutures 
(if  the  neck,  and  when  that  joint,  which  binds  to- 
gether head  and  neck,  is  cut,  the  body's  mighty 
mass  crmnples  in  a  heap.  No  deep  retreat  conceals 
tlie  soul,  you  need  no  knife  at  all  to  root  it  out,  no 
tleeply  driven  wound  to  find  the  vital  parts  ;  death 
lies  near  at  hand.  For  these  mortal  strokes  I  have 
St  t  no  definite  spot  ;  anywhere  you  wish,  the  way  is 
open.  Even  that  which  we  call  dying,  the  moment 
M  lien  the  breath  forsakes  the  body,  is  so  brief  that 
it<  fleetness  cannot  come  within  the  ken.  Whether 
the  throat  is  strangled  by  a  knot,  or  water  stops  the 
breathing,  or  the  hard  ground  crushes  in  the  skull  of 
one  falling  headlong  to  its  surface,  or  flame  inhaled 
cuts  off  the  course  of  respiration, — be  it  what  it  may, 
tlie  end  is  swift.  Do  you  not  blush  for  shame  ? 
You  dread  so  long  what  comes  so  quickly  !  "  )\^ 


47 


LIBER  II 

AD   SERENVM 

NEC  INIVRIAM  NEC  CONTVMELIAM 
ACCIPERE  SAPIENTEM 

(De  Constantia  Sapientis) 

1  1.  Tantum  inter  Stoicos,  Serene,  et  ceteros  sapien- 
tiam  professes  interesse  quantum  inter  feminas  et 
mares  non  immerito  dixerim,  cum  utraque  turba  ad 
vitae  societatem  tantundem  conferat,  sed  altera  pars 
ad  obsequendum,  altera  imperio  nata  sit.  Ceteri 
sapientes  molliter  et  blande,  ut  fere  domestici  et 
familiares  medici  aegi'is  corporibus,  non  qua  optimum 
et  celerrimum  est  medentur  sed  qua  licet;  Stoic 
virilem  ingressi  viam  non  ut  amoena  ineuntibus 
videatur  curae  habent,  sed  ut  quam  primum  nos 
eripiat  et  in  ilium  editum  verticem  educat,  qui  adeo 
extra  omnera  teli  iactum  surrexit,  ut  supra  fortunam 

2  emineat.  "  At  ardua  per  quae  vocamur  et  confragosa 
sunt."  Quid  enim  ?  Piano  aditur  excelsum  ?  Sed 
ne  tam  abrupta  quidem  sunt  quam  quidam  putant. 
Prima  tantum  pars  saxa  rupesque  habet  et  invii 
speciem,  sicut  pleraque  ex  longinquo  speculantibus 
48 


BOOK  II 

TO  SERENUS  ON  THE  FIRMNESS 
OF  THE  WISE  MAN 

The  Wise  Man  can  receive  neither  Injury  nor  Insult. 

iGHT  say  -with  good  reason,  Serenus,  that  there  is 
_reat  a  difference  between  the  Stoics  and  the  other 

lols  of  philosophy  as  there  is  between  males  and 

ales,  since  while  each  set  contributes  equally  to 
nan  society,  the  one  class  is  bom  to  obey,  the 
ither  to  command.  Other  philosophers,  using  gentle 
ind  persuasive  measures,  are  hke  the  intimate  family 
physician,  who,  commonly,  tries  to  cure  his  patients, 
ot  by  the  best  and  the  quickest  method,  but  as  he 
is  allowed.  The  Stoics,  ha\ing  adopted  the  heroic 
course,  are  not  so  much  concerned  in  making  it 
attractive  to  us  who  enter  upon  it,  as  in  having  it 
•escue  us  as  soon  as  possible  and  guide  us  to  that 
iofty  summit  which  rises  so  far  beyond  the  reach 
of  any  missile  as  to  tower  high  above  all  fortune. 
'  But,"  you  say,  "  the  path  by  which  we  are  called 
to  go  is  steep  and  rugged."  \Miat  of  it  ?  Can  the 
heights  be  reached  by  a  level  path  ?  But  the  way  is 
not  so  sheer  as  some  suppose.  The  first  part  only 
has  rocks  and  cliffs,  and  appears  impassable,  just  as 
many  places,  when  \-iewed  from  afar,  seem  often  to 

VOL.  I  E  49 


SENECA 

abscisa  et  conexa  videri  solent,  cum  aciem  longin- 
quitas  fallat,  deinde  propius  adeuntibus  eadem  ilia, 
quae  in  unum  congesserat  error  oeulorum,  paulatim 
adaperiuntur,  turn  illis  quae  praecipitia  ex  intervallo 
apparebant  redit  lene  fastigium. 
3  Nuper  cum  incidisset  mentio  M.  Catonis,  indigne 
ferebas,  sicut  es  iniquitatis  impatiens,  quod  Catonem 
aetas  sua  parum  intellexisset,  quod  supra  Pompeios 
et  Caesares  surgentem  infra  Vatinios  posuisset,  et 
tibi  indignum  videbatur,  quod  illi  dissuasuro  legem 
toga  in  foro  esset  erepta  quodque  a  rostris  usque 
ad  arcum  Fabianum  per  seditiosae  faetionis  manus 
traditus  voces  improbas  et  sputa  et  omnis  alias 
insanae  multitudinis  contumelias  pertulisset. 

1  2.  Turn  ego  respondi  habere  te,  quod  rei  publicae 
nomine    movereris,    quam    hinc    P.    Clodius,    hinc 
Vatinius  ac  pessimus  quisque  venundabat  et  caeca  j 
cupiditate  correpti  non  intellegebant  se  dum  vendunt 
et  venire.     Pro  ipso  quidem  Catone  securum  te  esse  I 
iussi  ;   nullam  enim  sapientem  nee  iniuriam  accipere 
nee  contumeliam  posse,  Catonem  autem  certius  ex-  j 
emplar  sapientis  viri  nobis  deos  immortalis  dedisse  | 
quam  Ulixen  et  Herculem  prioribus  saeculis.     Hos  i 
enim  Stoici  nostri  sapientes  pronuntiaverunt,  invictos 
laboribus    et    contemptores    voluptatis    et    victores 

2  omnium  terrorum.  Cato  non  cum  feris  manus  con- 
tulit,  quas  consectari  venatoris  agrestisque  est,  nee 
50 


ON  FIRMNESS,  i.  2-n.  2 

he  an  unbroken  steep  since  the  distance  deceives  the 

:    then,  as  you  draw  nearer,  these  same  places, 

oh  by  a  trick  of  the  eyes  had  merged  into  one, 

'!  en  up  gradually,  and  what  seemed  from  a  distance 

I v/ccipitous  is  now  reduced  to  a  gentle  slope. 

Recently,    when    there    happened    to    be    some 

uitntion  of  Marcus  Cato,  you,  \\iih.  your  impatience 

01  injustice,  grew  indignant  because  Cato's  o^\-n  age 

had  failed  to  understand  him,  because  it  had  rated 

liim  lower  than   any   \'atinius   though  he   towered 

>e  any  Pompey  and  Caesar  ;    and  it  seemed  to 

,   shameful   that   when   he   was   about   to   speak 

inst  some  law  in  the  forum,  his  toga  was  torn  from 

-houlders,  and  that,  after  he  had  been  hustled 

I  lawless  mob  all  the  way  from  the  rostrum  to  the 

h  of  Fabius,  he  had  to  endure  \ile  language,  and 

tie.  and  all  the   other  insults  of  a  maddened 

vd. 

Vnd  then  I  made  answer  that  on  behalf  of  the  state 

.  had  good  reason  to  be  stirred — the  state  which 

■lius  Clodius  on  the  one  hand,  Vatinius  and  all 

greatest  rascals  on  the  other,  were  putting  up 

sale,  and,  carried  away  by  bhnd  cupidity,  did 

realize  that,  while  they  were  selhng,  they  too 

e  being  sold.     For  Cato  himself  I  bade  you  have 

•oncem,  for  no  wise  man  can  receive  either  injury 

insult.     I  said,  too,  that  in  Cato  the  immortal  L — " 

gods  had  given  to  us  a  truer  exemplar  of  the  wise   ' 

man  than  earher  ages  had  in  Ulysses  and  Hercules. 

For  we  Stoics  have  declared  that  these  were  wise 

men,  because  they  were  unconquered  by  struggles, 

were    despisers    of  pleasure,    and    \ictors    over    all 

terrors.     Cato  did  not  grapple  with  wild  beasts — 

Uie  pursuit  of  these  is  for  the  huntsman  and  the 

51 


SENECA 

monstra  igne  ac  ferro  persecutus  est  nee  in  ea 
tempora  incidit  quibus  credi  posset  caelum  umeris 
xinius  inniti.  Excussa  iam  antiqua  credulitate  et 
saeculo  ad  summam  perducto  soUertiam  cum  ambitu 
congressus,  multiform!  malo,  et  cum  potentiae  im- 
mensa  cupiditate,  quam  totus  orbis  in  tres  divisus 
satiare  non  poterat,  adversus  vitia  civitatis  degene- 
rantis  et  pessum  sua  mole  sidentis  stetit  solus  et 
cadentem  rem  publicam,  quantum  modo  una  retrahi 
manu  poterat,  tenuit,  donee  abstractus  comitem  se 
diu  sustentatae  ruinae  dedit  simulque  exstincta  sunt 
quae    nefas    erat    dividi ;     neque    enim    Cato    post 

3  libertatem  vixit  nee  libertas  post  Catonem.  Huic  tu 
putas  iniuriam  fieri  potuisse  a  populo,  quod  aut 
praeturam  illi  detraxit  aut  togam  ?  Quod  sacrum 
illud  caput  purgamentis  oris  adspersit  ?  Tutus  est 
sapiens  nee  ulla  affici  aut  iniuria  aut  contumelia 
potest. 

1  3.  Videor  mihi  intueri  animum  tuum  incensum  et 
effervescentem  ;  paras  adclamare  :  "  Haec  sunt  quae 
auctoritatem  praeceptis  vestris  detrahant.  Magna 
promittitis  et  quae  ne  optari  quidem,  nedum  credi 
possint  ;  deinde  ingentia  locuti  cum  pauperem 
negastis  esse  sapientem,  non  negatis  solera  illi  et 
servum  et  tectum  et  cibum  deesse,  cum  sapien- 
tem   negastis  insanire,  non   negatis    et  alienari   et 

"  i.e.,  Caesar,  Pompey,  and  Crassus. 
52 


ON  FIRMNESS,  ii.  2-ni.  1 

peasant ;  he  did  not  hunt  down  monsters  with  fire 
and  sword,  nor  did  he  chance  to  hve  in  the  times 
when  it  was  possible  to  beUeve  that  the  heavens 
rt-ted  on  one  man's  shoulders.     In  an  age  when  the 
old  credulity  had  long  been  thro^\-n  aside,  and  know- 
ledge had  by  time  attained  its  highest  development, 
he  came  into  conflict  with  ambition,  a  monster  of 
many  shapes,  with  the  boundless  greed  for  power 
w  hich  the  division  of  the  whole  world  among  three 
men  *  could  not  satisfy.     He  stood  alone  against  the 
\ices   of  a   degenerate   state   that    was    sinking   to 
destruction  beneath  its  very  weight,  and  he  stayed 
the  fall  of  the  republic  to  the  utmost  that  one  man's 
hand  could  do  to  draw  it  back,  until  at  last  he  was 
himself  withdra^vn  and  shared  the  downfall  which  he 
had  so  long  averted,  and  the  two  whom  heaven  willed 
-^hould  never  part  were  blotted  out  together.     For 
Cato  did  not  survive  freedom,  nor  freedom  Cato. 
Think  you  that  what  the  people  did  to  such  a  man 
CDuld  have  been  an  injury,  even  if  they  tore  from 
liim  either  his  praetorship  or  his  toga  ?    even  if  they 
t)espattered   his  sacred   head  with  filth  from   their 
n^ouths  ?     The  wise  man  is  safe,  and  no  injury  or 
insult  can  touch  him. 

I  imagine  that  I  see  you  flaring  up  in  a  temper 
and  about  to  boil  over  ;  you  are  getting  ready  to 
exclaim  :  "  This  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  detracts 
from  the  weight  of  the  teachings  of  you  Stoics.  You 
make  great  promises,  promises  which  are  not  even  to 
be  desired,  still  less  believed ;  then  after  all  your 
big  words,  while  you  deny  that  a  wise  man  is  poor, 
you  do  not  deny  that  he  usually  possesses  neither 
slave  nor  house  nor  food  ;  while  you  deny  that  a 
wise  man  is  mad,  you  do  not  deny  that  he  does  lose 

53 


SENECA 

parum  sana  verba  emittere  et  quicquid  vis  morbi 
cogit  audere,  cum  sapientem  negastis  servum  esse, 
idem  non  itis  infitias  et  veniturum  et  imperata 
facturum  et  domino  suo  servilia  praestaturum  mini- 
steria.     Ita  sublato  alte  supercilio  in   eadem   quae 

2  ceteri  descenditis  mutatis  rerum  nominibus.  Tale 
itaque  aliquid  et  in  hoc  esse  suspicor,  quod  prima 
specie  pulchrum  atque  magnificum  est,  nee  iniuriam 
nee  contumeliam  accepturum  esse  sapientem.  Mul- 
tum  autem  interest,  utrum  sapientem  extra  indig- 
nationem  an  extra  iniuriam  ponas.  Nam  si  dicis 
ilium  aequo  animo  laturum,  nullum  habet  privilegium, 
contigit  illi  res  vulgaris  et  quae  discitur  ipsa  in- 
iuriarum  assiduitate,  patientia  ;  si  negas  accepturum 
iniuriam,  id  est  neminem  illi  temptaturum  facere, 
omnibus  relictis  negotiis  Stoicus  fio." 

3  Ego  vero  sapientem  non  imaginario  honore  ver- 
borum  exornare  constitui,  sed  eo  loco  ponere  quo 
nulla  permittatur  iniuria.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Nemo  erit 
qui  lacessat,  qui  temptet  ?  "  Nihil  in  rerum  natura 
tam  sacrum  est,  quod  sacrilegum  non  inveniat,  sed 
non  ideo  divina  minus  in  sublimi  sunt,  si  exsistunt 
qui  magnitudinem  multum  ultra  se  positam  non 
tacturi  appetant ;  invulnerabile  est  non  quod  non 
feritur,   sed  quod  non  laeditur  ;     ex  hac  tibi  nota 

4  sapientem  exhibebo.  Numquid  dubium  est,  quin 
certius  robur  sit  quod  non  vincitur  quam  quod  non 

»  While  the  Stoics  preached,  and  sometimes  practised, 
the  doctrine  of  participation  in  public  affairs,  they  emphasized 
the  desirability  of  peaceful  retirement  as  a  means  to  the 
higher  activity  of  intellectual  research.  See  Seneca,  De 
Otio,  5.  8;   6.  4. 

54 


ON  FIRMNESS,  iii.  1-4 

^is  reason,  that  he  babbles  crazy  words,  that  he  M-ill 
.enture  to  do  whatever  his  violent  disorder  impels 
lira  to  do  ;  while  you  deny  that  a  wise  man  is  ever  a 
1 1\  e,  you  do  not  likewise  go  on  to  deny  that  he  will 
-old,  that  he  -will  do  what  he  is  ordered  to  do,  and 

■  .der  to  his  master  the  services  of  a  slave.  So,  for 
all  your  lofty  assumption,  you  reach  the  same  level  as 
the  other  schools — only  the  names  of  things  are 
■hanged.  And  so  I  suspect  that  something  of  this 
-ort  lurks  behind  this  maxim  also,  '  A  wise  man  will 
i-eceive  neither  injury  nor  insult ' — a  maxim  which,  at 
first  sight,  appears  noble  and  splendid.  But  it  makes 
a  great  difference  whether  you  place  the  wise  man 
beyond  feehng  injured  or  beyond  being  injured. 
lor  if  you  say  that  he  will  bear  injury  calmly,  he  has 
no  peculiar  advantage  ;  he  is  fortunate  in  possessing 
a  common  quaUty,  one  which  is  acquired  from  the 
very  repetition  of  injuries — namely,  endurance.  If 
yuu  say  that  he  Avill  not  receive  injury,  that  is,  that 
no  one  will  attempt  to  injure  him,  then,  abandoning 
all  other  business,  I  am  for  becoming  a  Stoic."  " 

I  assuredly  did  not  intend  to  deck  up  the  wise 
man  with  the  fanciful  honour  of  words,  but  to  place 
him  in  the  position  where  no  injury  may  reach  him. 
'■  What  then?  "  you  say ;  "  will  there  be  no  one  to 
a--ail  him,  no  one  to  attempt  it  ?  "  Nothing  in  the 
world  is  so  sacred  that  it  will  not  find  some  one  to 
profane  it,  but  holy  things  are  none  the  less  exalted, 
even  if  those  do  exist  who  strike  at  a  greatness  that 
is  set  far  beyond  them,  and  which  they  will  never 
damage.  The  invulnerable  thing  is  not  that  which  is 
not  struck,  but  that  which  is  not  hurt ;  by  this  mark 
I  will  show  you  the  wise  man.  Is  there  any  doubt  j 
that  the  strength  that  cannot  be  overcome  is  a  truer* 

55 


SENECA 

lacessitur,  cum  dubiae  sint  vires  inexpertae,  at  merito 
certissima  firmitas  habeatur,  quae  omnis  incursus 
respuit  ?  Sic  tu  sapientem  melioris  scito  esse 
naturae,  si  nulla  illi  iniuria  nocet,  quam  si  nulla  fit. 
Et  ilium  fortem  virum  dicam,  quern  bella  non  subi- 
gunt  nee  admota  vis  hostilis  exterret,  non  cui  pingue 

6  otium  est  inter  desides  populos.  Hoc  igitur  dico, 
sapientem  nulli  esse  iniuriae  obnoxium  ;  itaque  non 
refert,  quam  multa  in  ilium  coiciantur  tela,  cum  sit 
nulli  penetrabilis.  Quomodo  quorundam  lapidum 
inexpugnabilis  ferro  duritia  est  nee  secari  adamas 
aut  caedi  vel  deteri  potest  sed  incurrentia  ultro 
retundit,  quemadmodum  quaedam  non  possunt  igne 
consumi  sed  flamma  circumfusa  rigorem  suum  liabi- 
tumque  conservant,  quemadmodum  proiecti  quidam 
in  altum  scopuli  mare  frangunt  nee  ipsi  ulla  saevitiae 
vestigia  tot  verberati  saeeulis  ostentant  ;  ita  sapientis 
animus  solidus  est  et  id  roboris  collegit,  ut  tarn  tutus 
sit  ab  iniuria  quam  ilia  quae  rettuli. 

1  4.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  erit  aliquis  qui  sapienti 
facere  temptet  iniuriam  ?  "  Temptabit,  sed  non 
perventuram  ad  eum  ;  maiore  enim  intervallo  a 
contactu  inferior um  abductus  est,  quam  ut  ulla  vis 
noxia  usque  ad  ilium  vires  suas  perferat.  Etiam 
cum  potentes  et  imperio  editi  et  consensu  servientium 
validi  nocere  intendent,  tam  citra  sapientiam  omnes 
eorum  impetus  deficient,  quam  quae  nervo  tormentis- 
56 


ON  FIRMNESS,  ni.  4-iv.  1 

sort  than  that  which  is  unassailed,  seeing  that  un-  ^ 
tested  powers  are  dubious,  whereas  the  stabihty  that 
repels  all  assaults  is  rightly  deemed  most  genuine  ? 
So  you  must  know  that  the  ^\^se  man,  if  no  injury 
hurts  him,  will  be  of  a  higher  tj^e  than  if  none  is 
offered  to  him,  and  the  brave  man,  I  should  say,  is  he 
whom  war  cannot  subdue,  whom  the  onset  of  a  hostile 
force  cannot    terrify,  not   he  who  battens   at   ease 
among  the  idle  populace.     Consequently  I  will  assert 
this — that  the  -v^ise  man  is  not  subject  to  any  injury. 
It  does  not  matter,  therefore,  how  many  darts  are 
hurled  against  him,  since  none  can  pierce  him.     As 
the  hardness  of  certain  stones  is  impervious  to  steel, 
and  adamant  cannot  be  cut  or  hewed  or  ground,  but 
in  turn  blunts  whatever  comes  into  contact  with  it ;  as 
certain  substances  cannot  be  consumed  by  fire,  but, 
though  encompassed  by  flame,  retain  their  hardness 
and  their  shape  ;    as  certain  cliffs,  projecting  into 
the  deep,  break  the  force  of  the  sea,  and,  though 
lashed   for   countless   ages,   show   no   traces   of  its 
wrath,  just  so   the   spirit   of  the  wise  man  is   im- 
pregnable,   and   has   gathered   such   a   measure    of 
strength  as  to  be  no  less  safe  from  injury  than  those 
things  which  I  have  mentioned. 

"  What  then  ?  "  you  say ;  "  will  there  be  no  one 
who  will  attempt  to  do  the  wise  man  injurv'  ?  " 
Yes,  the  attempt  will  be  made,  but  the  injury  will 
not  reach  him.  For  the  distance  which  separates 
him  from  contact  with  his  inferiors  is  so  great  that 
no  baneful  force  can  extend  its  power  all  the  way  to 
him.  Even  when  the  mighty,  exalted  by  authority 
and  powerful  in  the  support  of  their  ser\itors,  strive 
to  injure  him,  all  their  assaults  on  wisdom  will  fall  as 
short  of  their  mark  as  do  the  missiles  shot  on  high  by 


SENECA 

ve  in  altum  exprimuntur,  cum  extra  visum  exsilierint. 

2  citra  caelum  tamen  flectuntur.  Quid  ?  Tu  putas 
turn,  cum  stolidus  ille  rex  multitudine  telorum  diem 
obscuraret,  ullam  sagittam  in  solem  incidisse  aut 
demissis  in  profundum  catenis  Neptunum  potuisse 
cont.ingi  ?  Ut  caelestia  humanas  manus  effugiunt 
et  ab  his  qui  templa  diruunt  ac  simulacra  conflant 
nihil  divinitati  nocetur,  ita  quicquid  fit  in  sapientem 
proterve,  petulanter,  superbe,  frustra  temptatur. 
"  At  satius   erat  neminem   esse   qui  facere  vellet." 

3  Rem  difficilem  optas  humano  generi,  innocentiam  ; 
et  non  fieri  eorum  interest  qui  facturi  sunt,  non 
eius  qui  pati  ne  si  fiat  quidem  potest.  Immo  nescio 
an  magis  vires  sapientiae  ostendat  tranquillitas  inter 
lacessentia,  sicut  maximum  argumentum  est  im- 
peratoris  armis  virisque  pollentis  tuta  securitas  in 
hostium  terra. 

1  5.  Dividamus,  si  tibi  videtur,  Serene,  iniuriam  a 
contumelia.  Prior  ilia  natura  gravior  est,  haec  levior 
et  tantum  delicatis  gravis,  qua  non  laeduntur  homines 
sed  ofFenduntur.  Tanta  est  tamen  animorum  dissolutio 
et  vanitas,  ut  quidam  nihil  acerbius  putent.  Sic  in- 
venies  servum  qui  flagellis  quam  colaphis  caedi  malit 
et  qui  mortem  ac  verbera  tolerabiliora  credat  quam 

2  contumeliosa  verba.  Ad  tantas  ineptias  perventum 
est,    ut    non    dolore    tantum    sed    doloris    opinione 


"  i.e.,  Xerxes.     The  incidents    mentioned  are  associated 
respectively  with  his  prowess  before  Thermopylae  and  his 
wrath  expended  upon  the  Hellespont ;  cf.  Herodotus,  vii.  226 
and  35. 
58 


ON  FIRMNESS,  iv.  1-v.  2 

b'  iwstring  or  catapult,  which  though  they  leap  beyond 
uur  \-ision,  yet  curve  do^^■nwards  this  side  of  heaven. 
Tell  me,  do  you  suppose  that  when  that  stupid  king  " 
darkened  the  day  \\1th  the  shower  of  his  darts,  any 
arrow  fell  upon  the  sun,  or  that  he  was  able  to  reach 
Neptune  when  he  lowered  his  chains  into  the  deep  ? 
As  heavenly  things  escape  the  hands  of  man  and 
divinity  suffers  no  harm  from  those  Avho  demoUsh 
temples  and  melt  down  images,  so  every  wanton, 
insolent,  or  haughty  act  directed  against  the  wise 
man  is  essayed  in  vain.  "  But  it  would  be  better," 
you  say,  "  if  no  one  cared  to  do  such  things."  You 
are  praying  for  what  is  a  hard  matter — that  human 
beings  should  do  no  ^vrong.  And  that  such  acts  be 
not  done  is  profitable  to  those  who  are  prone  to  do 
them,  not  to  him  who  cannot  be  affected  by  them 
even  if  they  are  done.  No,  I  am  inclined  to  think 
that  the  power  of  \^-isdom  is  better  sho\\Ti  by  a  display 
of  calmness  in  the  midst  of  provocation,  just  as  the 
greatest  proof  that  a  general  is  mighty  in  his  arms 
and  men  is  his  quiet  unconcern  in  the  country'  of  the 
enemy. 

Let  us  make  a  distinction,  Serenus,  if  you  Uke, 
between  injury  and  insult.  The  former  is  by  its 
nature  more  serious ;  the  latter,  a  slighter  matter — 
serious  only  to  the  thin-skinned— for  men  are  not 
harmed,  but  angered  by  it.  Yet  such  is  the  weakness 
and  vanity  of  some  men's  minds,  there  are  those  who 
think  that  nothing  is  more  bitter.  And  so  you  will 
find  the  slave  who  would  rather  be  struck  with  the 
lash  than  the  fist,  who  considers  stripes  and  death 
more  endurable  than  insulting  words.  To  such  a 
pitch  of  absurdity  have  we  come  that  we  are  harrowed 
not  merely  by  pain  but  by  the  idea  of  pain,  Uke 

59 


SENECA 

vexemur  more  puerorum,  quibus  metum  incutit 
umbra  et  personarum  deformitas  et  depravata  facies, 
lacrimas  vero  evocant  nomina  parum  grata  auribus  et 
digitorum  motus  et  alia  quae  impetu  quodam  erroris 

3  improvidi  refugiunt.  Iniuria  propositum  hoc  habet 
aliquem  malo  adficere  ;  male  autem  sapientia  non 
relinquit  locum,  unum  enim  illi  malum  est  turpitudo, 
quae  intrare  eo  ubi  iam  virtus  honestumque  est  non 
potest.  Ergo,  si  iniuria  sine  malo  nulla  est,  malum 
nisi  turpe  nullum  est,  turpe  autem  ad  lionestis 
occupatum  pervenire  non  potest,  iniuria  ad  sapientem 
non  pervenit.  Nam  si  iniuria  alicuius  mali  patientia 
est,  sapiens  autem  nullius  mali  est  patiens,  nulla  ad 

4  sapientem  iniuria  pertinet.  Omnis  iniuria  deminutio 
eius  est  in  quern  incurrit,  nee  potest  quisquam  in- 
iuriam  accipere  sine  aliquo  detrimento  vel  dignitatis 
vel  corporis  vel  rerum  extra  nos  positarum.  Sapiens 
autem  nihil  perdere  potest ;  omnia  in  se  reposuit, 
nihil  fortunae  credit,  bona  sua  in  solido  habet  con- 
tentus  virtute,  quae  fortuitis  non  indiget  ideoque 
nee  augeri  nee  minui  potest  ;  nam  et  in  summum 
perducta  incrementi  non  habent  locum  et  nihil  eripit 
fortuna  nisi  quod  dedit  ;  virtutem  autem  non  dat, 
ideo  nee  detrahit ;  libera  est,  inviolabilis,  immota, 
inconcussa,  sic  contra  casus  indurat,  ut  ne  inclinari 

5  quidem,  nedum  vinci  possit  ;  adversus  adparatus 
terribilium  rectos  oculos  tenet,  nihil  ex  vultu  mutat, 
sive  illi  dura  sive  secunda  ostentantur.     Itaque  nihil 


31  sqq 
60 


Perhaps  the  superstitious  gesture  described  by  Persius,  ii. 
qq.,  as  a  charm  against  the  evil  ej^e. 


ox  FIRMNESS,  v.  2-5 

children  who  are  terror-stricken  by  darkness  and  the 
ufrliness  of  masks  and  a  distorted  countenance  ;  who 
are  provoked  even  to  tears  by  names  that  are  un- 
pleasant to  their  ears,  by  gesticulation  of  the  fingers,** 
and  other  things  which  in  their  ignorance  they  shrink 
from  in  a  kind  of  blundering  panic.     Injury  has  as  its 
aim  to  \-isit  e\'i\  upon  a  person.    But  -wisdom  leaves  no 
room  for  e\il,  for  the  only  e\'il  it  knows  is  baseness, 
which  cannot   enter  where  ^-irtue  and  uprightness 
already  abide.     Consequently,  if  there   can  be   no 
injury  -sWthout  e\'il,  no  e\-il  \vithout  baseness,  and  if, 
moreover,    baseness    cannot   reach   a   man   already 
possessed  by  uprightness,  then  injury  does  not  reach 
the  ^vise  man.     For  if  injury  is  the  experiencing  of 
•^ome  evil,  if,  moreover,  the  wise  man  can  experience 
no  e\il,  no  injur}"  affects  a  wise  man.     All  injur}-  is 
damaging  to  him  who  encounters  it,  and  no  man  can 
receive  injury  ^vithout  some  loss  either  in  respect  to 
his  position  or  his  person  or  things  external  to  us. 
But  the  ^^^se  man  can  lose  nothing.     He  has  every- 
thing invested  in  himself,  he  trusts  nothing  to  fortune, 
his  own  goods  are  secure,  since  he  is  content  with 
virtue,  which  needs  no  gift  from  chance,  and  which, 
therefore,  can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished. 
For  that  which  has  come  to  the  full  has  no  room  for 
further  growth,  and  Fortune  can  snatch  away  only 
Avhat  she  herself  has  given.     But  virtue  she  does 
not    give  ;     therefore    she    cannot    take    it    away. 
\'irtue  is  free,   in\iolable,   unmoved,   unshaken,   so 
steeled  against  the  blows  of  chance  that  she  cannot 
be  bent,  much  less  broken.     Facing  the  instruments 
of  torture  she  holds  her  gaze  unflinching,  her  expres- 
sion changes  not  at  all,  whether  a  hard  or  a  happy 
lot  is  sho^\'n  her.     Therefore  the  wise  man  will  lose 

61 


SENECA 

perdet  quod  perire  sensurus  sit ;  unius  enim  in 
possessione  virtutis  est,  ex  qua  depelli  numquam 
potest,  ceteris  precario  utitur  •  quis  autem  iactura 
movetur  alieni  ?  Quodsi  iniuria  nihil  laedere  potest 
ex  his  quae  propria  sapientis  sunt,  quia  virtute  salva^ 
sua  salva  sunt,  iniuria  sapienti  non  potest  fieri. 

6  Megaram  Demetrius  ceperat,  cui  cognomen  Pohor- 
cetes  fuit.  Ab  hoc  Stilbon  philosophus  interrogatus , 
num  ahquid  perdidisset  :  "  Nihil,"  inquit,  "  omnia 
mea  mecum  sunt."  Atqui  et  patrimonium  eius  in 
praedam  cesserat  et  filias  rapuerat  hostis  et  patria  in 
ahenam  dicionem  pervenerat  et  ipsum  rex  circumfusus 
victoris  exercitus  armis  ex  superiore  loco  rogitabat. 

7  At  ille  victoriam  illi  excussit  et  se  urbe  capta  non 
invictum  tantum  sed  indemnem  esse  testatus  est. 
Habebat  enim  vera  secum  bona,  in  quae  non  est 
manus  iniectio,  at  quae  dissipata  et  direpta  fere- 
bantur,  non  iudicabat  sua  sed  adventicia  et  nutum 
fortunae  sequentia.  Ideo  ut  non  propria  dilexerat ; 
omnium  enim  extrinsecus  adfluentium  lubrica  et 
incerta  possessio  est. 

1  6.  Cogita  nunc,  an  huic  fur  aut  calumniator  aut 
vicinus  impotens  aut  dives  aliquis  regnum  orbae 
senectutis  exercens  facere  iniuriam  possit,  cui  bellum 
et  hostis  et  ille  egregiam  artem  quassandarum  urbium 

2  professus  eripere  nihil  potuit.     Inter  micantis  ubique 

^  salva  added  by  Madvig. 
62 


ON  FIRMNESS,  v.  5-vi.  2 

nothing  which  he  will  be  able  to  regard  as  loss  ;  for 
the  only  possession  he  has  is  \-irtue,  and  of  this  he 
can  never  be  robbed.  Of  all  else  he  has  merely  the 
use  on  sufferance.  WTio,  however,  is  moved  by  the 
loss  of  that  which  is  not  his  ovm  ?  But  if  injury  can 
do  no  harm  to  anything  that  a  %\-ise  man  owns,  since 
if  his  \lrtue  is  safe  his  possessions  are  safe,  then  no 
injur\-  can  happen  to  the  mse  man. 

^^Tien  Demetrius,  the  one  who  had  the  appellation 
of  Poliorcetes,  had  captured  Megara,  he  questioned 
Stilbo,  a  philosopher,  to  find  out  whether  he  had  lost 
anything,  and  his  answer  was,  "  Nothing  ;  I  have 
all  that  is  mine  \\'ith  me."  Yet  his  estate  had  been 
given  up  to  plunder,  his  daughters  had  been  out- 
raged by  the  enemy,  his  native  city  had  passed 
under  foreign  sway,  and  the  man  himself  was  being 
questioned  by  a  king  on  his  throne,  ensconced  amid 
the  arms  of  his  \ictorious  army.  But  he  ^^Tested 
the  victory  from  the  conqueror,  and  bore  ^^-itness 
that,  though  his  city  had  been  captured,  he  himself 
was  not  only  unconquered  but  unharmed.  For  he 
had  viith  him  his  true  possessions,  upon  which  no 
hand  can  be  laid,  while  the  property  that  was  being 
scattered  and  pillaged  and  plundered  he  counted 
not  his  own,  but  the  adventitious  things  that  follow 
the  beck  of  Fortune.  Therefore  he  had  esteemed 
them  as  not  really  his  o\^'n  ;  for  all  that  flows  to  us 
from  without  is  a  slippery  and  insecure  possession. 

Consider  now,  can  any  thief  or  traducer  or  N-iolent 
neighbour,  or  any  rich  man  who  \\-ields  the  power 
conferred  by  a  childless  old  age,  do  injury  to  this 
man,  from  whom  war  and  the  enemy  and  that 
I  exponent  of  the  illustrious  art  of  wrecking  cities 
could  snatch  away  nothing  ?     Amid  swords  flashing 

63 


SENECA 

gladios  et  militarem  in  rapina  tumultum,  inter 
flammas  et  sanguinem  stragemque  impulsae  civitatis, 
inter  fragorem  templorum  super  deos  suos  cadentium 
uni  homini  pax  fuit.  Non  est  itaque,  quod  audax 
iudices  promissum,  cuius  tibi,  si  parum  fidei  habeo, 
sponsorem  dabo.  Vix  enim  credis  tantum  firmitatis 
in  hominem  aut  tantam  animi  magnitudinem  cadere  ; 

3  sed  is  prodit  in  medium  qui  dieat  :  "  Non  est  quod 
dubites,  an  attollere  se  homo  natus  supra  humana 
possit,  an  dolores,  damna,  ulcerationes,  vulnera, 
magnos  motus  rerum  circa  se  frementium  securus 
aspiciat  et  dura  placide  ferat  et  secunda  moderate, nee 
illis  cedens  nee  his  fretus,  unus  idemque  inter  diversa 
sit  nee  quicquam  suum  nisi  se  putet,  et  se  quoque 

4  ea  parte  qua  mehor  est.  En  adsum  hoc  vobis  pro- 
baturus,  sub  isto  tot  civitatium  eversore  munimenta 
incussu  arietis  labefieri  et  turrium  altitudinem  cunicuhs 
ac  latentibus  fossis  repente  desidere  et  aequaturum 
editissimas  arces  aggerem  crescere,  at  nulla  machina- 
menta  posse  reperiri,  quae  bene  fundatum  animum 

5  agitent.  Erepsi  modo  e  ruinis  domus  et  incendis  undi- 
que  relucentibus  flammas  per  sanguinem  fugi  ;  filias 
meas  quis  casus  habeat,  an  peior  publico,  nescio  ;  solus 
et  senior  et  hostilia  circa  me  omnia  videns  tamen  in- 
tegrum incolumemque  esse  censum  meum  profiteor. 


»  i.e.,  that  the  wise  man   can   lose   nothing,  receive  no 
injury. 
64 


ON  FIRMNESS,  vi.  2-5 

on  every  side  and  the  uproar  of  soldiers  bent  on 
pillage,  amid  flames  and  blood  and  the  havoc  of  the 
smitten  city,  amid  the  crash  of  temples  falling  upon 
their  gods,  one  man  alone  had  peace.  It  is  not  for 
you,  therefore,  to  call  reckless  this  boast  of  mine  " ; 
and  if  you  do  not  give  me  credence,  I  shall  adduce  a 
voucher  for  it.  For  you  can  hardly  believe  that  so 
much  steadfastness,  that  such  greatness  of  soul  falls 
to  the  lot  of  any  man.  But  here  is  one  *  who  comes 
into  our  midst  and  says  :  "  There  is  no  reason  why 
you  should  doubt  that  a  mortal  man  can  raise  himself 
above  his  human  lot,  that  he  can  \aew  vrith.  unconcern 
pains  and  losses,  sores  and  wounds,  and  nature's  great 
commotions  as  she  rages  all  around  him,  can  bear 
hardship  calmly  and  prosperity  soberly,  neither 
yielding  to  the  one  nor  trusting  to  the  other  ;  that 
he  can  remain  wholly  unchanged  amid  the  diversities 
of  fortune  and  count  nothing  but  himself  his  own, 
and  of  this  self,  even,  only  its  better  part.  See,  here 
am  I  to  prove  to  you  this — that,  though  beneath  the 
hand  of  that  destroyer  of  so  many  cities  fortifica- 
tions shaken  by  the  battering-ram  may  totter,  and 
high  towers  undermined  by  tunnels  and  secret  saps 
may  sink  in  sudden  downfall,  and  earthworks  rise  to 
match  the  loftiest  citadel,  yet  no  war-engines  can  be 
devised  that  mil  shake  the  firm-fixed  soul.  I  crept 
just  now  from  the  ruins  of  my  house,  and  while  the 
conflagration  blazed  on  every  side,  I  fled  from 
the  flames  through  blood  ;  what  fate  befalls  my 
daughters,  whether  a  worse  one  than  their  country's 
own,  I  know  not.  Alone  and  old,  and  seeing  the 
enemy  in  possession  of  everything  around  me,  I, 
nevertheless,  declare  that  my  holdings  are  all  intact 
»  i.e.,  Stilbo. 
VOL.  I  V  66 


SENECA 

6  Teneo,  habeo  quicquid  mei  habui.  Non  est  quod 
me  victum  victoremque  te  credas.  Vicit  fortuna  tua 
fortunam  meam.  Caduca  ilia  et  dominum  mutantia 
ubi  sint  nescio  ;    quod  ad  res  meas  pertinet,  mecum 

7  sunt,  mecum  erunt.  Perdiderunt  isti  divites  patri- 
monia,  libidinosi  amores  suos  et  magno  pudoris  im- 
pendio  dilecta  scorta,  ambitiosi  curiam  et  forum  et 
loca  exercendis  in  publico  vitiis  destinata  ;  feneratores 
perdiderunt  tabellas,  quibus  avaritia  falso  laeta 
divitias  imaginatur.  Ego  quidem  omnia  integra 
illibataque  habeo.  Proinde  istos  interroga  qui  flent, 
lamentantur,  qui  strictis  gladiis  nuda  pro  pecunia 
corpora  opponunt,  qui  hostem  onerato  sinu  fugiunt." 

8  Ergo  ita  habe,  Serene,  perfectimi  ilium  virum, 
humanis  divinisque  virtutibus  plenimi,  nihil  perdere. 
Bona  eius  sohdis  et  inexsuperabihbus  munimentis 
praecincta  sunt.  Non  Babylonios  illis  muros  con- 
tuleris,  quos  Alexander  intravit,  non  Carthaginis  aut 
Numantiae  moenia  una  manu  capta,  non  Capitolium 
arcemve,  habent  ista  hostile  vestigium.  Ilia,  quae 
sapientem  tuentur,  et  a  flamma  et  ab  incursu  tuta 
sunt,  nullum  introitum  praebent,  excelsa,  inexpugna 
bilia,  diis  aequa. 

1  7.  Non  est  quod  dicas,  ita  ut  soles,  hunc  sapientem 
nostrum    nusquam    inveniri.     Non    fingimus    istud 


"  Scipio  Africanus  the  younger  reduced  Carthage  in  116 
B.C.,  Numantia  in  133  B.C. 

66 


ON  FIRMNESS,  vi.  6-vii.  1 

and  unharmed.  I  still  possess  them  ;  whatever  I  have 
had  as  my  own,  I  have.  There  is  no  reason  for  you 
to  suppose  me  vanquished  and  yourself  the  \'ictor  ; 
your  fortune  has  vanquished  my  fortune.  Where 
those  things  are  that  pass  and  change  their  o^^•ners, 
I  know  not ;  so  far  as  my  possessions  are  concerned, 
they  are  Avith  me,  and  ever  will  be  with  me.  The 
losers  are  yonder  rich  men  who  have  lost  their  estates 

the  hbertines  who  have  lost  their  loves — the  prosti- 
tutes whom  they  cherished  at  a  great  expenditure 
of  shame — politicians  who  have  lost  the  senate-house, 
the  forum,  and  the  places  appointed  for  the  public 
exercise  of  their  failings  ;  the  usurers  have  lost  their 
records  on  which  their  avarice,  rejoicing  without 
warrant,  based  its  dream  of  wealth.  But  I  have 
still  my  all,  untouched  and  undiminished.  Do  you, 
accordingly,  put  your  question  to  those  who  weep 
and  wail,  who,  in  defence  of  their  money,  present 
their  naked  bodies  to  the  point  of  the  sword,  who, 
when  their  pockets  are  loaded,  flee  from  the  enemy." 
Know,  therefore,  Serenus,  that  this  perfect  man,  full 
of  virtues  human  and  diAine,  can  lose  nothing.  His 
goods  are  girt  about  by  strong  and  insurmountable 
defences.  Not  Babylon's  walls,  which  an  Alexander 
entered,  are  to  be  compared  with  these,  not  the 
ramparts  of  Carthage  or  Numantia,  both  captured  by 
one  man's  hand,"  not  the  Capitol  or  citadel  of  Rome, 
— upon  them  the  enemy  has  left  his  marks.  The 
walls  which  guard  the  wise  man  are  safe  from  both 
flame  and  assault,  they  provide  no  means  of  entrance, 
— are  lofty,  impregnable,  godlike. 

There  is  no  reason  for  you  to  say,  Serenus,  as  your 
habit  is,  that  this  wise  man  of  ours  is  nowhere  to  be 
found.     He  is  not  a  fiction  of  us  Stoics,  a  sort  of 

67 


SENECA 

humani  ingenii  vanum  decus  nee  ingentem  imagi- 
nem  falsae  rei  concipimus,  sed  qualem  conformamus, 
exhibuimus,  exhibebimus,  raro  forsitan  magnisque 
aetatium  intervallis  unum ;  neque  enim  magna  et 
excedentia  solitum  ac  vulgarem  modum  crebro  gig- 
nuntur.  Ceterum  hie  ipse  M.  Cato,  a  cuius  mentione 
haec  disputatio  processit,  vereor  ne  supra  nostrum 
exemplar  sit. 

2  Denique  validius  debet  esse  quod  laedit  eo  quod 
laeditur  ;  non  est  autem  fortior  nequitia  virtute  ; 
non  potest  ergo  laedi  sapiens.  Iniuria  in  bonos  nisi 
a  malis  non  temptatur  ;  bonis  inter  se  pax  est,  mali 
tam  bonis  perniciosi  quam  inter  se.  Quodsi  laedi 
nisi  infirmior  non  potest,  malus  autem  bono  infirmior 
est,  nee  iniuria  bonis  nisi  a  dispari  verenda  est ; 
iniuria  in  sapientem  virum  non  cadit.  Illud  enim 
iam  non  es  admonendus  neminem  bonum  esse  nisi 

3  sapientem.  "  Si  iniuste,"  inquit,  "  Socrates  dam- 
natus  est,  iniuriam  accepit."  Hoc  loco  intellegere 
nos  oportet  posse  evenire,  ut  faciat  aliquis  iniuriam 
mihi  et  ego  non  accipiam.  Tamquam  si  quis  rem, 
quam  e  villa  mea  subripuit,  in  domo  mea  ponat,  ille 

4  furtum  fecerit,  ego  nihil  perdiderim.  Potest  aliquis 
nocens  fieri,  quamvis  non  nocuerit.  Si  quis  cum 
uxore  sua  tamquam  cum  aliena  concumbat,  adulter 


»  Cf.  1.  3. 
68 


ON  FIRMNESS,  vii.  1-4 

phantom  glor\'  of  human  natvu-e,  nor  is  he  a  mere 
conception,  the  mighty  semblance  of  a  thing  unreal, 
but  we  have  shown  him  in  the  flesh  just  as  we 
delineate  him,  and  shall  show  him — though  per- 
chance not  often,  and  after  a  long  lapse  of  years  only 
one.  For  greatness  which  transcends  the  limit  of 
the  ordinary  and  common  tA'pe  is  produced  but 
rarely.  But  tliis  self-same  Marcus  Cato,  the  men- 
tion of  whom  started  this  discussion,"  I  almost  think 
surpasses  even  our  exemplar. 

Again,  that  which  injures  must  be  more  powerful 
than  that  which  is  injured;  but  ^^'ickedness  is  not 
stronger  than  righteousness  ;  therefore  it  is  im- 
possible for  the  ^\ise  man  to  be  injured.  Only  the 
bad  attempt  to  injure  the  good  ;  the  good  are  at 
peace  \nth  each  other,  the  bad  are  no  less  harmful 
to  the  good  than  they  are  to  each  other.  But  if 
only  the  weaker  man  can  be  injured,  and  if  the  bad 
man  is  weaker  than  the  good  man,  and  the  good 
have  to  fear  no  injury  except  from  one  who  is  no 
match  for  them,  then  injurj^  cannot  befall  the  wise 
man.  For  by  this  time  you  do  not  need  to  be 
reminded  of  the  fact  that  there  is  no  good  man 
except  the  wise  man.  "  But,"  some  one  says,  "  if 
Socrates  was  condemned  unjustly,  he  received  an 
injur)-."  At  this  point  it  is  needful  for  us  to  under- 
stand that  it  is  possible  for  some  one  to  do  me  an 
injury  and  for  me  not  to  receive  the  injury.  For 
example,  if  a  man  should  steal  something  from  my 
country-house  and  leave  it  in  my  to\sTi-house,  he 
would  have  committed  a  theft,  but  I  should  have 
lost  nothing.  It  is  possible  for  one  to  become  a 
MTong-doer,  although  he  may  not  have  done  a  MTong. 
If  a  man  hes  with  his  wife  as  if  she  were  another 

69 


SENECA 

erit,  quamvis  ilia  adultera  non  sit.  Aliquis  mihi 
venenum  dedit,  sed  vim  suam  remixtum  cibo  perdidit : 
venenum  ille  dando  sceleri  se  obligavit,  etiam  si  non 
nocxiit ;  non  minus  latro  est,  cuius  telum  obposita 
veste  elusum  est.  Omnia  seelera  etiam  ante  effectum 
operis,    quantxmi    culpae    satis    est,   perfecta    sunt. 

6  Quaedam  eius  condicionis  sunt  et  hac  vice  copulantur, 
ut  alterum  sine  altero  esse  possit,  alterum  sine  altero 
non  possit.  Quod  dico  conabor  facere  manifestum. 
Possum  pedes  movere,  ut  non  curram  ;  currere  non 
possum,  ut  pedes  non  moveam.  Possum,  quamvis 
in  aqua  sim,  non  natare  ;    si  nato,  non  possum  in 

6  aqua  non  esse.  Ex  hac  sorte  et  hoc  est  de  quo 
agitur.  Si  iniuriam  accepi,  necesse  est  factam  esse  ; 
si  est  facta,  non  est  necesse  accepisse  me ;  multa 
enim  incidere  possunt  quae  submoveant  iniuriam. 
Ut  intentatam  manum  deicere  aliquis  casus  potest 
et  emissa  tela  declinare,  ita  iniurias  qualescumque 
potest  aliqua  res  repellere  et  in  medio  intercipere, 
ut  et  factae  sint  nee  acceptae. 

1  8.  Praeterea  iustitia  nihil  iniustum  pati  potest, 
quia  non  coeunt  contraria.  Iniuria  autem  non  potest 
fieri  nisi  iniuste  ;  ergo  sapienti  iniuria  non  potest 
fieri.  Nee  est  quod  mireris  ;  si  nemo  illi  potest 
iniuriam  facere,  ne  prodesse  quidem  quisquam  potest. 
Et  sapienti  nihil  deest  quod  accipere  possit  loco 
70 


ON  FIRMNESS,  vn.  4-vin.  l 

man's  wife,  he  ■v^ill  be  an  adulterer,  though  she  will 
not  be  an  adulteress.  Some  one  gave  me  poison,  but 
the  poison  lost  its  efficacy  by  being  mixed  ^^■ith  food ; 
the  man,  by  giving  the  poison,  became  guilty  of  a 
crime,  even  if  he  did  me  no  injurj'.  A  man  is  no  less 
a  murderer  because  his  blow  was  foiled,  intercepted 
by  the  victim's  dress.  All  crimes,  so  far  as  guilt  is 
concerned,  are  completed  even  before  the  accom- 
plishment of  the  deed.  Certain  acts  are  of  such  a 
character,  and  are  linked  together  in  such  a  relation, 
that  while  the  first  can  take  place  without  the  second, 
the  second  cannot  take  place  vvithout  the  first.  I 
shall  endeavour  to  make  clear  what  I  mean.  I  can 
move  my  feet  without  running,  but  I  cannot  run 
without  moving  my  feet.  It  is  possible  for  me, 
though  being  in  the  water,  not  to  svvim  ;  but  if  I 
svvim,  it  is  impossible  for  me  not  to  be  in  the  water. 
To  the  same  category  belongs  the  matter  under  dis- 
cussion. If  I  have  received  an  injury,  it  must 
necessarily  have  been  done.  If  an  injury  was  done, 
I  have  not  necessarily  received  it ;  for  many  things 
can  happen  to  avert  the  injury.  Just  as,  for  example, 
some  chance  may  strike  down  the  hand  while  it  takes 
aim  and  turn  the  speeding  missile  aside,  so  it  is 
possible  that  some  circumstance  may  ward  off  injuries 
of  any  sort  and  intercept  them  in  mid-course,  vvith  the 
result  that  they  may  have  been  done,  yet  not  received. 
Moreover,  justice  can  suffer  no  injustice,  because 
opposites  do  not  meet.  But  no  injury  can  be  done 
vvithout  injustice  ;  therefore  no  injury  can  be  done 
to  the  Avise  man.  And  you  need  not  be  surprised  ; 
if  no  one  can  do  him  an  injury,  no  one  can  do  him 
a  service  either.  The  v\-ise  man,  on  the  one  hand," 
lacks  nothing  that  he  can  receive  as  a  gift ;  the  evil 

71 


SENECA 

muneris,  et  malus  nihil  potest  dignum  tribuere  sa- 
piente  ;  habere  enim  prius  debet  quam  dare,  nihil 
autem  habet  quod  ad  se  transferri  sapiens  gavisurus 

2  sit.  Non  potest  ergo  quisquam  aut  nocere  sapienti 
aut  prodesse,  quoniam  divina  nee  iuvari  desiderant 
nee  laedi  possunt,  sapiens  autem  vieinus  proximusque 
dis  consistit,  excepta  mortalitate  similis  deo.  Ad  ilia 
nitens  pergensque  excelsa,  ordinata,  intrepida, 
aequali  et  concordi  cursu  fluentia,  secura,  benigna, 
bono   publico   nata,    et   sibi   et   aliis   salutaria   nihil 

3  humile  concupiscet,  nihil  flebit.  Qui  rationi  innixus 
per  humanos  casus  divino  incedit  animo,  non  habet 
ubi  accipiat  iniuriam — ab  homine  me  tantum  dicere 
putas  ?  Ne  a  fortuna  quidem,  quae  quotiens  cum 
virtute  congressa  est,  numquam  par  recessit.  Si 
maximum  illud  ultra  quod  nihil  habent  iratae  leges 
ac  saevissimi  domini  quod^  minentur,  in  quo  im- 
perium  suum  fortuna  consumit,  aequo  placidoque 
animo  accipimus  et  scimus  mortem  malum  non  esse, 
ob  hoc  ne  iniuriam  quidem,  multo  facilius  alia 
tolerabimus,  damna  et  dolor es,  ignominias,  locorum 
commutationes,  orbitates,  discidia,  quae  sapientem, 
etiam  si  universa  circumveniant,  non  mergunt, 
nedum  ut  ad  singulorum  impulsus  maereat.  Et 
si   fortunae   iniurias   moderate   fert,    quanto   magis 

^  So  inferior  uss.  and  Pincianus :  A  omits. 
72 


ON  FIRMNESS,  viii.  1-3 

man,  on  the  other,  can  bestow  nothing  good  enough 
for  the  wise  man  to  have.  For  a  man  must  have 
before  he  can  give  ;  the  e\-il  man,  however,  has 
nothing  that  the  wise  man  would  be  glad  to  have 
transferred  to  himself.  It  is  impossible,  therefore, 
for  any  one  either  to  injure  or  to  benefit  the  wise  man, 
since  that  which  is  divine  does  not  need  to  be  helped, 
and  cannot  be  hurt ;  and  the  wise  man  is  next-door 
neighbour  to  the  gods  and  like  a  god  in  all  save  his 
mortality.  As  he  struggles  and  presses  on  towards 
those  things  that  are  lofty,  well-ordered,  undaunted, 
that  flow  on  with  even  and  harmonious  current,  that 
are  untroubled,  kindly,  adapted  to  the  public  good, 
beneficial  both  to  himself  and  to  others,  the  wise 
man  will  covet  notliing  low,  will  never  repine.  The 
man  who,  relying  on  reason,  marches  through  mortal 
vicissitudes  with  the  spirit  of  a  god,  has  no  vulnerable 
spot  where  he  can  receive  an  injury.  From  man 
only  do  you  think  I  mean  ?  No,  not  even  from  For- 
tune, who,  whenever  she  has  encountered  virtue,  has 
always  left  the  field  outmatched.  If  that  supreme 
event,  beyond  which  outraged  laws  and  the  most 
cruel  masters  have  nothing  with  which  to  threaten  us, 
and  in  which  Fortune  uses  up  all  her  power,  is  met 
with  calm  and  unruffled  mind,  and  if  it  is  realized 
that  death  is  not  an  evil  and  therefore  not  an  injury 
either,  we  shall  much  more  easily  bear  all  other 
things — losses  and  pains,  disgrace,  changes  of  abode, 
bereavements,  and  separations.  These  things  cannot 
overwhelm  the  wise  man,  even  though  they  all 
encompass  him  at  once  ;  still  less  does  he  grieve 
when  they  assault  him  singly.  And  if  he  bears 
composedly    the    injuries    of   Fortune,   how    much 

73 


SENECA 

hominum    potentium    quos    scit    fortunae     manus 
esse  ! 

1  9.  Omnia  itaque  sic  patitur  ut  hiemis  rigorem  et 
intemperantiam  caeli,  ut  fervores  morbosque  et 
cetera  forte  accidentia,  nee  de  quoquam  tam  bene 
iudicat,  ut  ilium  quicquam  putet  consilio  fecisse,  quod 
in  uno  sapiente  est.  Aliorum  omnium  non  consilia, 
sed  fraudes  et  insidiae  et  motus  animorum  inconditi 
sunt,  quos  casibus  adnumerat ;  omne  autem  fortui- 
tum  circa  nos  saevit  et  in  vilia.^ 

2  lUud  quoque  cogita,  iniuriarum  latissime  patere 
materiam  in^  illis  per  quae  periculum  nobis  quae- 
situm  est,  ut  accusatore  submisso  aut  criminatione 
falsa  aut  irritatis  in  nos  potentiorum  odiis  quaeque 
alia  inter  togatos  latrocinia  sunt.  Est  et  ilia  iniuria 
frequens,  si  lucrum  alicui  excussiun  est  aut  praemium 
diu  captatum,  si  magno  labore  adfectata  hereditas 
aversa  est  et  quaestuosae  domus  gratia  erepta.  Haec 
efFugit  sapiens  qui  nescit  nee  in  spem  nee  in  metum 

3  vivere.  Adice  nunc  quod  iniuriam  nemo  inmota 
mente  accipit,  sed  ad  sensimi  eius  perturbatur,  caret 
autem  perturbatione  vir  ereptus  erroribus,  moderator 
sui,  altae  quietis  et  placidae.     Nam  si  tangit  ilium 

*  in  villa  Madvig  :  in  vitia  A. 
*  in  added  by  Madvig. 


"  The  Stoics,  exalting  reason,  held  that  virtue  involved 
both  right  living  and  right  thinking.  Thus,  only  the 
"wise  man,"  aiming  at  "virtue,"  achieved  right  thinking. 

74 


ON  FIRMNESS,  viii.  3-ix.  3 

the  more  will  he  bear  those  of  powerful  men, 
whom  he  knows  to  be  merely  the  instruments  of 
Fortune ! 

All  such  things,  therefore,  he  endures  in  the  same 
way  that  he  submits  to  the  rigours  of  winter  and  to 
inclement  weather,  to  fevers  and  disease,  and  the 
other  accidents  of  chance  ;  nor  does  he  form  so  high 
an  estimate  of  any  man  as  to  think  that  he  has  done 
anything  with  the  good  judgement  that  is  found 
only  in  the  wise  man.<*  All  others  are  actuated,  not 
by  judgement,  but  by  delusions  and  deceptions  and 
ill-formed  impulses  of  the  mind,  which  the  wise  men 
sets  dowTi  to  the  account  of  chance ;  but  every  power 
of  Fortune  rages  round  about  us  and  strikes  what 
counts  for  naught ! 

Consider,  further,  that  the  most  extensive  oppor- 
tunity for  injury  is  found  in  those  things  through 
which  some  danger  is  contrived  for  us,  as,  for  example, 
the  suborning  of  an  accuser,  or  the  bringing  of  a 
false  accusation,  or  the  stirring  up  of  the  hatred 
of  the  powerful  against  us,  and  all  the  other  forms 
of  robbery  that  exist  among  ci\iUans.  Another 
common  type  of  injury  arises  when  a  man  has  his 
profits  or  a  long-chased  prize  torn  from  his  grasp,  as 
when  a  legacy  which  he  has  made  great  effort  to 
secure  is  turned  aside,  or  the  goodwill  of  a  lucrative 
house  is  withdrawn.  All  this  the  wise  man  escapes, 
for  he  knows  nothing  of  directing  his  life  either 
towards  hope  or  towards  fear.  Add,  further,  that  no 
man  receives  an  injury  without  some  mental  dis- 
turbance, yea  more,  he  is  perturbed  even  by  the 
thought  of  it ;  but  the  man  who  has  been  saved  from 
error,  who  is  self-controlled  and  has  deep  and  calm 
repose,  is  free  from  such  perturbation.       For  if  an 


SENECA 

iniuria,  et  movet  et  impellit,^  caret  autemira  sapiens, 
quam  excitat  iniuriae  species,  nee  aliter  careret  ira 
nisi  et  iniuria,  quam  scit  sibi  non  posse  fieri.  Inde 
tam  erectus  laetusque  est,  inde  continue  gaudio 
elatus  ;  adeo  autem  ad  ofFensiones  rerum  hominum- 
que  non  contrahitur,  ut  ipsa  illi  iniuria  usui  sit,  per 
quam  experimentum  sui  capit  et  virtutem  temptat. 

4  Faveamus,  obsecro  vos,  huic  proposito  aequisque  et 
animis  et  auribus  adsimus,  dum  sapiens  iniuriae 
excipitur  !  Nee  quicquam  ideo  petulantiae  vestrae 
aut  rapacissimis  cupiditatibus  aut  caecae  temeritati 
superbiaeque  detrahitur.  Salvis  vitiis  vestris  haec 
sapienti  libertas  quaeritur.  Non  ut  vobis  facere  non 
liceat  iniuriam,  agimus,  sed  ut  ille  omnes  iniurias  in 
altum  demittat  patientiaque  se  ac  magnitudine  animi 

5  defendat.  Sic  in  certaminibus  sacris  plerique  vicerunt 
caedentium  manus  obstinata  patientia  f atigando .  Ex 
hoc  puta  genere  sapientem  eorum,  qui  exercitatione 
longa  ac  fideli  robur  perpetiendi  lassandique  omnem 
inimicam  vim  consecuti  sunt. 

1       10.  Quoniam  priorem  partem  percucurrimus,  ad 
alteram  transeamus,  qua  quibusdam  propriis,  pleris- 
que    vero    communibus    contumeliam    refutabimus. 
^  impellit  Bentley  :  impedit  A. 

"  In  the  Latin  the  language  is  priestly.  That  the  wise 
man  can  suffer  no  wrong  is  presented  as  a  sort  of  divine 
utterance  which  is  to  be  received  in  solemn  silence. 

76 


ON  FIRMNESS,  ix.  3-x.  1 

injury  reaches  him,  it  does  stir  and  incite  him  ;  yet, 
if  he  is  a  \vise  man,  he  is  free  from  that  anger  which  is 
aroused  by  the  mere  appearance  of  injury,  and  in  no 
other  way  could  he  be  free  from  the  anger  than  by 
being  free  also  from  the  injury,  knowing  that  an 
injury  can  never  be  done  to  him.  For  this  reason  he 
is  so  resolute  and  cheerful,  for  this  reason  he  is  elate 
with  constant  joy.  So  far,  moreover,  is  he  from 
shrinking  from  the  buffetings  of  circumstances  or 
of  men.  that  he  counts  even  injury  profitable,  for 
through  it  he  finds  a  means  of  putting  himself  to  the 
proof  and  makes  trial  of  his  \'irtue.  Let  us,  I  beseech 
you,  be  silent "  in  the  presence  of  this  proposition,  and 
with  impartial  minds  and  ears  give  heed  while  the 
wise  man  is  made  exempt  from  injur}' !  Nor  because 
of  it  is  aught  diminished  from  your  wantonness,  or 
from  your  greediest  lusts,  or  from  your  blind  pre- 
sumption and  pride  !  You  may  keep  your  vices — it  is 
the  wise  man  for  whom  this  liberty  is  being  sought. 
Our  aim  is  not  that  you  may  be  prevented  from  doing 
injury,  but  that  the  wise  man  may  cast  all  injuries 
far  from  him,  and  by  his  endurance  and  his  greatness 
of  soul  protect  himself  from  them.  Just  so  in  the 
sacred  games  many  have  won  the  victory  by  wearing 
out  the  hands  of  their  assailants  through  stubborn 
endurance.  Do  you,  then,  reckon  the  vnse  man  in 
this  class  of  men — the  men  who  by  long  and  faithful 
training  have  attained  the  strength  to  endure  and 
tire  out  any  assault  of  the  enemy. 

Having  touched  upon  the  first  part  of  the  dis- 
cussion, let  us  now  pass  to  the  second,  in  which  by 
arguments — some  of  them  our  own,  most  of  them, 
however,  common  to  our  school — we  shall  disprove 
the  possibiht}'  of  insult.     It  is  a  sUghter  offence  than 

77 


SENECA 

Est  minor  iniuria,  quam  queri  magis  quam  exsequi 
possumus,  quam  leges  quoque  nulla  dignam  vindicta 

2  putaverunt.  Hunc  affectum  movet  humilitas  animi 
contrahentis  se  ob  dictum  factumve^  inhonorificum : 
"  lUe  me  hodie  non  admisit,  cum  alios  admitteret," 
et  "  sermonem  meum  aut  superbe  aversatus  est  aut 
palam  risit,"  et  "  non  in  medio  me  lecto  sed  in  imo 
collocavit,"  et  alia  huius  notae,  quae  quid  vocem  nisi 
querellas  nausiantis  animi  ?  In  quae  fere  delicati 
et  felices  incidunt ;   non  vacat  enim  haec  notare  cui 

3  peiora  instant.  Nimio  otio  ingenia  natura  infirma  et 
muliebria  et  inopia  verae  iniuriae  lascivientia  his 
commoventur,  quorum  pars  maior  constat  vitio  inter- 
pretantis.  Itaque  nee  prudentiae  quicquam  in  se 
esse  nee  fiduciae  ostendit  qui  contumelia  afficitur  ; 
non  dubie  enim  contemptum  se  iudicat,  et  hie  morsus 
non  sine  quadam  humilitate  animi  evenit  supprimentis 
se  ac  descendentis.  Sapiens  autem  a  nullo  con- 
temnitur,  magnitudinem  suam  novit  nullique  tantum 
de  se  hcere  renuntiat  sibi  et  omnis  has,  quas  non 
miserias  animorum  sed  molestias  dixerim,  non  vincit 
sed  ne  sentit  quidem. 

4  AUa  sunt  quae  sapientem  feriunt,  etiam  si  non 
pervertunt,  ut  dolor  corporis  et  debiHtas  aut  amicorum 

^  factumve  Gertz  :  factumque  A. 
78 


ON  FIRMNESS,  x.  1^ 

injury,  something  to  be  complained  of  rather  than 
avenged,  something  which  even  the  laws  have  not 
deemed    worthy    of   punishment.     This    feehng    is 
stirred  by  a  sense  of  humihation  as  the  spirit  shrinks 
before  an  uncomplimentary  word  or  act.     "  So-and- 
so  did  not  give  me  an  audience  to-day,  though  he  gave 
it  to  others  "  ;    "  he  haughtily  repulsed  or  openly 
laughed  at  my  conversation  "  ;    "he  did  not  give 
me  the  seat  of  honour,  but  placed  me  at  the  foot  of 
the   table,"     These   and   similar  reproaches — what 
shall  I  call  them  but  the  complainings  of  a  squeamish 
temper  ?     And  it  is  generally  the  pampered  and 
prosperous  who  indulge  in  them  ;    for  if  a  man  is 
pressed  by  worse  ills,  he  has  not  time  to  notice  such 
things.    By  reason  of  too  much  leisure  natures  which 
are  naturally  weak  and  effeminate   and,  from  the 
dearth  of  real  injur}-,  have  gro^vn  spoiled,  are  dis- 
turbed by  these  sUghts,  the  greater  number  of  which 
are  due  to  some  fault  in  the  one  who  so  interprets 
them.     Therefore  any  man  who  is  troubled  by  an 
insult   shows    himself  lacking   in   both  insight  and 
behef  in  himself ;   for  he  decides  without  hesitation 
that  he  has  been  sHghted,  and  the  accompamong 
sting  is  the  ine\-itable  result  of  a  certain  abjectness 
of  spirit,  a  spirit  which  depreciates  itself  and  bows 
down  to  another.    But  no  one  can  shght  the  wise 
man,  for  he  knows  his  o^vn  greatness  and  assures  him- 
self that  no  one  is  accorded  so  much  power  over  him, 
and  all  these  feelings,  which  I  prefer  to  call  rather 
annoyances  than  distresses  of  the  mind,  he  does  not 
have  to  overcome — nay,  he  does  not  even  have  them. 
Quite  different  are  the  things  that  do  buffet  the 
wise  man,  even  though  they  do  not  overthrow  him, 
such  as  bodily  pain  and  infirmity,  or  the  loss  of  friends 

79 


SENECA 

liberorumque  amissio  et  patriae  bello  flagrantis 
calamitas.  Haec  non  nego  sentire  sapientem  ;  nee 
enim  lapidis  illi  duritiam  ferrive  adserimus.  Nulla 
virtus  est,  quae  non  sentiat  se  perpeti.  Quid  ergo 
est  ?  Quosdam  ictus  recipit,  sed  receptos  evincit 
et  sanat  et  comprimit,  haec  vero  minora  ne  sentit 
quidem  nee  adversus  ea  solita  ilia  virtute  utitur  dura 
tolerandi,  sed  aut  non  adnotat  aut  digna  risu  putat. 

1  11.  Praeterea  cum  magnam  partem  contume- 
liarum  superbi  insolentesque  faciant  et  male  feliei- 
tatem  ferentes,  habet  quo  istum  affectum  inflatum 
respuat,  pulcherrimam  virtutem  omnium,^  magnani- 
mitatem.  Ilia,  quicquid  eiusmodi  est,  transcurrit  ut 
vanas   species   somniorum  visusque   nocturnes    nihil 

2  habentis  solidi  atque  veri.  Simul  illud  cogitat  omnes 
inferiores  esse,  quam  ut  illis  audacia  sit  tanto  ex- 
celsiora  despicere.  Contumelia  a  contemptu  dicta  est, 
quia  nemo  nisi  quem  contempsit  tali  iniuria  notat ; 
nemo  autem  maiorem  melioremque  contemnit,  etiam 
si  facit  aliquid,  quod  contemnentes  solent.  Nam  et 
pueri  OS  parentium  feriunt  et  crines  matris  turbavit 
laceravitque  infans  et  sputo  adspersit  aut  nudavit  in 
conspectu  suorum  tegenda  et  verbis  obscenioribus 
non  pepercit,  et  nihil  horum  contumeliam  dicimus. 

^  followed  by  animi  in  A. 
80 


ON  FIRMNESS,  x.  4-xi.  2 

and  cluldren,  and  the  ruin  that  befalls  his  country 
amid  the  flames  of  war.  I  do  not  deny  that  the  ^\^se 
man  feels  these  things  ;  for  we  do  not  claim  for 
him  the  hardness  of  stone  or  of  steel.  There  is  no 
virtue  that  fails  to  realize  that  it  does  endure.  What, 
then,  is  the  case  ?  The  wise  man  does  receive  some 
wounds,  but  those  that  he  receives  he  binds  up, 
arrests,  and  heals  ;  these  lesser  things  he  does  not 
even  feel,  nor  does  he  employ  against  them  his  accus- 
tomed virtue  of  bearing  hardship,  but  he  either  fails  to 
notice  them,  or  counts  them  worthy  of  a  smile. 

Moreover,  since,  in  large  measure,  insults  come 
from  the  proud  and  arrogant  and  from  those  who 
bear  prosperity  ill,  the  ^^ise  man  possesses  that 
wliich  enables  him  to  scorn  their  puffed-up  attitude — 
the  noblest  of  all  the  virtues,  magnanimity.  This 
passes  over  ever^^thing  of  that  sort  as  of  no  more  con- 
sequence than  the  delusive  shapes  of  dreams  and  the 
apparitions  of  the  night,  which  have  nothing  in  them 
that  is  substantial  and  real.  At  the  same  time  he 
remembers  this, — that  all  others  are  so  much  his  own 
inferiors  that  they  would  not  presume  to  despise  what 
is  so  far  above  them.  The  word  "  contumely  "  is 
derived  from  the  word  "  contempt,"  for  no  one 
outrages  another  by  so  grave  a  ^\Tong  unless  he  has 
contempt  for  him  ;  but  no  man  can  be  contemptuous 
of  one  who  is  greater  and  better  than  liimself,  even  if 
his  action  is  of  a  kind  to  which  the  contemptuous  are 
prone.  For  children  will  strike  their  parents  in  the 
face,  and  the  infant  tumbles  and  tears  his  mother's 
hair  and  slobbers  upon  her,  or  exposes  to  the  gaze 
of  the  family  parts  that  were  better  covered  over,  i" 
and  a  child  does  not  shrink  from  foul  language. 
Yet  we  do  not  count  any  of  these  things  an  insult. 
VOL.  I  G  81 


SENECA 

Quare  ?  Quia  qui  facit  contemnere  non  potest. 
3  Eadem  causa  est,  cur  nos  mancipiorum  nostrorum 
urbanitas  in  dominos  contumeliosa  delectet,  quorum 
audacia  ita  demum  sibi  in  convivas  ius  facit,  si  coepit 
a  domino  ;  et  ut  quisque  contemptissimus  et  vel  ludi- 
briumestjita  solutissimae  linguae  est.  Pueros  quidam 
in  hoc  mercantur  procaces  et  illorum  impudentiam 
acuunt  ac  sub  magistro  habent,  qui  probra  meditate 
efFundant,  nee  has  contumelias  vocamus,  sed  argutias. 
Quanta  autem  dementia  est  isdem  modo  delectari, 
mode  ofFendi,  et  rem  ab  amico  dictam  maledictum 
vocare,  a  servulo  ioculare  convicium  ! 

1  12.  Quem  animum  nos  adversus  pueros  habemus, 
hunc  sapiens  adversus  omnes,  quibus  etiam  post  iu- 
ventam  canosque  puerilitas  est.  An  quicquam  isti 
profecerunt,  quibus  puerilis^  animi  mala  sunt  auctique 
in  maius  error es,  qui  a  pueris  magnitudine  tantum 
formaque  corporum  difFerunt,  ceterum  non  minus  vagi 
incertique,    voluptatium    sine    dilectu    adpetentes, 

2  trepidi  et  non  ingenio  sed  formidine  quieti  ?     Non 
ideo  quicquam  inter  illos  puerosque  interesse  quis 
dixerit,  quod  illis  talorum  nucumve  et  aeris  minuti  I 
avaritia  est,  his  auri  argentique  et  urbium,  quod  illi  J; 
inter    ipsos     magistratus     gerunt     et     praetextam  r 

fascesque  ac  tribunal  imitantur,  hi  eadem  in  campo 

\ 
^  puerilis  added  by  Gertz, 

82 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xi.  2-xii.  2 

And  why  ?  because  he  who  does  them  is  incapable 
of  being  contemptuous.  For  the  same  reason  the 
waggery  of  slaves,  insulting  to  their  masters,  amuses 
us,  and  their  boldness  at  the  expense  of  guests  has 
licence  only  because  they  begin  \\-ith  their  master 
himself;  and  the  more  contemptible  and  even 
ridiculous  any  slave  is,  the  more  freedom  of  tongue 
he  has.  For  this  purpose  some  people  buy  young 
slaves  because  they  are  pert,  and  they  whet  their 
impudence  and  keep  them  under  an  instructor  in 
order  that  they  may  be  practised  in  pouring  forth 
streams  of  abuse  ;  and  yet  we  call  this  smartness, 
not  insult.  But  what  madness  it  is  at  one  time  to 
be  amused,  at  another  to  be  affronted,  by  the  same 
things,  and  to  call  something,  if  spoken  by  a  friend, 
a  slander  ;  if  spoken  by  a  slave,  a  plaj^ul  taunt  ! 

The  same  attitude  that  we  have  toward  young 
slaves,  the  wise  man  has  toward  all  men  whose  child- 
hood endures  even  beyond  middle  age  and  the 
period  of  grey  hairs.  Or  has  age  brought  any  profit 
at  all  to  men  of  this  sort,  who  have  the  faults  of 
a  childish  mind  with  its  defects  augmented,  who 
differ  from  children  only  in  the  size  and  shape  of 
their  bodies,  but  are  not  less  wayward  and  unsteady, 
who  are  undiscriminating  in  their  passion  for  pleasure, 
timorous,  and  peaceable,  not  from  inclination,  but 
from  fear  ?  Therefore  no  one  may  say  that  they 
differ  in  any  way  from  children.  For  while  children 
are  greedy  for  knuckle-bones,  nuts,  and  coppers, 
these  are  greedy  for  gold  and  silver,  and  cities  ; 
while  children  play  among  themselves  at  being 
magistrates,  and  in  make-beheve  have  their  bordered 
toga,  Uctors'  rods  and  tribunal,  these  play  in  earnest 
at  the  same  things  in  the  Campus  Martius  and  the 

83 


SENECA 

foroque  et  in  curia  serio  ludunt,  illi  in  litoribus 
harenae  congestu  simulacra  domuum  excitant,  hi  ut 
magnum  aliquid  agentes  in  lapidibus  ac  parietibus  et 
tectis  moliendis  occupati  tutelae  corporum  inventa 
in  periculum  verterunt.  Ergo  par  pueris  longiusque 
3  progressis,  sed  in  alia  maioraque  error  est.  Non  im- 
merito  itaque  horum  contumelias  sapiens  ut  iocos 
accipit,  et  aliquando  illos  tanquam  pueros  malo 
poenaque  admonet,  adficit,  non  quia  accepit  iniuriam, 
sed  quia  fecerunt  et  ut  desinant  facere  ;  sic  enim 
et  pecora  verbere  domantur,  nee  irascimur  illis,  cum 
sessorem  recusaverunt,  sed  compescimus,  ut  dolor 
contumaciam  vincat.  Ergo  et  illud  solutum  scies, 
quod  nobis  opponitur  :  "  Quare,  si  non  accepit 
iniuriam  sapiens  nee  contumeliam,  punit  eos  qui 
fecerunt?  "     Non  enim  se  ulciscitur,  sed  illos  emendat. 

1  13.  Quid  est  autem,  quare  hanc  animi  firmitatem 
non  credas  in  virum  sapientem  cadere,  cum  tibi  in 
aliis  idem  notare  sed  non  ex  eadem  causa  liceat  ? 
Quis  enim  phrenetico  medicus  irascitur  ?  Quis 
febricitantis  et  a  frigida  prohibiti  maledicta  in  malam 

2  partem  accipit  ?  Hunc  affectum  adversus  omnis 
habet  sapiens,  quem  adversus  aegros  suos  medicus, 
quorum  nee  obscena,  si  remedio  egent,  contrectare 
nee  reliquias  et  effusa  intueri  dedignatur  nee  per 
furorem  saevientium  excipere  convicia.     Scit  sapiens 

"  Horace's  "celsae  graviore  casu  decidunt  turres  "  {Carm. 
ii.  10.  10  sq.)  points  the  trend  of  the  thought.     According 
to  a  Stoic  commonplace  wisdom  lay  in  the  observance  of 
the  "  Golden  Mean.*' 
84 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xii.  2-xiii.  2 

forum  and  the  senate  ;  while  children  rear  their  toy 
houses  on  the  sea-shore  vriih.  heaps  of  sand,  these, 
as  though  engaged  in  a  mighty  enterprise,  are  busied 
in  piling  up  stones  and  walls  and  roofs,  and  convert 
what  was  intended  as  a  protection  to  the  body  into 
a  menace."  Therefore  children  and  those  who  are 
farther  advanced  in  life  are  alike  deceived,  but  the 
latter  in  different  and  more  serious  things.  And  so 
the  wise  man  not  improperly  considers  insult  from 
such  men  as  a  farce,  and  sometimes,  just  as  if  they 
were  children,  he  will  admonish  them  and  inflict 
suffering  and  punishment,  not  because  he  has  received 
an  injury,  but  because  they  have  committed  one,  and 
in  order  that  they  may  desist  from  so  doing.  For 
thus  also  we  break  in  animals  by  using  the  lash,  and 
we  do  not  get  angry  at  them  when  they  will  not 
submit  to  a  rider,  but  we  curb  them  in  order  that  by 
pain  we  may  overcome  their  obstinacy.  Now,  there- 
fore, you  will  know  the  answer  to  the  question  with 
which  we  are  confronted  :  "  Why,  if  the  wise  man 
cannot  receive  either  injury  or  insult,  does  he  punish 
those  who  have  offered  them?"  For  he  is  not 
avenging  himself,  but  correcting  them. 

But  why  is  it  that  you  refuse  to  believe  that  the 
wise  man  is  granted  such  firmness  of  mind,  when 
you  may  observe  that  others  have  the  same,  although 
for  a  different  reason  ?  What  physician  gets  angry 
with  a  lunatic  ?  Who  takes  in  ill  part  the  abuse  of 
a  man  stricken  with  fever  and  yet  denied  cold  water  ? 
The  wise  man's  feeling  towards  all  men  is  that  of  the 
physician  towards  his  patients  :  he  does  not  scorn 
to  touch  their  pri\'y  parts  if  they  need  treatment, 
or  to  \iew  the  body's  refuse  and  discharges,  or  to 
endure  violent  words  from  those  who  rage  in  delirium. 

85 


SENECA 

omnis  hos,  qui  togati  purpuratique  incedunt  ut^ 
valentes,  coloratos  male  sanos  esse,  quos  non  aliter 
videt  quam  aegros  intemperantis.  Itaque  ne  suceen- 
set  quidem,  si  quid  in  morbo  petulantius  ausi  sunt 
adversus  medentem,  et  quo  animo  honores  eorum 
nihilo    aestimat,     eodem    parum    honorifice    facta. 

3  Quemadmodum  non  placebit  sibi,  si  ilium  mendicus 
coluerit,  nee  contumeliam  iudicabit,  si  illi  homo 
plebis  ultimae  salutanti  mutuam  salutationem  non 
reddiderit,  sic  ne  suspiciet  quidem,  si  ilium  multi 
divites  suspexerint — scit  enim  illos  nihil  a  mendicis 
difFerre,  immo  miseriores  esse,  illi  enim  exiguo,  hi 
multo  egent — et  rursus  non  tangetur,  si  ilium  rex 
Medorura  Attalusve  Asiae  salutantem  silentio  ac 
vultu  arroganti  transierit.  Scit  statum  eius  non  magis 
habere  quicquam  invidendum  quam  eius,  cui  in  magna 
familia  cura  optigit  aegros  insanosque  compescere. 

4  Num  moleste  feram,  si  mihi  non  reddiderit  nomen 
aliquis  ex  his,  qui  ad  Castoris  negotiantur  nequam 
mancipia  ementes  vendentesque,  quorum  tabernae 
pessimorum  servorum  turba  refertae  sunt  ?  Non,  ut 
puto  ;  quid  enim  is  boni  habet,  sub  quo  nemo  nisi 
malus  est  ?  Ergo  ut  huius  humanitatem  inhumani- 
tatemque  neglegit,  ita  et  regis  :  "  Habes  sub  te 
Parthos  et  Medos  et  Bactrianos,  sed  quos  metu 
contines,  sed  propter  quos  remittere  arcum  tibi  non 

^  ut  added  by  Weidner. 
86 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xiii.  2^ 

e  ^vise  man  knows  that  all  who  strut  about  in  togas 
d  in  purple,  as  if  they  were  well  and  strong,  are,  for 
all  their  bright  colour,  quite  unsound,  and  in  his  eyes 
they  differ  in  no  way  from  the  sick  who  are  bereft  of 
self-control.  And  so  he  is  not  even  irritated  if  in 
their  sick  condition  they  venture  to  be  somewhat 
impertinent  to  their  physician,  and  in  the  same  spirit 
in  which  he  sets  no  value  on  the  honours  they  have,  he 
sets  no  value  on  the  lack  of  honour  they  show.  Just 
as  he  ^\-ill  not  be  flattered  if  a  beggar  shows  him 
respect,  nor  count  it  an  insult  if  a  man  from  the  dregs 
of  the  people,  on  being  greeted,  fails  to  return  his 
greeting,  so,  too,  he  wiil  not  even  look  up  if  many 
rich  men  look  up  at  him.  For  he  knows  that  they 
differ  not  a  whit  from  beggars — yea,  that  they  are 
even  more  ^\Tetched  ;  since  the  beggar  wants  little, 
the  rich  man  much.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  he 
will  not  be  disturbed  if  the  King  of  the  Medes  or 
King  Attalus  of  Asia,  ignoring  his  greeting,  passes 
him  by  in  silence  and  with  a  look  of  disdain.  He 
knows  that  the  position  of  such  a  man  is  no  more  to 
be  envied  than  that  of  the  slave  in  a  large  household 
whose  duty  it  is  to  keep  under  constraint  the  sick 
and  the  insane.  The  men  who  traffic  in  ^\Tetched 
human  chattels,  buying  and  selhng  near  the  temple 
of  Castor,  whose  shops  are  packed  \\-ith  a  throng  of 
the  meanest  slaves — if  some  one  of  these  does  not  call 
me  by  name,  shall  I  take  umbrage  ?  No,  I  think  not. 
For  of  what  good  is  a  man  who  has  under  him  none 
but  the  bad  ?  Therefore,  just  as  the  wise  man  dis- 
regards this  one's  courtesy  or  discourtesy,  so  will  he 
like\vise  disregard  the  king's  :  "  You,  O  king,  have 
under  you  Parthians  and  Medes  and  Bactrians,  but 
you  hold  them  in  check  by  fear  ;    they  never  allow 

87 


SENECA 

contigit,  sed  hostes  teterrimos,  sed  venales,  sed  novum 
5  aucupantes  dominum."  Nullius  ergo  movebitur 
contumelia.  Omnes  enim  inter  se  difFerant,  sapiens 
quidem  pares  illos  ob  aequalem  stultitiam  omnis 
putat ;  nam  si  semel  se  demiserit  eo,  ut  aut  iniuria 
moveatur  aut  contumelia,  non  poterit  umquam  esse 
securus.  Securitas  autem  propriuni  bonum  sapientis 
est ;  nee  committet,  ut  iudicando  contumeliam  sibi 
faetam  honorem  habeat  ei  qui  fecit ;  necesse  est 
enim,  a  quo  quisque  contemni  moleste  ferat,  suspici 
gaudeat. 

1  14.  Tanta  quosdam  dementia  tenet,  ut  sibi  con- 
tumeliam fieri  putent  posse  a  muliere.  Quid  refert 
quam  habeant,  quot  lecticarios  habentem,  quam  one- 
ratas  aures,  quam  laxam  sellam  ?  Aeque  inprudens 
animal  est  et,  nisi  scientia  accessit  ac  multa  eruditio, 
ferum,  cupiditatium  incontinens.  Quidam  se  a  cine- 
rario  impulsos  moleste  ferunt  et  contumeliam  vocant 
ostiari  difficultatem,  nomenculatoris  superbiam,  cu- 
biculari  supercilium.  O  quantus  risus  inter  ista 
toUendus  est !  quanta  voluptate  implendus  animus  ex 
alienorum   errorum   tumultu   contemplanti   quietem 

2  suam  !  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Sapiens  non  accedet  ad  fores, 
quas  durus  ianitor  obsidet  ?  "  Ille  vero,  si  res 
necessaria  vocabit,  experietur  et  ilium,  quisquis  erit, 
tanquam  canem  acrem  obiecto  cibo  leniet  nee 
indignabitur  aliquid  impendere,  ut  limen  transeat, 


88 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xiii.  4-xiv.  2 

u  to  relax  your  bow  ;  they  are  your  bitterest 
v.iiemies,  open  to  bribes,  and  eager  for  a  new  master." 
Consequently  the  ^^ise  man  \n\\  not  be  moved  by  any 
man's  insult.  For  men  may  all  differ  one  from 
another,  yet  the  wise  man  regards  them  as  all  aUke 
because  they  are  all  equally  foohsh  ;  since  if  he  should 
once  so  far  condescend  as  to  be  moved  either  by 
insult  or  injury,  he  could  never  be  unconcerned. 
Unconcern,  however,  is  the  peculiar  blessing  of  the 
wise  man,  and  he  \\'ill  never  allow  himself  to  pay  to 
the  one  who  offered  him  an  insult  the  compliment  of 
admitting  that  it  was  offered.  For,  necessarily, 
whoever  is  troubled  by  another's  scorn,  is  pleased  by 
his  admiration. 

Some  men  are  mad  enough  to  suppose  that  even 
a  woman  can  offer  them  an  insult.  What  matters 
it  how  they  regard  her,  how  many  lackeys  she  has 
for  her  htter,  how  hea\-ily  weighted  her  ears,  how 
roomy  her  sedan  ?  She  is  just  the  same  unthinking 
creature — wild,  and  unrestrained  in  her  passions — 
unless  she  has  gained  knowledge  and  had  much 
instruction.  Some  are  affronted  if  a  hairdresser 
jostles  them,  and  some  call  the  rudeness  of  a  house- 
porter,  an  usher's  arrogance,  or  a  valet's  loftiness  an 
insult.  O  what  laughter  should  such  things  draw  ! 
With  what  satisfaction  should  a  man's  mind  be  filled 
when  he  contrasts  his  ovm  repose  with  the  unrest 
into  which  others  blunder  !  "  WTiat  then  ?  "  you  say, 
"  will  the  wise  man  not  approach  a  door  that  is 
guarded  by  a  surly  keeper  ?  "  Assuredly,  if  some 
necessar}'  business  summons  him  he  will  make  the 
venture,  and  placate  the  keeper,  be  he  what  he  may, 
as  one  quiets  a  dog  by  tossing  him  food,  and  he  will 
not  deem  it  improper  to  pay  something  in  order  that 

89 


SENECA 

cogitans  et  in  pontibus  quibusdam  pro  transitu  dari. 
Itaque  illi  quoque,  quisquis  erit,  qui  hoc  salutationum 
publicum  exerceat,  donabit  ;  scit  emi  acre  venalia. 
Ille  pusilli  animi  est,  qui  sibi  placet,  quod  ostiario 
libere  respondit,  quod  virgam  eius  fregit,  quod  ad 
dominum  accessit  et  petit  corium.     Facit  se  adver- 

3  sarium  qui  contendit,  et  ut  vincat,  par  fuit.  "  At 
sapiens  colapho  percussus  quid  faciet  ?  "  Quod  Cato, 
cum  illi  OS  percussum  esset  ;  non  excanduit,  non 
vindicavit  iniuriam,  ne  remisit  quidem,  sed  factam 
negavit ;  maiore  animo  non  agnovit  quam  ignovisset. 
Non  diu  in  hoc  haerebimus  ;  quis  enim  nescit  nihil 
ex    his,  quae   creduntur   mala   aut  bona,  ita  videri 

4  sapienti  ut  omnibus  ?  Non  respicit,  quid  homines 
turpe  iudicent  aut  miserum,  non  it  qua  populus,  sed 
ut  sidera  contrarium  mundo  iter  intendunt,  ita  hie 
adversus  opinionem  omnium  vadit. 

1  15.  Desinite  itaque  dicere  :  "  Non  accipiet  ergo 
sapiens  iniuriam,  si  caedetur,  si  oculus  illi  eruetur  ? 
Non  accipiet  contumeliam,  si  obscenorum  vocibus 
improbis  per  forum  agetur  ?  Si  in  convivio  regis 
recumbere  infra  mensam  vescique  cum  servis  igno- 
miniosa  officia  sortitis  iubebitiur  ?  Si  quid  aliud  ferre 
cogetur    eorum     quae     excogitari    pudori    ingenuo 

2  molesta    possunt  ?  "     In    quantumcumque    ista    vel 

"  It  was  supposed  that  the  sphere  of  heaven  revolved 
about  the  earth  from  east  to  west,  and  that  while  the  sun, 
moon,  and  planets  were  swept  along  in  this  revolution, 
they  also  moved  in  their  own  courses  in  the  opposite 
direction. 

90 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xiv.  2-xv.  2 

may  pass  the  threshold,  remembering  that  even  on 

ae  bridges  one  has  to  pay  to  cross.     And  so  to  the 

!ow,  be  he  what  he  may,  who  phes  this  source  of 

venue  at  receptions,  he  -will  pay  his  fee  ;  he  knows 

that  money  will  buy  whatever  is  for  sale.     The  man 

has  a  small  mind  who  is  pleased  ^^^th  himself  because 

he  spoke  his  mind  to  a  porter,  because  he  broke  his 

iff  on  him,  made  his  way  to  his  master  and  demanded 

fellow's  hide.     Whoever  enters  a  contest  becomes 

the  antagonist  of  another,  and,  for  the  sake  of  \ictor}% 

is  on  the  same  level.     "  But,"  you  ask,  "  if  a  >vise 

man  receives  a  blow,  what  shall  he  do  ?  "     WTiat 

Cato  did  when  he  was  struck  in  the  face.     He  did 

not  flare  up,  he  did  not  avenge  the  >vTong,  he  did  not 

even  forgive  it,  but  he  said  that  no  ^^Tong  had  been 

done.     He  showed  finer  spirit  in  not  acknowledging  it 

than  if  he  had  pardoned  it.     But  we  shall  not  linger 

long  upon  this  point.     For  who  is  not  aware  that 

none  of  the  things  reputed  to  be  goods  or  ills  appear 

to  the  wise  man  as  they  do  to  men  at  large  ?     He  does 

not  regard  what  men  consider  base  or  WTetched  ;  he 

does  not  walk  with  the  crowd,  but  as  the  planets 

make  their  way  against  the  whirl  of  heaven,"  so  he 

proceeds  contrary'  to  the  opinion  of  the  world. 

Therefore  leave  off  saying  :  "  Will  the  wise  man, 
then,  receive  no  injury  if  he  is  given  a  lashing,  if  he 
has  an  eye  gouged  out  ?  Will  he  receive  no  insult 
if  he  is  hooted  through  the  forum  by  the  \ile  words 
of  a  foul-mouthed  crowd  ?  If  at  a  king's  banquet  he 
is  ordered  to  take  a  place  beneath  the  table  and  to 
eat  with  the  slaves  assigned  to  the  most  disreputable 
service  ?  If  he  is  forced  to  bear  whatever  else  can 
be  thought  of  that  will  offend  his  native  self-respect?" 
No  matter  how  great  these  things  may  come  to  be, 

91 


SENECA 

numero  vel  magnitudine  creverint,  eiusdem  naturae 
erunt.  Si  non  tangent  ilium  parva,  ne  maiora  qui- 
dem  ;  si  non  tangent  pauca,  ne  plura  quidem.  Sed 
ex  imbecillitate  vestra  coniecturam  capitis  ingentis 
animi,  et  cum  cogitastis  quantum  putetis  vos  pati 
posse,  sapientis  patientiae  paulo  ulteriorem  terminum 
ponitis.     At  ilium  in  aliis  mundi  finibus  sua  virtus 

3  collocavit nihil vobiscum  commune  habentem.  Quaere 
et  aspera  et  quaecumque  toleratu  gravia  sunt 
audituque  et  visu  refugienda.  Non  obruetur  eorum 
coetu  et  qualis  singulis,  talis  universis  obsistet.  Qui 
dicit  illud  tolerabile  sapienti,  illud  intolerabile,  et 
animi  magnitudinem  intra  certos  fines  tenet,  male 
agit ;   vineit  nos  fortuna,  nisi  tota  vincitur. 

4  Ne  putes  istam  Stoicam  esse  duritiam,  Epicurus, 
quem  vos  patronum  inertiae  vestrae  assumitis  puta- 
tisque  mollia  ac  desidiosa  praecipere  et  ad  voluptates 
ducentia,  "  Raro,"  inquit,  "  sapienti  fortuna  inter- 
venit."     Quam   paene    emisit   viri   vocem  !     Vis   tu 

5  fortius  loqui  et  illam  ex  toto  summovere  !  Domus 
haec  sapientis  angusta,  sine  cultu,  sine  strepitu,  sine 
apparatu,  nullis  adservatur  ianitoribus  turbam  venali 
fastidio  digerentibus,  sed  per  hoc  limen  vacuum  et 
ab  ostiaris  liberum  fortuna  non  transit.  Scit  non  esse 
ilhc  sibi  locum,  ubi  sui  nihil  est. 


"  Epicurus's  doctrine  that  the  highest  pleasure  was  peace 
of  mind  (drapa^ia)  fostered  naturally  inaction  and  aloofness 
from  affairs ;  \d6e  ^nhaas  was  the  watchword  of  his 
followers.  Cf.  Seneca,  De  Beneficiis,  iv.  4.  1  :  "  deus  aversus 
a  mundo  aliud  agit  aut,  quae  maxima  Epicuro  felicitas 
videtur,  nihil  agit." 

*  Epicurea,  p.  74,  xvi  (Usener). 

92 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xv.  2-5 

lether  in  number  or  in  size,  their  nature  will 
main  the  same.  If  small  things  do  not  move  him, 
neither  A^ill  the  greater  ones  ;  if  a  few  do  not  move 
him,  neither  will  more .  But  from  the  measure  of  your 
own  weakness  you  form  your  idea  of  an  heroic  spirit, 
and,  ha%'ing  pictured  how  much  you  think  that  you 
can  endure,  you  set  the  Hmit  of  the  wise  man's  endur- 
ance a  httle  farther  on.  But  his  virtue  has  placed 
lum  in  another  region  of  the  universe  ;  he  has  nothing 
in  common  with  you.  Therefore  search  out  the  hard 
things  and  whatever  is  grievous  to  bear — things  from 
which  the  ear  and  the  eye  must  shrink.  The  whole 
mass  of  them  will  not  crush  him,  and  as  he  with- 
tands  them  singly,  so  will  he  withstand  them 
united.  He  who  says  that  one  thing  is  tolerable  for 
the  wise  man,  another  intolerable,  and  restricts  the 
greatness  of  his  soul  to  definite  bounds,  does 
him  wTong ;  Fortune  conquers  us,  unless  we  wholly 
conquer  her. 

Do  not  suppose  that  such  austerity  is  Stoic  only. 
Epicurus,  whom  you  claim  as  the  advocate  of  your 
pohcy  of  inaction,**  who,  as  you  think,  enjoins  the 
course  that  is  soft  and  indolent  and  conducive  to 
pleasure,  has  said,  "  Rarely  does  Fortune  block  the 
path  of  the  \\ise  man."*  How  near  he  came  to 
uttering  a  manly  sentiment  !  Will  you  speak  more 
heroically  and  clear  Fortune  from  his  path  altogether? 
This  house  of  the  wise  man  is  cramped,  ^^^thout  adorn- 
ment, without  bustle,  -without  pomp,  is  guarded  by 
no  doormen  who,  with  venal  fastidiousness,  dis- 
criminate between  the  \isitors  ;  but  over  its  thresh- 
old, empty  and  devoid  of  keepers.  Fortune  does 
not  pass.  She  knows  that  she  has  no  place  there, 
where  nothing  is  her  own. 

93 


SENECA 

1  16.  Quodsi  Epicurus  quoque,  qui  corpori  plurimuin 
indulsit,  adversus  iniurias  exsurgit,  qui  id  apud  nos 
incredibile  videri  potest  aut  supra  humanae  naturae 
mensuram  ?  Ille  ait  iniurias  tolerabiles  esse  sapienti, 
nos  iniurias  non  esse.     Nee  enim  est,  quod  dicas  hoc 

2  naturae  repugnare.  Non  negamus  rem  incommodam 
esse  verberari  et  impelli  et  aliquo  membro  carere, 
sed  omnia  ista  negamus  iniurias  esse  ;  non  sensum 
illis  doloris  detrahimus,  sed  nomen  iniuriae,  quod  non 
potest  recipi  virtute  salva.  Uter  verius  dicat  vide- 
bimus  ;  ad  contemptum  quidem  iniuriae  uterque 
consentit.  Quaeris  quid  inter  duos  intersit  ?  Quod 
inter  gladiatores  fortissimos,  quorum  alter  premit 
vulnus  et  stat  in  gradu,  alter  respiciens  ad  clamantem 
populum  significat  nihil  esse  et  intercedi  non  patitur. 

3  Non  est,  quod  putes  magnum,  quo  dissidemus  ;  illud 
quo  de  agitur,  quod  unum  ad  vos  pertinet,  utraque 
exempla  hortantur,  contemnere  iniurias  et,  quas 
iniuriarum  umbras  ac  suspiciones  dixerim,  con- 
tumelias,  ad  quas  despiciendas  non  sapiente  opus  est 
viro,  sed  tantum  consipiente,  qui  sibi  possit  dicere  : 
"  Utrum  merito  mihi  ista  accidunt  an  inmerito  ?  Si 
merito,  non  est  contumelia,  iudicium  est,  si  inmerito, 

4  illi  qui  iniusta  facit  erubescendum  est."  Et  quid  est 
illud  quod  contumelia  dicitur  ?  In  capitis  mei  levi- 
tatem  iocatus  est  et  in  oculorum  vahtudinem  et  in 
crurum  gracilitatem  et  in  staturam.  Quae  con- 
tumelia est  quod  apparet  audire  ?     Coram  uno  ali- 


94 


I 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xvi.  1-4 

But  if  even  Epicurus,  who  most  of  all  indulged  the 

tit  -h,  is  up  in  arms  against  injury,  how  can  such  an 

;Utitude  on  our  part  seem  incredible  or  to  be  beyond 

the  bounds  of  human  nature  ?     He  says  that  injuries 

.lie  tolerable  for  the  ^^•ise  man  ;  we  say  that  injuries 

(1.  <  not  exist  for  him.     Nor,  indeed,  is  there  any  reason 

V  hv  you  should  claim  that  this  wars  against  nature. 

\\  e  do  not  deny  that  it  is  an  unpleasant  thing  to  be 

l)t  aten  and  hit,  to  lose  some  bodily  member,  but  we 

(It  nv  that  all  such  things  are  injuries.     We  do  not 

divest  them  of  the  sensation  of  pain,  but  of  the  name 

of  injures  which  is  not  allowable  so  long  as  \irtue  is 

unharmed.     Which  of  the   two   speaks  more  truly 

\\  t'  Avill  consider :   as  to  contempt,  at  any  rate,  for 

■    iiiry  both  think  alike.      Do  you  ask,  then,  what  is 

diiference  between  the  two  ?     The  same  differ- 

e   that  distinguishes   two   gladiators,   both  very 

brave,  one  of  whom  stops  his  wound  and  stands  his 

:>und,  the  other,  turning  to  the  shouting  crowd, 

ces  a  sign  that  he  has  no  wound,  and  permits  no 

1     erference.     There  is  no  need  for  you  to  suppose 

that  our  difference  is  great ;   as  to  the  point,  and  it 

he  only  one  that  concerns  you,  both  schools  urge 

;  to  scorn  injuries  and,  what  I  may  call  the  shadows 

1  suggestions  of  injuries,  insults.     And  one  does  not 

d  to  be  a  wise  man  to  despise  these,  but  merely 

lan  of  sense — one  who  can  say  to  himself :    "  Do 

r  do  I  not,  deserve  that  these  things  befall  me  ? 

it  I  do  deserve  them,  there  is  no  insult — it  is  justice  ; 

^''  I  do  not  deserve  them,  he  who  does  the  injustice 

he  one  to  blush."     And  this  insult,  so  called,  what 

i  ~  1 :  ?    Some  j  est  at  the  baldness  of  my  head,  the  weak- 

UL:^s  of  my  eyes,  the  thinness  of  my  legs,  my  build. 

But  whv  is  it  an  insult  to  be  told  what  is  self-evident  ? 

95 


SENECA 

quid  dictum  ridemus,  coram  pluribus  indignamur,  et 
eorum  aliis  libertatem  non  relinquimus,  quae  ipsi  in 
nos  dicere  adsuevimus  ;  iocis  temperatis  delectamur, 
immodicis  irascimur. 

1  17.  Clirysippus  ait  quendam  indignatum,  quod 
ilium  aliquis  vervecem  marinum  dixerat.  In  senatu 
flentem  vidimus  Fidum  Cornelium,  Nasonis  Ovidii 
generum,  cum  ilium  Corbulo  struthocamelum  de- 
pilatum  dixisset  ;  adversus  alia  maledicta  mores  et 
vitam  convulnerantia  frontis  illi  firmitas  constitit, 
adversus  hoc  tam  absurdum  lacrimae  prociderunt ; 
tanta  animormn  inbecillitas  est,  ubi  ratio  discessit. 

2  Quid,  quod  ofFendimur,  si  quis  sermonem  nostrum 
imitatur,  si  quis  incessum,  si  quis  vitium  aliquod 
corporis  aut  linguae  exprimit  ?  Quasi  notiora  ilia 
fiant  alio  imitante  quam  nobis  facientibus  !  Senec- 
tutem  quidam  inviti  audiunt  et  canos  et  alia  ad  quae 
voto  pervenitur  ;  paupertatis  maledictum  quosdam 
perussit,  quam  sibi  obiecit  quisquis  abscondit.  Itaque 
materia  petulantibus  et  per  contumeliam  urbanis 
detrahitur,  si  ultro  illam  et  prior  occupes  ;    nemo 

3  risum  praebuit  qui  ex  se  cepit.  Vatinium,  hominem 
natum  et  ad  risum  et  ad  odium,  scurram  fuisse  et 
venustum  ac  dicacem  memoriae  proditum  est.  In 
pedes  suos  ipse  plurima  dicebat  et  in  fauces  concisas  ; 
sic  inimicorum,  quos  plures  habebat  quam  morbos, 
et  in  primis  Ciceronis  urbanitatem  efFugerat.  Si  hoc 
potuit  ille  duritia  oris,  qui  assiduis  conviciis  pudere 

"  Pliny,  Nat.  Hist.  ix.  44,  describes  a  sea-monster,  called 
a  "  ram  "  (aries),  which  was  not  a  nice  creature.  The 
shift  to  "  wether."  coarsens  the  insult. 

*  According  to  Plutarch,  Cicero,  9  and  26,  his  neck  was 
covered  with  wens.  He  suffered  also  from  some  deformity 
or  disease  of  the  feet :   cf.  Quintilian,  vi.  3.  75. 

96 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xvi.  4-xvii.  3 

nething  is  said  in  the  presence  of  only  one  person 

1  we  laugh  ;    if  several  are  present,  we  become 

•  igriant,  and  we  do  not  allow  others  the  liberty  of 

-  }  ing  the  very  things  that  we  are  in  the  habit  of 

'-aying  about  ourselves.     Jests,  if  restrained,  amuse 

us  ;  if  unrestrained,  they  make  us  angry. 

Chrysippus  says  that  a  certain  man  grew  indignant 
because  some  one  had  called  him ' '  a  sea-wether . ' ' "  We 
saw  Fidus  Comehus,  the  son-in-law  of  Ovidius  Naso, 
shed  tears  in  the  senate,  when  Corbulo  called  him  a 
plucked  ostrich.  In  the  face  of  other  charges,  damag- 
ing to  his  character  and  standing,  the  composure  of  his 
countenance  was  unruffled,  but  at  one  thus  absurd 
out  burst  his  tears  !  Such  is  the  weakness  of  the 
mind  when  reason  flees.  Why  are  we  offended  if  any 
one  imitates  our  talk  or  walk,  or  mimics  some  defect 
of  body  or  speech  ?  Just  as  if  these  would  become 
more  notorious  by  another's  imitating  them  than  by 
our  doing  them  !  Some  dislike  to  hear  old  age 
spoken  of  and  grey  hairs  and  other  things  which 
men  pray  to  come  to.  The  curse  of  poverty  galls 
some,  but  a  man  makes  it  a  reproach  to  himself  if 
he  tries  to  hide  it.  And  so  sneerers  and  those  who 
point  their  wit  with  insult  are  robbed  of  an  excuse 
if  you  anticipate  it  with  a  move  on  your  part.  No 
one  becomes  a  laughing-stock  who  laughs  at  himself.' 
It  is  common  knowledge  that  Vatinius,  a  man  born 
to  be  a  butt  for  ridicule  and  hate,  was  a  graceful  and 
witty  jester.  Jle  uttered  many  a  jest  at  the  expense 
of  his  own  feet  and  his  scarred  jowls.''  So  he  escaped 
the  wit  of  his  enemies — they  outnumbered  his  afflic- 
tions— and,  above  all,  Cicero's.  If  the  man  who, 
through  constant  abuse,  had  forgotten  how  to  blush, 
was  able,  by  reason  of  his  brazen  face,  to  do  this,  why 

VOL.  I  H  97 


SENECA 

dedidicerat,  cur  is  non  possit,  qui  studiis  liberalibus 
et  sapientiae  cultu  ad  aliquem  profectum  pervenerit  ? 
4  Adice  quod  genus  ultionis  est  eripere  ei,  qui  fecit, 
factae  contumeliae  voluptatem  ;  solent  dicere  :  "  O 
miserum  me  !  Puto,  non  intellexit."  Adeo  fructus 
contumeliae  in  sensu  et  indignatione  patientis  est. 
Deinde  non  deerit  illi  aliquando  par ;  invenietur  qui 
te  quoque  vindicet. 

1  18.  C.  Caesar  inter  cetera  vitia,  quibus  abundabat, 
contumeliosus  mira  libidine  ferebatur  omnis  aliqua 
nota  feriendi,  ipse  materia  risus  benignissima  :  tanta 
illi  palloris  insaniam  testantis  foeditas  erat,  tanta 
oculorum  sub  fronte  anili  latentium  torvitas,  tanta 
capitis  destituti  et  emendicaticiis  capillis  aspersi  de- 
formitas  ;  adice  obsessam  saetis  cervicem  et  exili- 
tatem  crurum  et  enormitatem  pedum.  Immensum 
est,  si  velim  singula  referre,  per  quae  in  parentes 
avosque  suos  contumeliosus  fuit,  per  quae  in  uni- 
verses ordines  ;  ea  referam,  quae  ilium  exitio 
dederunt. 

2  Asiaticum  Valerium  in  primis  amicis  habebat, 
ferocem  virum  et  vix  aequo  animo  alienas  con- 
tumelias  laturum  ;  huic  in  convivio,  id  est  in  contione, 
voce  clarissima,  qualis  in  concubitu  esset  uxor  eius, 
obiecit.  Di  boni,  hoc  virum  audire,  principem  scire  et 
usque  eo  licentiam  pervenisse,  ut,  non  dico  consulari, 

98 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xvii.  3-xvin.  2 

should  any  one  be  unable  to  do  so,  who,  thanks  to  the 
liberal  studies  and  the  training  of  philosophy,  has 
attained  to  some  growth  ?  Besides,  it  is  a  sort  of 
revenge  to  rob  the  man  who  has  sought  to  inflict  an 
insult  of  the  pleasure  of  having  done  so.  "  Oh  dear 
me  !  "  he  will  say,  "  I  suppose  he  didn't  understand." 
Thus  the  success  of  an  insult  depends  upon  the 
sensitiveness  and  the  indignation  of  the  \ictim.  The 
offender,  too,  will  one  day  meet  his  match ;  some 
one  will  be  found  who  will  avenge  you  also. 

Gains  Caesar,  who  amid  the  multitude  of  his 
other  vices  had  a  bent  for  insult,  was  moved  by  the 
strange  desire  to  brand  every  one  with  some  stigma, 
while  he  himself  was  a  most  fruitful  source  of  ridicule  ; 
such  was  the  ugliness  of  his  pale  face  bespeaking 
his  madness,  such  the  wildness  of  his  eyes  lurking 
beneath  the  brow  of  an  old  hag,  such  the  hideousness 
of  his  bald  head  with  its  sprinkhng  of  beggarly  hairs. 
And  he  had,  besides,  a  neck  overgrown  with  bristles, 
spindle  shanks,  and  enormous  feet.  It  would  be  an 
endless  task  were  I  to  attempt  to  mention  the 
separate  acts  by  which  he  cast  insult  upon  his 
parents  and  grandparents  and  upon  men  of  every 
class  ;  I  shall,  therefore,  mention  only  those  which 
brought  him  to  his  destruction. 

Among  his  especial  friends  there  was  a  certain 
Asiaticus  \'alerius,  a  proud-spirited  man  who  w^as 
hardly  to  be  expected  to  bear  with  equanimity 
another's  insults.  At  a  banquet,  that  is  at  a  public 
gathering,  using  his  loudest  voice.  Gains  taunted 
this  man  with  the  way  his  wife  behaved  in  sexual 
intercourse.  Ye  gods  !  what  a  tale  for  the  ears  of 
a  husband  !  what  a  fact  for  an  emperor  to  know  !  and 
what  indecency  that  an  emperor  should  go  so  far  as  to 

99 


SENECA 

non    dico    amico,    sed    tantum    marito    princeps    et 

3  adulterium  suum  narret  et  fastidium  !  Chaereae 
contra,  tribune  militum,  sermo  non  pro  manu  erat, 
languidus  sono  et,  ni  facta  nosses,  suspectior.  Huic 
Gaius  signum  petenti  modo  Veneris,  modo  Priapi 
dabat  aliter  atque  aliter  exprobrans  armato  mollitiam  ; 
haec  ipse  perlucidus,  crepidatus,  auratus.  Coegit  ita- 
que  ilium  uti  ferro,  ne  saepius  signum  peteret  !  Ille 
primus  inter  coniuratos  mamun  sustulit,  ille  cervicem 
mediam  uno  ictu  decidit ;  plurimum  deinde  undique 
publicas  ac  privatas  iniurias  ulciscentium  gladiorum 
ingestum  est,  sed  primus  vir  fuit,  qui  minime  visus 

4  est.  At  idem  Gaius  omnia  contumelias  putabat,  ut 
sunt  ferendarum  impatientes  faciendarum  cupidis- 
simi ;  iratus  fuit  Herennio  Macro,  quod  ilium  Gaium 
salutaverat,  nee  impune  cessit  primipilari,  quod 
Caligulam  dixerat  ;  hoc  enim  in  castris  natus  et 
alumnus  legionum  vocari  solebat,  nullo  nomine  mili- 
tibus  familiarior  umquam  factus,  sed  iam  Caligulam 

6  convicium  et  probrum  iudicabat  cothurnatus.^     Ergc 
hoc   ipsum    solacio    erit,    etiam    si    nostra   facility 
ultionem    omiserit,    futurum    aliquem    qui    poem 
exigat  a  procace  et  superbo  et  iniurioso,  quae  vitis 

^  cothurnatus  Pincianus,  cf.  Suetonitis,  Cal.  52  :  contur-l 
batus  A. 

"  i.e.,  in  Greek  fashion.  Gaius  was  given  to  eccentricj 
ostentation  in  dress  (Suet.  Cal.  52). 

*>  i.e.,  a  commander  of  the  first  company  of  the  third-Hne^ 
reserves  of  a  Roman  legion. 

"  Reared  in  camp,  he  had  been  nicknamed  "Caligula"' 
by  the  troops  because  he  wore  the  soldier's  low  boot  {caligfa).i 

100 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xviii.  2-5 

report  his  adultery  and  his  dissatisfaction  in  it  to  the 
woman's  very  husband — to  say  nothing  of  his  being 
a  consular,  to  say  nothing  of  his  being  a  friend  !  On 
the  other  hand,  Chaerea,  a  tribune  of  the  soldiers,  had 
a  way  of  talking  that  ill-accorded  with  his  prowess  ; 
his  voice  was  feeble  and,  unless  you  knew  his  deeds, 
was  apt  to  stir  distrust.  When  he  asked  for  the 
watchword,  Gaius  would  give  him  sometimes  "Venus," 
sometimes  "  Priapus,"  seeking  to  taunt  the  man  of 
arms,  in  one  way  or  another,  with  wantonness.  He 
himself,  all  the  while,  was  in  shining  apparel,  shod  with 
sandals,"  and  decked  with  gold.  And  so  Chaerea 
was  driven  to  use  the  sword  in  order  to  avoid  having 
to  ask  for  the  watchword  any  more  !  Among  the 
conspirators  he  was  the  first  to  lift  his  hand ;  it  was 
he  who  with  one  blow  severed  the  emperor's  neck. 
After  that  from  all  sides  blades  showered  upon  him, 
avenging  pubhc  and  private  wrongs,  but  the  first 
hero  was  Chaerea,  who  least  appeared  one.  Yet 
this  same  Gaius  would  interpret  everything  as  an 
insult,  as  is  the  way  of  those  who,  being  most  eager 
to  offer  an  affront,  are  least  able  to  endure  one.  He 
became  angry  at  Herennius  Macer  because  he  ad- 
dressed him  as  Gaius,  while  a  centurion  of  the  first 
maniple  ^  got  into  trouble  because  he  said  "Cahgula." 
For  in  the  camp,  where  he  was  born  and  had  been  the 
pet  of  the  troops,  this  was  the  name  by  which  he  was 
commonly  called,  nor  was  there  ever  any  other  by 
which  he  was  so  well  kno^vn  to  the  soldiers.  But 
now,  having  attained  to  boots,  he  considered  "  Little 
Boots  "  *  a  reproach  and  disgrace.  This,  then,  will 
be  our  comfort  :  even  if  by  reason  of  tolerance  we  , 
omit  revenge,  some  one  will  arise  to  bring  the  im-  / 
pertinent,  arrogant,  and  injurious  man  to  punish- 

101 


SENECA 

numquam  in  uno  homine  et  in  una  contumelia  con- 
siununtur. 

Respiciamus  eorum  exempla,  quorum  laudamus 
patientiam,  ut  Socratis,  qui  comoediarum  publicatos 
in  se  et  spectatos  sales  in  partem  bonam  accepit 
risitque  non  minus  quam  cum  ab  uxore  Xanthippe 
immunda  aqua  perfunderetur.  Antistheni  mater 
barbara  et  Thraessa  obiciebatur  ;  respondit  et  deorum 
matrem  Idaeam  esse. 

1  19.  Non  est  in  rixam  eonluctationemque  venien- 
dum .  Procul  auf er endi  pedes  sunt  et  quicquid  horum  ab 
imprudentibus  fiet  (fieri  autem  nisi  ab  imprudentibus 
non  potest)  neglegendum  et  honores  iniuriaeque  vulgi 
in  promiscuo  habendae.     Nee  his  dolendum  nee  iUis 

2  gaudendum  ;  ahoqui  multa  timore  contumeharum  aut 
taedio  necessaria  omittemus  pubhcisque  et  privatis 
officiis,  ahquando  etiam  salutaribus  non  occurremus, 
dum  muUebris  nos  cura  angit  ahquid  contra  animum 
audiendi.  Ahquando  etiam  obirati  potentibus  de- 
tegemus  hunc  affectum  intemperanti  hbertate.  Non 
est  autem  hbertas  nihil  pati,  fallimur  ;  libertas  est 
animum  superponere  iniuriis  et  eum  facere  se,  ex 
quo  solo  sibi  gaudenda  veniant,  exteriora  diducere  a 
se,  ne  inquieta  agenda  sit  vita  omniimi  risus,  omnium 
linguas  timenti.     Quis  enim  est,  qui  non  possit  con- 

3  tumeliam  facere,  si  quisquam  potest  ?     Diverso  autem 

0  As  notably  the  Clouds  of  Aristophanes. 

»  Since  the  worship  of  Rhea  (or  Cybele),  "  Mother  of 
the  Gods,"  was  associated  with  Cretan  (or  Trojan)  Mt. 
Ida,  the  Athenian  might  call  her  irreverently  a  "  barbarian." 

102 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xvin.  5-xix.  3 

ment ;  for  his  offences  are  never  exhausted  upon  one 
individual  or  in  one  insult. 

Let  us  turn  now  to  the  examples  of  those  whose 
endurance  we  commend — for  instance  to  that  of 
Socrates,  who  took  in  good  part  the  pubhshed  and 
acted  gibes  directed  against  him  in  comedies,"  and 
laughed  as  heartily  as  when  his  vrife  Xanthippe 
drenched  him  with  foul  water.  Antisthenes  was 
taunted  with  ha\'ing  a  barbarian,  a  Thracian  woman, 
for  his  mother  ;  his  retort  was  that  even  the  mother 
of  the  gods  was  from  Mount  Ida.** 

Strife  and  \vTanghng  we  must  not  come  near.  We 
should  flee  far  from  these  things,  and  all  the  provoca- 
tions thereto  of  unthinking  people — which  only  the  un- 
thinking can  give — should  be  ignored,  and  the  honours 
and  the  injuries  of  the  common  herd  be  valued  both 
alike.  We  must  neither  grieve  over  the  one, nor  rejoice 
over  the  other.  Other\\-ise,  from  the  fear  of  insults 
or  from  weariness  of  them,  we  shall  fall  short  in  the 
doing  of  many  needful  things,  and,  suffering  from  a 
womanish  distaste  for  hearing  anything  not  to  our 
mind,  we  shall  refuse  to  face  both  pubUc  and  private 
duties,  sometimes  even  when  they  are  for  our  well- 
being.  At  times,  also,  enraged  against  powerful  men, 
we  shall  reveal  our  feelings  ^^ith  unrestrained  liberty. 
But  not  to  put  up  with  anything  is  not  liberty ;  we 
deceive  ourselves.  Liberty  is  ha\ing  a  mind  that 
rises  superior  to  injur}',  that  makes  itself  the  only 
source  from  which  its  pleasures  spring,  that  separates 
itself  from  all  external  things  in  order  that  man 
may  not  have  to  hve  his  life  in  disquietude,  fearing 
everybody's  laughter,  everybody's  tongue.  For  if 
any  man  can  offer  insult,  who  is  there  who  cannot  ? 
But  the  truly  wise  man  and  the  aspirant  to  msdom 

103 


SENECA 

remedio  utetur  sapiens  afFectatorque  sapientiae. 
Imperfectis  enim  et  adhuc  ad  publicum  se  iudicium 
derigentibus  hoc  proponendum  est  inter  iniurias  ipsos 
contumeliasque  debere  versari ;  omnia  leviora  accident 
expectantibus.  Quo  quisque  honestior  genere,  fama, 
patrimonio  est,  hoc  se  fortius  gerat,  memor  in  prima 
acie  altos  ordines  stare.  ContumeHas  et  verba  pro- 
brosa  et  ignominias  et  cetera  dehonestamenta  velut 
clamorem  hostium  ferat  et  longinqua  tela  et  saxa 
sine  vulnere  circa  galeas  crepitantia  ;  iniurias  vero  ut 
vulnera,  aha  armis,  alia  pectori  infixa,  non  deiectus, 
ne  motus  quidem  gradu  sustineat.  Etiam  si  premeris 
et  infesta  vi  urgere,  cedere  tamen  turpe  est ;  ad- 
signatum  a  natura  locum  tuere.  Quaeris  quis  hie 
4  sit  locus  ?  Viri.  Sapienti  ahud  auxihum  est  huic 
contrarium  ;  vos  enim  rem  geritis,  ilU  parta  victoria 
est.  Ne  repugnate  vestro  bono  et  hanc  spem,  dum  ad 
verum  pervenistis,  ahte  in  animis  libentesque  mehora 
excipite  et  opinione  ac  voto  iuvate.  Esse  ahquid  in- 
victum,  esse  aliquem,  in  quem  nihil  fortuna  possit,  e 
re  pubhca  est  generis  humani. 


104. 


ON  FIRMNESS,  xix.  3-4 

will  use  different  remedies.  For  those  who  are  not 
perfected  and  still  conduct  themselves  in  accordance 
with  pubUc  opinion  must  bear  in  mind  that  they 
have  to  dwell  in  the  midst  of  injury  and  insult ; 
all  misfortune  \N-ill  fall  more  hghtly  on  those  who 
expect  it.  The  more  honourable  a  man  is  by  birth, 
reputation,  and  patrimony,  the  more  heroically  he 
should  bear  himself,  remembering  that  the  tallest 
ranks  stand  in  the  front  battle-line.  Let  him  bear 
insults,  shameful  words,  civil  disgrace,  and  all  other 
degradation  as  he  would  the  enemy's  war-cry,  and 
the  darts  and  stones  from  afar  that  rattle  around 
a  soldier's  helmet  but  cause  no  wound.  Let  him 
endure  injuries,  in  sooth,  as  he  would  wounds — 
though  some  blows  pierce  his  armour,  others  his 
breast,  never  overthro\\Ti,  nor  even  moved  from 
his  ground.  Even  if  you  are  hard  pressed  and  beset 
A\-ith  fierce  violence,  yet  it  is  a  disgrace  to  retreat  ; 
maintain  the  post  that  Nature  assigned  you.  Do 
you  ask  what  this  may  be  ?  The  post  of  a  hero. 
The  wise  man's  succour  is  of  another  sort,  the 
opposite  of  this  ;  for  while  you  are  in  the  heat  of 
action,  he  has  won  the  victory.  Do  not  war  against 
your  o\\-n  good  ;  keep  alive  this  hope  in  your  breasts 
until  you  arrive  at  truth,  and  gladly  give  ear  to  the 
better  doctrine  and  help  it  on  by  your  belief  and 
prayer.  That  there  should  be  something  unconquer- 
able, some  man  against  whom  Fortune  has  no  power, 
works  for  the  good  of  the  commonwealth  of 
mankind. 


105 


LIBER  III 

AD    NOVATVM 

DE  IRA 

LIBER    I 

1  1.  Exegisti  a  me,  Novate,  ut  scriberem  quemad- 
niodum  posset  ira  leniri,  nee  immerito  mihi  videris 
hunc  praecipue  affectum  pertimuisse  maxime  ex  om- 
nibus taetrum  ac  rabidum.  Ceteris  enim  aliquid  quieti 
plaeidique  inest,  hie  totus  concitatus  et  in  impetu 
doloris  est,  armorum  sanguinis  suppliciorum  minima 
humana  furens  cupiditate,  dum  alteri  noceat  sui  neg- 
legens,  in  ipsa  irruens  tela  et  ultionis  secum  ultorem 

2  tracturae  avidus.  Quidam  itaque  e  sapientibus  viris 
iram  dixerunt  brevem  insaniam ;  aeque  enim  impotens 
sui  est,  decoris  oblita,  necessitudinum  immemor,  in 
quod  coepit  pertinax  et  intenta,  rationi  consiliisque 
praeclusa,  vanis  agitata  causis,  ad  dispectum  aequi 
verique  inhabilis,  ruinis  simillima,  quae  super  id  quod 

3  oppressere  franguntur.  Ut  scias  autem  non  esse  sanos 
quos  ira  possedit,  ipsum  illorum  habitum  intuere  ; 
nam  ut  furentium  certa  indicia  sunt  audax  et  minax 
106 


BOOK  III 
TO  NOVATUS  ON  ANGER 

BOOK    I 

You  have  importuned  me,  Novatus,  to  write  on  the  tnn"'^ 
subject  of  how  anger  may  be  allayed,  and  it  seems  »'^9«'' 
to  me  that  you  had  good  reason  to  fear  in  an  especial 
degree  this,  the  most  hideous  and  frenzied  of  all  the 
emotions.  For  the  other  emotions  have  in  them  some 
element  of  peace  and  calm,  while  tliis  one  is  wholly 
violent  and  has  its  being  in  an  onrush  of  resentment, 
raging  with  a  most  inhuman  lust  for  weapons,  blood, 
and  punishment,  giving  no  thought  to  itself  if  only 
it  can  hurt  another,  hurling  itself  upon  the  very 
point  of  the  dagger,  and  eager  for  revenge  though^'**"'* 
it  may  drag  down  the  avenger  along  with  it.  Certain ''''*"^*^' 
wise  men,  therefore,  have  claimed  that  anger  is 
temporary  madness.  For  it  is  equally  devoid  of  self- 
control,  forgetful  of  decency,  unmindful  of  ties, 
persistent  and  diligent  in  whatever  it  begins,  closed 
to  reason  and  counsel,  excited  by  trifling  causes,  unfit 
to  discern  the  right  and  true — the  very  counterpart 
of  a  ruin  that  is  shattered  in  pieces  where  it  over- 
whelms. But  you  have  only  to  behold  the  aspect 
of  those  possessed  by  anger  to  know  that  they  are 
insane.  For  as  the  marks  of  a  madman  are  un- 
mistakable— a  bold  and  threatening  mien,  a  gloomy 

107 


SENECA 

vultus,  tristis  frons,  torva  facies,  citatus  gradus, 
inquietae  manus,  color  versus,  crebra  et  vehementius 
acta  suspiria,   ita  irascentium   eadem   signa  sunt : 

4  flagrant  ac  micant  oculi,  multus  ore  toto  rubor  ex- 
aestuante  ab  imis  praecordiis  sanguine,  labra  qua- 
tiuntur,  dentes  comprimuntur,  horrent  ac  surriguntur 
capilli,  spiritus  coactus  ac  stridens,  articulorum  se 
ipsos  torquentium  sonus,  gemitus  mugitusque  et 
parum  explanatis  vocTbus  sermo  praeruptus  et  con- 
plosae  saepius  manus  et  pulsata  humus  pedibus  et 
totum  concitum  corpus ' '  magnasque  irae  minas  agens,' ' 
foeda  visu  et  horrenda  facies  depravantium  se  atque 

6  intumescentium — nescias  utrum  magis  detestabile 
vitium  sit  an  deforme.  Cetera  licet  abscondere  et 
in  abdito  alere  ;  ira  se  profert  et  in  faciem  exit, 
quantoque  maior,  hoc  eflPervescit  manifestius.  Non 
vides  ut  omnium  animalium,  simul  ad  nocendum 
insurrexerunt,  praecurrant  notae  ac  tota  corpora 
solitum  quietumque  egrediantur  habitum  et  feritatem 

6  suam  exasperent  ?  Spumant  apris  ora,  dentes  acu- 
untur  attritu,  taurorum  cornua  iactantur  in  vacuum 
et  harena  pulsu  pedum  spargitur,  leones  fremunt, 
inflantur  irritatis  colla  serpentibus,  rabidarum  canum 
tristis  aspectus  est.  Nullum  est  animal  tam  horren- 
dum  tam  perniciosumque  natura,  ut  non  appareat  in 

7  illo,  simul  ira  invasit,  novae  feritatis  accessio.  Nee 
ignoro  ceteros  quoque  afFectus  vix  occultari,  libidinem 
metumque  et  audaciam  dare  sui  signa  et  posse 
praenosci  ;     neque    enim    ulla    vehementior    intrat 

"  Conjecturally  an  iambic  fragment. 
108 


ON  ANGER,  I.  I.  3-7 

brow,  a  fierce  expression,  a  hurried  step,  restless 
hands,  an  altered  colour,  a  quick  and  more  violent 
breathing — so  likemse  are  the  marks  of  the  angry 
man  ;  his  eyes  blaze  and  sparkle,  his  whole  face  is 
crimson  Avith  the  blood  that  surges  from  the  lowest 
depths  of  the  heart,  his  Ups  quiver,  his  teeth  are 
clenched,  his  hair  bristles  and  stands  on  end,  his 
breathing  is  forced  and  harsh,  his  joints  crack  from 
wTithing,  he  groans  and  bellows,  bursts  out  into 
speech  vrith.  scarcely  intelhgible  words,  strikes  his 
hands  together  continually,  and  stamps  the  ground 
ivith  his  feet ;  his  whole  body  is  excited  and  "  per- 
forms great  angr}'^  threats " " ;  it  is  an  ugly  and 
horrible  picture  of  distorted  and  swollen  frenzy — you 
cannot  tell  whether  this  \ice  is  more  execrable  or 
more  hideous.  Other  vices  may  be  concealed  and 
cherished  in  secret ;  anger  shows  itself  openly  and 
appears  in  the  countenance,  and  the  greater  it  is, 
the  more  visibly  it  boils  forth.  Do  you  not  see  how 
animals  oT  every  sort,  as  soon  as  they  bestir  them- 
selves for  mischief,  show  premonitory  signs,  and  how 
their  whole  body,  forsaking  its  natural  state  of  repose, 
accentuates  their  ferocity  ?  Wild  boars  foam  at  the 
mouth  and  sharpen  their  tusks  by  friction,  bulls 
toss  their  horns  in  the  air  and  scatter  the  sand  by 
pawing,  lions  roar,  snakes  puff  up  their  necks  when 
they  are  angn,',  and  mad  dogs  have  a  sullen  look. 
No  animal  is  so  hateful  and  so  deadly  by  nature  as 
not  to  show  a  fresh  access  of  fierceness  as  soon  as  it 
is  assailed  by  anger.  And  yet  I  am  aware  that  the 
other  emotions  as  well  are  not  easily  concealed  ;  that 
lust  and  fear  and  boldness  all  show  their  marks  and 
can  be  recognized  beforehand.  For  no  violent  agita- 
tion can  take  hold  of  the  mind  without  affecting  in 

109 


SENECA 

concitatio,  quae  nihil  moveat  in  vultu.     Quid  ergo 
interest  ?     Quod  alii  affectus  apparent,  hie  eminet. 

2.  lam  vero  si  effectus  eius  damnaque  intueri  velis, 
nulla  pestis  humano  generi  pluris  stetit.  Videbis 
caedes  ac  venena  et  reorum  mutuas  sordes  et  urbium 
clades  et  totarum  exitia  gentium  et  principum  sub 
civili  hasta  capita  venalia  et  subiectas  tectis  faces  nee 
intra  moenia  coercitos  ignes  sed  ingentia  spatia  regio- 
num  hostili  flamma  relucentia.  Aspice  nobilissimarum 
civitatum  fundamenta  vix  notabilia  ;  has  ira  deiecit. 
Aspice  solitudines  per  multa  milia  sine  habitatore 
desertas  ;  has  ira  exhausit.  Aspice  tot  memoriae 
proditos  duces  mali  exempla  fati  ;  alium  ira  in  cubili 
suo  confodit,  alium  intra  sacra  mensae  iura  percussit, 
alium  intra  leges  celebrisque  spectaculum  fori  lan- 
cinavit,  alium  filii  parricidio  dare  sanguinem  iussit, 
alium  servili  manu  regalem  aperire  iugulum,  alium 
in  cruce  membra  distendere.  Et  adhuc  singulorum 
supnlicia  narro  ;  quid,  si  tibi  libuerit  relictis  in  quos 
ira  viritim  exarsit  aspicere  caesas  gladio  contiones  et 
plebem  immisso  milite  contrucidatam  et  in  perniciem 
promiscuam  totos  populos  capitis  damnatos^ 


^  damnatos  restored  by  Madvig,  after  which  a  leaf  or 
more  of  the  MS.  has  been  lost. 

"  i.e.,  base  defendants  bring  countercharges  of  baseness. 

*  The  proscriptions  of  Sulla,  Marius,  and  the  triumvirs, 
and  the  destruction  of  such  cities  as  Carthage,  Corinth,  and 
Numantia  give  point  to  the  rhetoric, 

«  Cf.  the  fate  of  Clitus,  De  Ira,  iii.  17.  1. 

^  Perhaps  a  reference  to  the  murder  of  Tiberius  Gracchus. 

«  In  the  lost  portion  of  the  text  Seneca  seems  to  have 
discussed  the  reason  of  anger,  citing  ancient  definitions  of 
110 


ON  ANGER,  I.  I.  7-II.  3 

some  way  the  countenance.  Where,  then,  Ues  the 
difference  ?  In  this — the  other  emotions  show, 
anger  *ta«ds  out . 

Moreover,  if  you  choose  to  view  its  results  and  Kd«"vxft 
the  harm  of  it,  ho  plague  has  cost  the  human  race  «ff*'*'^ 
mor^  dear^  _You  will  see  bloodshed  and  poisoning, 
the  \'ile  countercharges  of  criminals,"  the  downfall 
of  cities  and  whole  nations  given  to  destruction, 
princely  persons  sold  at  public  auction,  houses  put 
to  the  torch,  and  conflagration  that  halts  not  within 
the  city- walls,  but  makes  great  stretches  of  the 
country  glow  with  hostile  flame.*  Behold  the  most 
glorious  cities  whose  foundations  can  scarcely  be 
traced — anger  cast  them  doA\Ti.  Behold  solitudes 
stretching  lonely  for  many  miles  without  a  single 
dweller — anger  laid  them  waste.  Behold  all  the 
leaders  who  have  been  handed  down  to  posterity  as 
instances  of  an  e\'il  fate — anger  stabbed  this  one  in 
his  bed,  struck  do\^■n  this  one  amid  the  sanctities  of 
the  feast,''  tore  this  one  to  pieces  in  the  very  hpme 
of  the  law  and  in  full  view  of  the  crowded  forum,** 
forced  this  one  to  have  his  blood  spilled  by  the 
murderous  act  of  his  son,  another  to  have  his  royal 
throat  cut  by  the  hand  of  a  slave,  another  to  have 
his  limbs  stretched  upon  the  cross.  And  hitherto 
I  have  mentioned  the  sufferings  of  individual  persons 
only  ;  what  if,  lea\'ing  aside  these  who  singly  felt 
the  force  of  anger's  flame,  you  should  choose  to  view 
the  gatherings  cut  dovm  by  the  sword,  the  popu- 
lace butchered  by  soldiery  let  loose  upon  them,  and 
whole  peoples  condemned  to  death  in  common  ruin  * 
»  *  «  ♦  ♦         «  « 

the  passion  and  giving  his  own.  Lactantius,  De  Ira  Dei, 
17,  supplies  significant  evidence  for  the  context. 

Ill 


SENECA 

4  tamquam  aut  curam  nostram  deserentibus  aut 
auctoritatem  contemnentibus.  Quid  ?  Gladiatoribus 
quare  populus  irascitur  et  tam  inique,  ut  iniuriam 
putet,  quod  non  libenter  pereunt  ?  Contemni  se 
iudicat  et  vultu,  gestu,  ardore  a  spectatore  in  ad- 

6  versarium  vertitur.  Quicquid  est  tale,  non  est  ira, 
sed  quasi  ira,  sicut  puerorum,  qui  si  ceciderunt, 
terram  verberari  volunt  et  saepe  ne  sciunt  quidem, 
cur  irascantur,  sed  tantum  irascuntur,  sine  causa  et 
sine  iniuria,  non  tamen  sine  aliqua  iniuriae  specie 
nee  sine  aliqua  poenae  cupiditate.  Deluduntur  itaque 
imitation  e  plagarum  et  simulatis  deprecantium 
lacrimis  placantur  et  falsa  ultione  falsus  dolor  toUitur. 

1  3.  "  Irascimur,"  inquit,  "  saepe  non  illis  qui  lae- 
serunt,  sed  iis  qui  laesuri  sunt ;  ut  scias  iram  non  ex 
iniuria  nasci."  Verum  est  irasci  nos  laesuris,  sed 
ipsa  cogitatione  nos  laedunt,  et  iniuriam  qui  facturus 

2  est  iam  facit.  "  Ut  scias,"  inquit,  "  non  esse  iram 
poenae  cupiditatem,  infirmissimi  saepe  potentissimis 
irascuntur  nee  poenam  concupiscunt  quam  non 
sperant."  Primum  diximus  cupiditatem  esse  poenae 
exigendae,  non  facultatem ;  concupiscunt  autem 
homines  et  quae  non  possunt.  Deinde  nemo  tam 
hmnilis  est,  qui  poenam  vel  summi  hominis  sperare 
non  possit ;  ad  nocendum  potentes  sumus.  Aristo- 

"  The  speaker  here  criticizes  Seneca's  definition  of  anger, 
drawn   from   Posidonius,   which    has    been    preserved    by 
Lactantius  {I.e.):  "ira  est  cupiditas  ulciscendae  iniuriae." 
112 


ON  ANGER,  I.  II.  4-ni.  2 

as  if  either  forsaking  our  protection,  or  despising 
our  authority.  Tell  me,  why  do  we  see  the  people 
grow  angry  ^\-ith  gladiators,  and  so  unjustly  as  to 
deem  it  an  oiFence  that  they  are  not  glad  to  die  ? 
They  consider  themselves  affronted,  and  from  mere  r^cck.  a* 
spectators  transform  themselves  into  enemies,  in^^'^'***'* 
looks,  in  gesture,  and  in  %dolence.  Whatever  this 
may  be,  it  is  not  anger,  but  mock  anger,  like  that 
of  children  who,  if  they  fall  do^-n,  want  the  earth 
to  be  thrashed,  and  who  often  do  not  even  know 
why  they  are  angry — they  are  merely  angry,  without 
any  reason  and  \\'ithout  being  injured,  though  not 
without  some  semblance  of  injury  and  not  ^\^thout 
some  desire  of  exacting  punishment.  And  so  they  are 
deceived  by  imaginary  blows  and  are  pacified  by  the 
pretended  tears  of  those  who  beg  forgiveness,  and 
mock  resentment  is  removed  by  a  mock  revenge. 

"  Wq^  often  get  angry,"  some  one  rejoins,  "  not  3».<j«r-  •• 
at  those  who  have  hurt  us,  but  at  those  who  intend  >^<^"^  * 
to  hurt  us  ;   you  may,  therefore,  be  sure  that  anger  '^•"*7* 
is  not  born  of  injury.""     It  is  true  that  we  do  get 
angry  at  those  who  intend  to  hurt  us,  but  by  the 
very   intention   they   do   hurt   us  ;     the    man   who 
intends  to  do  injury  has  already  done  it.     "  But," 
our  friend  replies,  "  that  you  may  know  that  anger 
is  not  the  desire  to  exact  punishment,  the  weakest 
men  are  often  angry  at  the  most  powerful,  and  if 
they  have  no  hope  of  inflicting  punishment,  they 
have  not  the  desire."     In  the  first  place,  I  spoke  of 
the  desire  to  exact  punishment,  not  of  the  power  to 
do  so  ;    moreover,  men  do  desire  even  what  they 
cannot  attain.     In  the  second  place,  no  one  is  so 
lowly  that  he  cannot  hope  to  punish  even  the  loftiest  / 
qf  men  ;    we  all  have  power  to  do  harm.     Aristotle's 
VOL.  I  I  11.^ 


SENECA 

3  telis  finitio  non  niultum  a  nostra  abest ;  ait  enim 
iram  esse  cupiditatem  doloris  reponendi.  Quid  inter 
nostram  et  hanc  finitionem  intersit,  exsequi  longum 
est.  Contra  utramque  dicitur  feras  irasci  nee  iniuria 
irritatas   nee  poenae    dolorisve   alieni   causa ;     nam 

4  etiam  si  haec  efficiunt,  non  haec  petunt.  Sed  dicen- 
dum  est  feras  ira  carere  et  omnia  animalia^  praeter 
hominem  ;  nam  cum  sit  inimica  rationi,  nusquam 
tamen  nascitur,  nisi  ubi  rationi  locus  est.  Impetus 
habent  ferae,  rabiem,  feritatem,  incursum  ;  iram 
quidem  non  magis  quam  luxuriam,  et  in  quasdam 

5  voluptates  intemperantiores  horaine  sunt.  Non  est 
quod  credas  illi  qui  dicit  : 

Non  aper  irasci  meminit,  non  fidere  cursu 
cerva  nee  armentis  incurrere  fortibus  ursi. 

Irasci  dicit  incitari,  impingi ;  irasci  quidem  non  magis 

6  sciunt  quam  ignoscere.  Muta  animalia  humanis 
affectibus  carent,  habent  autem  similes  illis  quosdam 
impulsus.  Alioquin  si  amor  in  illis  esset  et  odium, 
esset  amicitia^  et  simultas,  dissensio  et  concordia  ; 
quorum  aliqua  in  illis  quoque  exstant  vestigia,  ceterum 
humanorum  pectorum  propria  bona  malaque  sunt. 

7  Nulli  nisi  homini  concessa  prudentia  est,  providentia, 
diligentia,  cogitatio,  nee  tantum  virtutibus  humanis 
animalia  sed  etiam  \itiis  prohibita  sunt.  Tota  illorum 
ut   extra   ita   intra  forma   humanae   dissimilis   est  ; 

^  animalia  added  by  Vahlen. 
^  Madvig  inserts  si  before  amicitia  and  dissensio. 

"  De  A.nitna,  403  a  30  :  dia<p£povTijos  8'  &c  dpiixaivro  (pvcnKos 
re  Kai  dia\eKrLi:6s  eKaarov  avrSiv,  olov  opyj]  tl  ecrriv  '  6  fjikv  yap 
6pe^LV  avTiXi'TT-qaews  ij  tl  toiovtov,  6  8i  ^icnv  rod  irepl  KapSiav 
ai/xaros  ■^  $epfx.od.     Cf.  Rhetor,  ii.  2. 

*  Ovid,  Met,  vii.  545  sq.,  where  he  describes  the  effect 
of  a  plague. 

114 


ON  ANGER,  I.  in.  3-7 

definition  "  differs  little  from  mine  ;  for  he  says  that 
anger  is  f!Te~desire  to  fepa.y  suffering.  To  trace  the 
difference  between  his  definition  and  mine  would  take 
too  long.  In  criticism  of  both  it  may  be  said  that 
wild  beasts  become  angry  though  they  are  neither 
stirred  by  injury  nor  bent  on  the  punishment  or  the 
suffering  of  another  ;  for  even  if  they  accomplish 
these  ends,  they  do  not  seek  them.  But  our  reply  "''f"  "' 
must  be  that  wild  beasts  and  all  animals,  except  man,  '"  '*'**'" 
are  not  subject  to  anger;  for  while  it  is  the  foe  of 
reason,  it  is,  nevertheless,  born  only  where  reason 
dwells.  Wild  beasts  have  impulses,  madness,  fierce- 
ness, aggressiveness  ;  but  they  no  more  have  anger 
than  they  have  luxuriousness.  Yet  in  regard  to 
certain  pleasures  they  are  less  self-restrained  than 
man.  You  are  not  to  believe  the  words  of  the 
poet : 

The  boar  his  wrath  forgets,  the  hind  her  trust  in  flight. 
Nor  bears  will  now  essay  the  sturdy  kine  to  fight" 

Their  being  aroused  and  spurred  to  action  he  calls 
their  "  wrath  "  ;  but  they  know  no  more  how  to  be 
wToth  than  to  pardon.  Dumb  animals  lack  the 
emotions  of  man,  but  they  have  certain  impulses 
similar  to  these  emotions.  Otherwise,  if  they  were 
capable  of  love  and  hate,  they  would  also  be  capable 
of  friendship  and  enmity,  discord  and  harmony  ;  and 
some  traces  of  these  quaUties  do  appear  in  them  also, 
but  the  qualities  of  good  and  bad  are  peculiar  to  the 
human  breast.  Wisdom,  foresight,  diligence,  and 
reflection  have  been  granted  to  no  creature  but  man, 
and  not  only  his  wtues  but  also  his  faults  have  been^ 
withheld  from  the  animals.  As  their  outward  form 
is  wholly  different  from  that  of  man,  so  is  their  inner 
~  115 


SENECA 

regium  est  illud  et  principale  aliter  ductum.  Ut  vox 
est  quidem,  sed  non  explanabilis  et  perturbata  et 
verboruin  inefficax,  ut  lingua,  sed  devincta  nee  in 
motus  varios  soluta,  ita  ipsum  principale  parum 
subtile,  parum  exactum.  Capit  ergo  visus  speciesque 
rerum  quibus  ad  impetus  evocetur,  sed  turbidas  et 
8  confusas.  Ex  eo  procursus  illorum  tumultusque 
vehementes  sunt,  metus  autem  sollicitudinesque  et 
tristitia  et  ira  non  sunt,  sed  his  quaedam  similia. 
Ideo  cito  cadunt  et  mutantur  in  contrarium  et,  cum 
acerrime  saevierunt  expaveruntque,  pascuntur  et  ex 
fremitu  discursuque  vesano  statim  quies  soporque 
sequitur. 

1  4.  Quid  esset  ira  satis  explicitum  est.  Quo  distet 
ab  iracundia  apparet ;  quo  ebrius  ab  ebrioso  et 
timens  a  timido.     Iratus  potest  non  esse  iracundus  ; 

2  iracundus  potest  aliquando  iratus  non  esse.  Cetera, 
quae  pluribus  apud  Graecos  nominibus  in  species 
iram  distinguunt,  quia  apud  nos  vocabula  sua  non 
habent,  praeteribo,  etiam  si  amarum  nos  acerbumque 
dicimus,  nee  minus  stomachosum,  rabiosum,  cla- 
mosum,  difficilem,  asperum,  quae  omnia  irarum 
differentiae  sunt  ;    inter  hos  morosum  ponas  licet, 

3  delicatum  iracundiae  genus.  Quaedam  enim  sunt 
irae,  quae  intra  clamorem  considant,  quaedam  non 
minus  pertinaces  quam  frequentes,  quaedam  saevae 
manu  verbis  parciores,  quaedam  in  verborum  male- 

116 


ON  ANGER,  I.  III.  7-iv.  3 

nature  ;  its  guiding  and  directing  principle  is  cast 
in  a.  different  mould.  They  have  a  voice,  it  is  true, 
but  it  is  unintelligible,  uncontrolled,  and  incapable 
of  speech  ;  they  have  a  tongue,  but  it  is  shackled  and 
not  free  to  make  many  different  movements.  So 
likewise  in  them  the  ruling  principle  itself  is  lacking 
in  fiijene^s  and  precision.  Consequently,  while  it 
forms  impressions  and  notions  of  the  things  that 
arouse  it  to  action,  they  are  clouded  and  indistinct. 
It  follows,  accordingly,  that  while  they  have  violent 
outbreaks  and  mental  disturbances,  they  do  not  have 
fear  and  anxiety,  sorrow  and  anger,  but  certain 
states_similar  to  them.  These,  therefore,  quickly 
pass  and  change  to  the  exact  reverse,  and  animals, 
after  showing  the  sharpest  frenzy  and  fear,  \\-i\\  begin 
to  feed,  and  their  frantic  bellowing  and  plunging  is 
immediately  followed  by  repose  and  sleep. 

What  anger  is  has  now  been  sufficiently  explained,  i 
The-difference  betiveeu  it  and  irascibility  is  evident ;  ' 
it  is  like  the  difference  between  a  drunken  man  and 
a  drunkard,  between  a  frightened  man  and  a  coward. 
An  angry  man  may  not  be  an  irascible  man  ;  an 
irascible  man~msLj,  at  times,  not  be  an  angry  man. 
The~^other"eategories  which  the  Greeks,  using  a 
multiphcity  of  terms,  estabhsh  for  the  different  kinds 
of  anger  I  shall  pass  over,  since  we  have  no  distinct- 
ive words  for  them  ;  and  yet  we  call  men  bitter  and 
harsh,  and,  just  as  often,  choleric,  rabid,  braAvlsome, 
captious,  and  fierce — all  of  wliich  designate  different 
aspects  of  anger.  Here,  too,  you  may  place  the 
peevish  man,  whose  state  is  a  mild  sort  of  irascibility. 
Now  there  are  certain  kinds  of  anger  which  subside 
in  noise  ;  some  are  as  persistent  as  they  are  common ; 
some  are  fierce  in  deed  but  inclined  to  be  frugal  of 

117 


SENECA 

dictorumque  amaritudinem  efiFusae  ;  quaedam  ultra 
querellas  et  aversationes  non  exeunt,  quaedam  altae 
gravesque  sunt  et  introrsus  versae.  Mille  aliae  species 
sunt  mali  multiplicis. 

1  5.  Quid  esset  ira  quaesitum  est,  an  in  ullum  aliud 
animal  quam  in  hominem  caderet,  quo  ab  iracundia 
distaret,  quot  eius  species  essent ;  nunc  quaeramus 
an  ira  secundum  naturam  sit  et  an  utilis  atque  ex 
aliqua  parte  retinenda. 

2  An  secundum  naturam  sit  manifestum  erit,  si 
hominem  inspexerimus.  Quo  quid  est  mitius,  dum 
in  recto  animi  habitus  est  ?  Quid  autem  ira  crudelius 
est  ?  Quid  homine  aliorum  amantius  ?  Quid  ira 
infestius  ?  Homo  in  adiutorium  mutuum  genitus  est, 
ira  in  exitium ;  hie  congregari  vult,  ilia  discedere ; 
hie  prodesse,  illanocere  ;  hie  etiam  ignotis  succurrere, 
ilia  etiam  carissimos  petere  ;  hie  ahorum  commodis 
vel    impendere    se    paratus    est,  ilia    in    periculum, 

3  dummodo  deducat,  descender e.  Quis  ergo  magis 
naturam  rerum  ignorat  quam  qui  optimo  eius  operi 
et  emendatissimo  hoc  ferum  ac  perniciosum  vitium 
adsignat  ?  Ira,  ut  diximus,  avida  poenae  est,  cuius 
cupidinem  inesse  pacatissimo  hominis  pectori  minime 
secundum  eius  naturam  est.  Beneficiis  enim  humana 
vita  constat  et  concordia,  nee  terrore  sed  mutuo 
amore  in  foedus  auxiliumque  commune  constringitur. 

1  6.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  ahquando  castigatio  neces- 
saria  est  ?  "  Quidni  ?  Sed  haec  sine  ira,  cum  ratione  ; 

*  i.e.,  not  entirely  discarded  by  the  wise  man. 
118 


ON  ANGER,  I.  IV.  3-vi.  1 

•ds  ;  some  are  vented  in  bitterness  of  speech  and 
-es  ;    certain  kinds  do  not  go  beyond  a  word  of 
complaint  and  a  show  of  coohiess,  others  are  deep- 
seated  and  weighty  and  brood  in  a  man.     There  are 
a  thousand  different  shapes  of  the  multiform  evil. 

Hitherto  we  have  inquired  what  anger  is,  whether  it 
beloflgs  taany  other  creature  than  man,  how  it  differs 
fronijrascibility .  and  in  how  many  aspects  it  appears  ; 
let  u&-now  mquire  whether  anger  is  in  accordance  5<^cu'j«»'« 
with  nature  ;    whether  it  is  expedient  and  ought,    ^ '*"/'' 
therefore,  in  some  measure  to  be  kept." 

Whether  it  is  in  accordance  with  nature  will  ^^ 
become  clear  if  we  turn  our  eyes  to  man.  \\'hat  is 
more  gentle  than  he  while  he  is  in  a  right  state  of 
min4  ?  But  what  is  more  cruel  than  anger  ?  What 
is  more  loving  to  others  than  man  ?  \Miat  more 
hostile  than  anger  ?  Man  is  bom  for  mutual  help  ;  ^'^'^"'^ 
anger  for  mutual  destruction.  The  one  desires 
union,  the  otherdTsunion  ;  the~bne  to  help,  the  other 
to  harm  ;  one  would  succour  even  strangers,  the 
other  attack  its  best  beloved  ;  the  one  is  ready  even 
to  expend  himself  for  the  good  of  others,  the  other 
to  plunge  into  peril  only  if  it  can  drag  others  along. 
Who,  therefore,  has  less  knowledge  of  the  ways  of 
Nature  than  the  man  who  would  ascribe  to  her  best 
and  most  finished  work  this  cruel  and  deadly  \ice  ? 
Anger,  as  I  have  said,  is  bent  on  punisliment,  and  that  "^ 
such  a  desire  should  find  a  harbour  in  man's  most 
peaceful  breast  accords  least  of  all  with  his  nature.'*""^*''**' 
For  human  hfe  is  founded  on  kindness  and  concord, 
and  is  bound  into  an  alliance  for  common  Tielp,  not 
by  terror,  but  by  mutual  love.  '"" 

"  WhaOhen  ^ ''  yon  say ;  "  is  not^con-ection  some-     , 
times    necessary?"    Of   course    it   is;     but    with 

119 


SENECA 

non  enim  nocet  sed  medetur  specie  nocendi.  Quem- 
admodum  quaedam  hastilia  detorta,  ut  corrigamus, 
adurimus  et  adactis  cuneis,  non  ut  frangamus  sed  ut 
explicemus,  elidimus,  sic  ingenia  vitio  prava  dolore 

2  corporis  animique  corrigimus.  Nempe  medicus  primo 
in  levibus  vitiis  temptat  non  multum  ex  cotidiana 
consuetudine  inflectere  et  cibis,  potionibus,  exercita- 
tionibus  ordinem  imponere  ac  valetudinem  tantum 
mutata  vitae  dispositione  firmare.  Proximum  est, 
ut  modus  proficiat ;  si  modus  et  ordo  non  proficit, 
subducit  aliqua  et  circumcidit ;  si  ne  adhoc  quidem 
respondet,  interdicit  cibis  et  abstinentia  corpus  ex- 
onerat ;  si  frustra  molliora  cesserunt,  ferit  venam 
membrisque,  si  adhaerentia  nocent  et  morbum 
diffundunt,   manus   adfert ;     nee   ulla   dura   videtur 

3  curatio,  cuius  salutaris  effectus  est.  Ita  legum  prae- 
sidem  civitatisque  rectorem  decet,  quam  diu  potest, 
verbis  et  his  mollioribus  ingenia  curare,  ut  facienda 
suadeat  cupiditatemque  honesti  et  aequi  conciliet 
animis  faciatque  vitiorum  odium,  pretium  virtutium  ; 
transeat  deinde  ad  tristiorem  orationem,  qua  moneat 
adhuc  et  exprobret ;  novissime  ad  poenas  et  has 
adhuc  leves,  revocabiles  decurrat ;  ultima  suppUcia 
sceleribus  ultimis  ponat,  ut  nemo  pereat,  nisi  quern 


"  i.e.,  the  poles  or  saplings  from  which  spears  were  made. 
120 


ON  ANGER,  I.  VI.  1-3 

,  retion,  not  "with  anger .     For  it  will  not  hurt, 
L-ut  wTU  heal  under  the  guise  of  hurting.     As  we 
apply  the  flame  to  certain  spearshafts "  when  they 
are  crooked  in  order  to  straighten  them,  and  com- 
press them  by  dri\-ing  in  wedges,  not  to  crush  them, 
but  to  take  out  their  kinks,  so  through  pain  applied 
to  body  and  mind  we  reform  the  natures  oT  men 
that  are  distorted  by  vice.     ^lanifestly,  a  p¥ysician, 
in  the  case  ot  shghfSisorders,  tries  at  first  not  to 
make  much  change  in  his  patient's  daily  habits  ;   he 
lays  down  a  regimen  for  food,  drink,  and  exercise, 
and  tries  to  improve  his  health  only  through  a  change 
in  the  ordering  of  his  life.     His  next  concern  is  to 
see  that  the  amount  is  conducive  to  health.     If  the 
first  amount  and  regimen  fail   to   bring  rehef,   he 
orders  a  reduction  and  lops  off  some  things.     If  still 
there  is  no  response,  he  prohibits  food  and  disburdens 
the  body  by  fasting.     If  these  milder  measures  are 
unavailing  he  opens  a  vein,  and  then,  if  the  limbs 
by  continuing  to  be  attached  to  the  body  are  doing 
it  harm  and  spreading  the  disease,  he  lays  violent 
hands  on  them.     No  treatment  seems  harsh  if  its 
result  is  salutar)-.     Similarly,  it  becomes  A  guardian  <^>^»-ce> 
of  the  la^v,  the  ruler  of  the  state,  to  heal  human  ^  '^"^ 
nature  by  the  use  of  words,  and  these  of  the  milder 
sort,  as  long  as  he  can,  to  the  end  that  he  may  per- 
suade a  man  to  do  what  he  ought  to  do,  and  win  over 
his  heart  to  a  desire  for  the  honourable  and  the  just, 
and  imptant  in  his  mind  hatred  of  vice  and  esteem  of 
virtue.     Let  him  pass  next  to  harsher  language,  inT^ 
which  he  will  still  aim  at  admonition  and  reproof.*^ 
Lastly,  let  him  resort  to  punishment,  yet  still  making 
it  hght  and  not  irrevocable.     Extreme  punishment 
let  him  appoint  only  to  extreme  crime,  so  that  no 

121 


SENECA 

4  perire  etiam  pereuntis  intersit.  Hoc  uno  medentibus 
erit  dissimilis,  quod  illi  quibus  vitam  non  potuerunt 
largiri  facilem  exitum  praestant,  hie  damnatos  cum 
dedecore  et  traductione  vita  exigit,  non  quia  de- 
lectetur  ullius  poena — procul  est  enim  a  sapiente  tam 
inhumana  feritas — sed  ut  documentum  omnium  sint, 
et  quia  vivi  noluerunt  prodesse,  morte  certe  eorum 
res  publica  utatur.  Non  est  ergo  natura  hominis 
poenae   adpetens  ;    ideo  ne  ira  quidem  secundum 

5  naturam  hominis,  quia  poenae  adpetens  est.  Et 
Platonis  argumentum  adferam — quid  enim  nocet 
alienis  uti  ex  parte  qua  nostra  sunt  ? — :  "  Vir  bonus," 
inquit,  "  non  laedit."  Poena  laedit ;  bono  ergo 
poena  non  convenit,  ob  hoc  nee  ira,  quia  poena  irae 
con ve nit.  Si  vir  bonus  poena  non  gaudet,  non 
gaudebit  ne  eo  quidem  adfectu,  cui  poena  voluptati 
est ;  ergo  non  est  naturalis  ira. 

1  7.  Numquid,  quamvis  non  sit  naturahs  ira,  ad- 
sumenda  est,  quia  utilis  saepe  fuit  ?  Extollit  animos 
et  incitat,  nee  quicquam  sine  ilia  magnificum  in  bello 
fortitudo  gerit,  nisi  hinc  flamma  subdita  est  et  hie 
stimulus  peragitavit  misitque  in  pericula  audaces. 
Optimum  itaque  quidam  putant  temperare  irain,  non 
toUere,  eoque  detracto,  quod  exundat,  ad  salutarem 

"  Republic,  i.  335  d. 
122 


ON  ANGER,  I.  VI.  4-vii.  1 

man  will  lose  his  life  unless  it  is  to  the  benefit  even 
of  the  loser  to  lose  it.  In  only  one  particular  will 
he  differ  from  the  physician.  For  while  the  one 
supphes  to  the  patients  to  whom  he  has  been  unable 
to  give  the  boon  of  Ufe  an  easy  exit  from  it,  the  other 
forcibly  expels  the  condemned  from  Ufe,  covered 
with  disgrace  and  pubhc  ignominy,  not  because  he 
takes  pleasure  in  the  punishment  of  any  one — for  the 
wise  man  is  far  from  such  inhuman  ferocity-  -but  that 
theyjaaay  prove  a  warning  to  all,  and,  since  they  were 
rin\villing  to  be  useful  while  aUve,  that  in  death  at 
any-xate. they  may  be  of  ser\-ice  to  the  state.  Plan's 
nature,  then,  does  not  crave  vengeance ;  neither, 
therefore,  does  anger  accord  with  man's  nature, 
because  anger  craves  vengeance.  And  I  may  adduce 
here  the  argument  of  Plato — for  what  harm  is  there 
in  using  the  arguments  of  others,  so  far  as  they  are 
our  own  ?  "  The  good  man,"  he  says,  "  does  no 
injujgt-"  "  Punishment  injures  ;  therefore  punish- 
ment is  not  consistent  with  good,  nor,  for  the  same 
reason,  is  anger,  since  punishment  is  consistent  with 
anger.  If  the  good  man  rejoices  not  in  punishment, 
neither  will  he  rejoice  in  that  mood  which  takes 
pleasure  in  punishment ;  therefore  anger  is  contrary 
to  nature. 

Although  anger  be  contrary  to  nature,  may  it  not 
be  right  to  adopt  it,  because  it  has  often  been  useful  ? 
It  rouses  and  incites  the  spirit,  and  without  it  bravery 
performs  no  splendid  deed  in  war — unless  it  supplies 
the  flame,  unless  it  acts  as  a  goad  to  spur  on  brave 
men  and  send  them  into  danger.  Therefore  some 
think  that  the  best  course  is  to  control  anger,  not  to 
banish  it,  and  by  removing  its  excesses  to  confine  it 
withia- bejoeScial    bound-!-,    keeping,    however,    that 

123 


SENECA 

modum  cogere,  id  vero  retinere  sine  quo  languebit 
actio  et  vis  ac  vigor  animi  resolvetur. 

2  Primum  facilius  est  excludere  perniciosa  quam 
regere  et  non  adnoittere  quam  admissa  moderari ; 
nam   cum   se   in   possessione   posuerunt,   potentiora 

3  rectore  sunt  nee  recidi  se  minuive  patiuntur.  Deinde 
ratio  ipsa,  cui  freni  traduntur,  tam  diu  potens  est 
quam  diu  diducta  est  ab  adfectibus  ;  si  miscuit  se 
illis  et  inquinavit,  non  potest  continere  quos  sum- 
movere  potuisset.     Commota  enim  semel  et  excussa 

4  mens  ei  servit  quo  impellitur.  Quarundam  rerum 
initia  in  nostra  potestate  sunt,  ulteriora  nos  vi  sua 
rapiunt  nee  regressum  relinquunt.  Ut  in  praeceps 
datis  corporibus  nullum  sui  arbitrium  est  nee  resistere 
morarive  deiecta  potuerunt,  sed  consilium  omne  et 
paenitentiam  irrevocabilis  praecipitatio  abscidit  et 
non  licet  eo  non  pervenire,  quo  non  ire  licuisset,  ita 
animus  si  in  iram,  amorem  aliosque  se  proiecit  ad- 
fectus,  non  permittitur  reprimere  impetum  ;  rapiat 
ilium  oportet  et  ad  imum  agat  pondus  suum  et 
vitiorum  natura  proclivis. 

1  8.  Optimum  est  primum  irritamentum  irae  pro- 
tinus  spernere  ipsisque  repugnare  seminibus  et  dare 
operam,  ne  incidamus  in  iram.  Nam  si  coepit  ferre 
transversos,  difficilis  ad  salutem  recursus  est,  quoniam 
nihil  rationis  est,  ubi  semel  adfectus  inductus  est  ius- 
124. 


ON  ANGER,  I.  VII.  1-viii.  1 

part  wTthout  which  action  will  be  inert  and  the  mind's 
force-aKuLeneFg^y-Woken,  ^^, 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  easier  to  exclude  harmful 
passions  than  to  rule  them,  and  to  deny  them  admit- 
tance than,  after  they  have  been  admitted,  to  control 
theiQa;|:_J"or  when  they  have  established  themselves 
in  possession,  they  are  stronger  than  their  ruler  and 
do  noL^ermit  themselves  to  be  restrained  or  reduced. 
In  thje^se<3ond  place.  Reason  herself,  to  whom  the^ti  . 
reins^f  power  have  been  entrusted,  remains  mistress  "^*'^' 
only  so  long  as  she  is  kept  apart  from  the  passions  >^ 
if  once  slie  mingles  with  them  and  is  contaminated, 
she  becomes  unable  to  hold  back  those  whom  she 
might  Jiaye^cteared  from  her  path.  For  when  once 
the  mind  has  been  aroused  and  shaken,  it  becomes  the 
slave  of  the  disturbing  agent.  There  are  certain 
things  which  at  the  start  are  under  our  control,  but 
later  hurry  us  away  by  their  violence  and  leave  us 
no  retreat.  As  a  victim  hurled  from  the  precipice  "^ 
has  no  control  of  his  body,  and,  once  cast  off,  can 
neither  stop  nor  stay,  but,  speeding  on  irrevocably, 
is  cut  off  from  all  reconsideration  and  repentance 
and  cannot  now  avoid  arriving  at  the  goal  toward 
which  he  might  once  have  avoided  starting,  so  with 
the  mind — if  it  plunges  into  anger,  love,  or  the  other 
passions,  it  has  no  power  to  check  its  impetus  ;  its 
very  weight  and  the  downward  tendency  of  vice 
needs  must  hurr}-  it  on,  and  drive  it  to  the  bottom. 

TheJiest^jourse  is  to  reject  at  once, the^  first  incite- 
ment to  anger,  to  resist  even  its  small  beginnings,  and 
to  take  pains  to  avoid  falling  into  anger.  For  if  it 
begins  to  lead  us  astray,  the  return  to  the  safe  path 
is  difficult,  since,  if  once  we  admit  the  emotion  and 
by  our  own  free  will  grant  it  any  authority,  reason 


SENECA 

que  illi  aliquod  voluntate  nostra  datum  est  ;  faciet  de 

2  cetero  quantum  volet,  non  quantum  permiseris.  In 
primis,  inquam,  finibus  hostis  arcendus  est ;  nam  cum 
intravit  et  pprtis  se  intulit,  modum  a  captivis  non  ac- 
cipit.  Neque  enim  sepositus  est  animus  et  extrinsecus 
speculatur  adfectus,  ut  illos  non  patiatur  ultra  quam 
oportet  procedere,  sod  in  adfectum  ipse  mutatur  ideo- 
que  non  potest  utilem  illam  vim  et  salutarem  proditam 

3  iam  infirmatamque  revocare.  Non  enim,  ut  dixi,  se- 
paratas  ista  sedes  suas  diductasque  habent,  sed 
afFectus  et  ratio  in  melius  peiusque  mutatio  animi  est. 
Quomodo  ergo  ratio  occupata  et  oppressa  vitiis 
resurget,  quae  irae  cessit  ?  Aut  quemadmodum 
ex  confusione  se  liberabit,  in  qua  peiorum  mixtura 

4  praevaluit  ?  "  Sed  quidam,"  inquit,  "  in  ira  se  con- 
tinent." Utrum  ergo  ita  ut  nihil  faciant  eorum  quae 
ira  dictat  an  ut  aliquid  ?  Si  nihil  faciunt,  apparet 
non  esse  ad  actiones  rerum  necessariam  iram,  quam 
vos,  quasi  fortius  aliquid  ratione  haberet,  advocabatis. 

6  Denique  interrogo  :  valentior  est  quam  ratio  an 
infirmior  ?  Si  valentior,  quomodo  ilh  modum  ratio 
poterit  imponere,  cum  parere  nisi  imbecilliora  non 
soleant  ?  Si  infirmior  est,  sine  hac  per  se  ad  rerum 
effectus  sufficit  ratio  nee  desiderat  inbecilUoris  auxi- 

6  lium.  "  At  irati  quidam  constant  sibi  et  se  continent." 
126 


ON  ANGER,  I.  VIII.  1-6 

be£Qxn£S-filno_avajl ;  after  that  it  \\ill  do,  not  what- 
ever you  let  it,  but  whatever  it  chooses.  The  enemy, 
I  repeat,  must  be  stopped  at  the  ven,'  frontier  ;  for 
if  he  has  passed  it,  and  advanced  within  the  city- 
gates,  he  Avill  not  respect  any  bounds  set  by  his 
captives.  For  the  mind  is  not  a  member  apart,  nof~^ 
does  it_N-ie\vJthe  passions  merely  objectively,  thus/ 
forbidding  them  to  advance  farther  than  they  ought,  .;?/)Wics  t 
but  it  is  itself  transformed  into  the  passion  and  \St>.tl>^**^ 
therefore,  unable  to  recover  its  former  useful  and 
sa\ing  power  when  tliis  has  once  been  betrayed  and 
we^li^iied.  For,  as  I  said  before,  these  two  do  not 
dwell  separate  and  distinct,  but  passion^and  reason  ^ 
are  onh^  the  transformatiQii  of  the  mind  toward  the 
betler-op^th«-w©rse.  How,  then,  Mill  the  reason,  after 
it  has  surrendered  to  anger,  rise  again,  assailed  and 
crushed  as  it  is  by  ^■ice  ?  Or  how  shall  it  free  itself 
from  the  motley  combination  in  which  a  blending 
of  all  the  worse  quahties  makes  them  supreme  ? 
"  Rut/'  <;ayg  gr>mp  .oooL^li  fhf>rf>  are  those  who  control 
themselves  even  in  anger."  You  mean,  then,  that 
they  doT^one  of  the  things  that  anger  dictates,  or 
only  some  of  them  ?  If  they  do  none,  it  is  e\ident 
that  anger  is~nbt  essential  to  the  transactions  of  hfe, 
and  yet  you  were  advocating  it  on  the  ground  that 
it  is  something  stronger  than  reason.  I  ask,  in  fine, 
is  anger  more  powerful  or  weaker  than  reason  ?  If  it 
is  more  powerful,  how  -oill  reason  be  able  to  set  limita- 
tions upon  it,  since,  ordinarily,  it  is  only  the  less 
powerful  thing  that  submits  ?  If  it  is  weaker,  then 
reason  without  it  is  sufficient  in  itself  for  the  accom- 
plishment"~Df-DTrr  ta^k?,  and  requires  no  help  from  a 
thingness  powerful.  Yet  you  say  :  "  There  are  those 
wHo^eventhough  angry,  remain  true  to  themselves 

127 


SENECA 

Quando  ?  Cum  iam  ira  evanescit  et  sua  sponte 
decedit,  non  cum  in  ipso  fervore  est ;  tunc  enim 
7  potentior  est.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  aliquando  in  ira 
quoque  et  dimittunt  incolumes  intactosque  quos 
oderunt  et  a  nocendo  abstinent  ?  "  Faciunt.  Quan- 
do ?  Cum  adfectus  repercussit  adfectum  et  aut  metus 
aut  cupiditas  aliquid  impetravit.  Non  rationis  tunc 
beneficio  quievit,  sed  affectuum  infida  et  mala  pace. 

1  9,  Deinde  nihil  habet  in  se  utile  nee  acuit  animiun 
ad  res  bellicas.  Numquam  enim  virtus  vitio  adiu- 
vanda  est  se  contenta.  Quotiens  impetu  opus  est, 
non  irascitur  sed  exsurgit  et  in  quantum  putavit  opus 
esse  concitatur  remittiturque,  non  aliter  quam  quae 
tormentis  exprimuntur  tela  in  potestate  mittentis  sunt 

2  in  quantum  torqueantur.  "  Ira,"  inquit  Aristoteles, 
**  necessaria  est,  nee  quicquam  sine  ilia  expugnari 
potest,  nisi  ilia  implet  animum  et  spiritum  accendit ; 
utendum  autem  ilia  est  non  ut  duce  sed  ut  milite." 
Quod  est  falsum.  Nam  si  exaudit  rationem  sequi- 
turque  qua  ducitur,  iam  non  est  ira,  cuius  proprium  est 
contumacia  ;  si  vero  repugnat  et  non  ubi  iussa  est 
quiescit,  sed  libidine  ferociaque  provehitur,taminutilis 
animi  minister  est  quam  miles,  qui  signum  receptui 

3  neglegit.  Itaque  si  modum  adhiberi  sibi  patitur,  alio 
nomine  appellanda  est,  deslt  ira  esse,  quam  efFrenatam 


"  It  is  not  known  where. 
128 


I 


luHtc't-^ 


ON  ANGER,  I.  vni.  6-ix.  3 

nnd  are  self-contrnllefl  "  But  when  are  they  so  ?  Only 
when  anger  gradually  vanishes  and  departs  of  its  ovra. 
accord,  not  when  it  is  at  white  heat  ;  then  it  is  the 
more  powerful  of  the  two.  "  What  then  ?  "  you  say  ; 
"  do  not  men  sometimes  even  in  the  midst  of  anger 
allow  those  whom  they  hate  to  get  off  safe  and  sound 
and  refrain  from  doing  them  injury  ?  "  They  do  ; 
but  when  ?  When  passion  has  beaten  back  passion, 
and  either  fear  or  greed,  has  obtained  its  end.  Then 
there  is  peace,  not  wrought  through  the  good  offices 
of  reason,  but  through  a  treacherous  and  e\-il  agree-  < 
ment  between  the  passions. 

Again,  anger  embodies  nothing,  useful,  nor  daes^ ,/ 
it  kindlejthe  mind  to  warlike  deeds  ;  for  virtue,  h^mi^^fHie  ua 
self^uffiLcient,  never  needs  the  help  of  vice.  When- 
ever there  is  need  of  \iolent  effort,  the  mind  does 
not  become  angry,  but  it  gathers  itself  together  and 
is  aroused  or  relaxed  according  to  its  estimate  of  the 
need  ;  just  as  when  engines  of  war  hurl  forth  their 
arrows,  it  is  the  operator  who  controls  the  tension 
•wdth  which  they  are  hurled.  "  Anger,"  says 
Aristotle,"  "  is  necessary,  and  no  battle  can  be  won 
without  it — unless  it  fills  the  mind  and  fires  the  soul  ; 
it  must  serve,  however,  not  as  a  leader,  but  as  the 
comjaoja  soldier."  But  this  is  not  true.  For  if  it 
hstens  to  reason  and  follows  where  reason  leads,  it 
is  no  longer  anger,  of  which  the  chief  characteristic  is 
wilfulness.  If,  however,  it  resists  and  is  not  sub- 
missive when  ordered,  but  is  carried  away  by  its 
own  caprice  and  fury,  it  will  be  an  instrument  of 
the  mind  as  useless  as  is  the  soldier  who  disregards 
the  signal  for  retreat.  If,  therefore,  anger  suffers 
any  limitation  to  be  imposed  upon  it,  it  must  be 
calledTby  some  other  name — ^it  has'ceased  to  be  anger ; 
VOL.  I  K  129 


SENECA 

indomitamque  intellego  ;  si  non  patitur,  perniciosa 
est  nee  inter  auxilia  numeranda  ;  ita  aut  ira  non  est 
4  aut  inutilis  est.  Nam  si  quis  poenam  exigit  non 
ipsius  poenae  avidus  sed  quia  oportet,  non  est 
adnumerandus  iratis.  Hie  erit  utilis  miles  qui  scit 
parere  consilio  ;  adfectus  quidem  tam  mali  ministri 
quam  duces  sunt. 

1  10.  Ideo  numquam  adsumet  ratio  in  adiutorium 
improvidos  et  violentos  impetus,  apud  quos  nihil  ipsa 
auctoritatis  habeat,  quos  numquam  comprimere  possit, 
nisi  pares  illis  similisque  opposuerit,  ut  irae  metum,  I 

2  inertiae  iram,  timori  cupiditatem.^  Absit  hoc  a  I 
virtute  malum,  ut  umquam  ratio  ad  vitia  confugiat  !  * 
Non  potest  hie  animus  fidele  otium  capere,  quatiatur 
necesse  est  fluctueturque,  qui  malis  suis  tutus  est,  qui 
fortis  esse  nisi  irascitur  non  potest,  industrius  nisi 
cupit,  quietus  nisi  timet  :  in  tyrannide  illi  vivendum 
est  in  alicuius  adfectus  venienti  servitutem.  Non 
pudet   virtutes   in   clientelam   vitiorum   demittere  ? 

3  Deinde  desinit  quicquam  posse  ratio,  si  nihil  potest 
sine  adfectu,  et  incipit  par  illi  similisque  esse.  Quid 
enim  interest,  si  aeque  adfectus  inconsulta  res  est 
sine  ratione  quam  ratio  sine  adfectu  inefficax  ?  Par 
utrumque  est,  ubi  esse  alterum  sine  altero  non  potest. 
Quis  autem  sustineat  adfectum  exaequare  rationi  ? 

^  ut  .  .  .  cupiditatem  Oertz  and  Hermes  omit. 
130 


ON  ANGER,  I.  IX.  3-x.  3 

for  I  understand  this  to  be  unbridled  and  ungovern- 
able. If  it  suffers  no  limitation,  it  is  a  baneful  thing 
and  is  not  to  be  counted  as  a  helpful  agent.  Thus 
eitlier  anger  is  not  anger  or  it  is  useless.  For  the 
man  who  exacts  punishment,  not  because  he  desires 
punishment  for  its  ow-n  sake,  but  because  it  is  right 
ti  1  inflict  it,  ought  not  to  be  counted  as  an  angry  man. 
The  ai£eful_soldier  \n\\  be  one  who  knows  how  to  obey 
(uders  ;  the  passions  are  as  bad  subordinates  as  . 
tliL'V  are  leaders. 

C un-equently,  reasim_JSKQl_ne.Y.er- call  to  its-help 
Itlind  and  \-iolent  impulses  over  which  it  vnW  itself 
lia\-e  no  control,  which  it  can  never  crush  save  by 
:-etting  against  them  equally  powerful  and  similar 
impulses,  as  fear  against  anger,  anger  against  sloth, 
arced  against  fear.  May  \'irtue  be  spared  the 
calamit}''  of  having  reason  ever  flee  for  help  to  \'ice  ! 
It  is  impossible  for  the  mind  to  find  here  a  sure 
repose  ;  shattered  and  storm-tossed  it  must  ever  be 
if  it  depends  upon  its  worst  qualities  to  save  it,  if  it 
cannot  be  brave  Avithout  being  angry,  if  it  cannot 
he  industrious  without  being  greedy,  if  it  cannot  be 
tpiiet  without  being  afraid — such  is  the  tyranny 
under  which  that  man  must  live  who  surrenders  to 
the  bondage  of  any  passion.  Is  it  not  a  shame  to 
(1-  crrade  the  \-irtues  into  dependence  upon  the  vices  ? 

_ain,  reason  ceases  to  have  power  if  it  has  no  power 
^  art  from  passion,  and  so  gets  to  be  on  the  same 
k  vel  with  passion  and  like  unto  it.  For  what  differ- 
ence is  there,  if  passion  without  reason  is  a  thing  as 
unguided  as  reason  without  passion  is  ineffective  ? 
Both  are  on  the  same  level,  if  one  cannot  exist  with- 
out the  other.  Yet  who  would  maintain  that  passion 
i^   on  a  level  with  reason  ?     "  Passion,"  some  one 

131 


SENECA 

4  "  Ita,"  inquit,  "  utilis  adfectus  est,  si  modicus  est." 
Immo  si  natura  utilis  est.  Sed  si  impatiens  imperii 
rationisque  est,  hoc  dumtaxat  moderatione  con- 
sequetur,  ut  quo  minor  fuerit,  minus  noceat  :  ergo 
modicus  afFectus  nihil  aliud  quam  malum  modicum  est. 

1  11.  "  Sed  adversus  hostes,"  inquit,  "  necessaria  est 
ira."  Nusquam  minus  ;  ubi  non  efFusos  esse  oportet 
impetus  sed  temperatos  et  oboedientes.  Quid  enim 
est  aliud  quod  barbaros  tanto  robustiores  corporibus, 
tanto  patientiores  laborum  comminuat  nisi  ira  in- 

2  festissima  sibi  ?  Gladiatores  quoque  ars  tuetur,  ira 
denudat.  Deinde  quid  opus  est  ira,  cum  idem  pro- 
ficiat  ratio  ?  An  tu  putas  venatorem  irasci  feris  ? 
Atqui  et  venientis  excipit  et  fugientis  persequitur, 
et  omnia  ilia  sine  ira  facit  ratio.  Quid  Cimbrorum 
Teutonorumque  tot  milia  superfusa  Alpibus  ita 
sustulit,  ut  tantae  cladis  notitiam  ad  suos  non  nuntius 
sed  fama  pertulerit,  nisi  quod  erat  illis  ira  pro  virtute  ? 
Quae    ut   aliquando   propulit   stravitque    obvia,   ita 

3  saepius  sibi  exitio  est.  Germanis  quid  est  animosius  ? 
Quid  ad  incursum  acrius  ?  Quid  armorum  cupidius, 
quibus  innascuntur  innutriunturque,  quorum  unica 
ilhs  cura  est  in  alia  neglegentibus  .''  Quid  induratius 
ad  omnem  patientiam,  ut  quibus  magna  ex  parte  non 
tegimentacorporum  pro  visa  sint,non  sufFugia  adversus 

"  Leading  nations  of  a  vast  horde  of  barbarians,  who, 
migrating  from  northern  Germany  (113-101  b.c),  alarmed 
Italy  by  their  repeated  victories  over  Roman  armies.  Marius 
defeated  the  Teutons  at  Aquae  Sextiae  in  102  b.c,  and  in  the 
following  year,  with  Catulus,  annihilated  the  Cimbrians  on 
the  Raudine  Plain. 

132 


I 


ON  ANGER,  I.  X.  4-xi.  3 

says,  "  is  useful,  provided  that  it  be  moderate."  No, 
only  by  its  nature  can  it  be  useful.  If,  however,  it  will 
not  submit  to  authority  and  reason,  the  only  result  of 
its  moderation  \W11  be  that  the  less  there  is  of  it,  the 
less  harm  it  will  do.  Consequently  laadgrate  passion^ 
ig  nothings  else-tJiaa-A-jmoderate  evil.  / 

"  But_against-.the__enemyj"  it  is  said,  "  anger  is  .^^ho^er 
necessary..",  ,No where  is  it  less  so  ;  for  there  the 
attacl^_pught  not  to  be  disorderly,  but  regulated  and 
under  eonfrol.  What  else  is  it,  in  fact,  but  their 
anger — its  own  worst  foe — that  reduces  to  impotency 
the  barbarians,  who  are  so  much  stronger  of  body 
than  we,  and  so  much  better  able  to  endure  hard- 
ship ?  So,  too,  in  the  case  of  gladiators  skill  is  their 
protection,  anger  their  undoing.  Q£_jidiat-  .use, 
further,  is  anger, when  the  same  end  may  be  accom- 
phshed  by  reason  ?  Think  you  the  hunter  has  anger 
towar^Tv^TTd  beasts  ?  Yet  when  they  come,  he  takes 
them,  and  when  they  flee,  he  follows,  and  reason 
does  it  all  without  anger.  The  Cimbrians  and  the 
Teutons  "  who  poured  over  the  Alps  in  countless 
thousands — what  wiped  them  out  so  completely  that 
even  the  news  of  the  great  disaster  was  carried  to 
their  homes,  notby  a  messenger,  but  only  by  rumour, 
except  that  they  substituted  anger  for  valour  ? 
Anger,  although  it  will  sometimes  overthrow  and  lay 
low  whatever  gets  in  its  way,  yet  more  often  brings 
destruction  on  itself.  Who  are  more  courageous 
than  the  Germans  ?  Who  are  bolder  in  a  charge  ? 
Who  have  more  love  of  the  arms  to  which  they  are 
born  and  bred,  which  to  the  exclusion  of  all  else 
become  their  only  care  ?  Who  are  more  hardened 
to  endurance  of  every  kind,  since  they  are,  in  large 
measure,  pro\'ided  with  no  protection  for  their  bodies, 

133 


SENECA 

4  perpetuum  caeli  rigorem  ?  Hos  tamen  Hispani  Galli- 
que  et  Asiae  Syriaeque  molles  bello  viri,  antequam 
legio  visatur,  caedunt  ob  nullam  aliam  rem  opportunos 
quam  iracundiam.  Agedum  illis  corporibus,  illis 
animis  delicias,  luxum,  opes  ignorantibus  da  rationem, 
da  disciplinam  :  ut  nil  amplius  dicam,  necesse  erit 

6  certe  nobis  mores  Romanes  repetere.  Quo  alio 
Fabius  affectas  imperii  vires  recreavit,  quam  quod 
cunctari  et  trahere  et  morari  sciit,  quae  omnia  irati 
nesciunt  ?  Perierat  imperium,  quod  tunc  in  extremo 
stabat,  si  Fabius  tantum  ausus  esset  quantum  ira  sua- 
debat  :  habuit  in  consilio  fortunam  publicam  et  aesti- 
matis  viribus,  ex  quibus  iam  perire  nihil  sine  universo 
poterat,  dolorem  ultionemque  seposuit  in  unam  utili- 
tatem  et  occasiones  intentus  ;  iram  ante  vieit  quam 

6  Hannibalem.  Quid  Scipio  ?  Non  relicto  Hannibale  et 
Punico  exercitu  omnibusque,  quibus  irascendum  erat, 
bellum  in  Africam  transtulit  tam  lentus,  ut  opinionem 

7  luxuriae  segnitiaeque  malignis  daret  ?  Quid  alter 
Scipio  ?  Non  circa  Numantiam  multum  diuque  sedit 
et  hunc  suum  publicumque  dolorem  aequo  animo 
tulit,  diutius  Numantiam  quam  Carthaginem  vinci  ? 
Dum  circumvallat  et  includit  hostem,  eo  compulit,  ut 


"  A  reference  to  the  famous  tactics  of  Quintus  Fabius 
Maximus,  Cunctator,  who,  appointed  dictator  after  the  battle 
of  Lake  Trasimenus  (217  b.c),  harassed  Hannibal  by  his 
dilatory  policy. 

''  During  the  winter  of  205-204  b.c.  Scipio  lingered  in 
Sicily,  perfecting  plans  for  his  expedition  into  Africa. 

"  P.  Cornelius  Scipio  Aemilianus,  conqueror  of  Carthage 
(146  B.C.). 

•*  Through  the  winter,  spring,  and  summer  of  134-133  b.c. 

134 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XI.  4-7 

with  no  shelter  against  the  continual  rigour  of  the 
climate  ?  Yet  these  are  they  -whom  the  Spaniards 
and  the  Gauls  and  men  of  Asia  and  Syria,  uninured 
to  war,  cut  down  before  they  could  even  glimpse  a 
Roman  legion,  the  \-ictims  of  nothing  else  than  anger. 
But  mark  you,_iMUie^  give,  discipline  to  those  bodies, 
give  reason  to  those  minds  that  are  strangers  still  to 
pampered  ways,  excess,  and  wealthy  and  we  Romans — 
to  mention  nothmg  further — shall  assuredly  be  forced 
to  retWil  to  the  ancient  Roman  ways.  How  else  did 
Fabius  restore  the  broken  forces  of  the  state  but 
by  knowing  how  to  loiter,  to  put  oiF,  and  to  wait " 
— things  of  which  angry  men  know  nothing  ?  The 
state,  which  was  standing  then  in  the  utmost 
extremity,  had  surely  perished  if  Fabius  had  ventured 
to  do  all  that  anger  prompted.  But  he  took  into 
consideration  the  well-being  of  the  state,  and, 
estimating  its  strength,  of  which  now  nothing  could 
be  lost  ^\•ithout  the  loss  of  all,  he  buried  all  thought 
of  resentment  and  revenge  and  was  concerned  only 
with  expediency  and  the  fitting  opportunity  ;  Jie 
conquered  anger  before  he  conquered  Hannibal. 
And  what  of  Scipio  ?  Did  he  not  leave  behind  him 
Hannibal  and  the  Carthaginian  army  and  all  those 
with  whom  he  had  reason  to  be  angry,  and  dally  so 
long  ^  in  transferring  the  war  to  Africa  that  he  gave 
to  evil-minded  people  the  impression  that  he  was 
a  sensualist  and  a  sluggard  ?  What,  too,  of  the  other 
Scipio  ?  "  Did  he  not  sit  before  Numantia,  idling 
much  and  long,  and  bear  unmoved  the  reproach  to 
himself  and  to  his  countr}'  that  it  took  longer  to 
conquer  Numantia  than  to  conquer  Carthage  ? 
But  by  blockading  and  investing  '^  the  enemy  he 
forced  them  to  such  straits  that  they  perished  by 

135 


SENECA 

8  ferro  ipsi  suo  caderent.     Non  est  itaque  utilis  ne  in    t 
proeliis  quidem  aut  bellis  ira  ;   in  temeritatem  enim 
prona  est  et  pericula,  dum  inferre  vult,  non  cavet. 
Ilia  eertissima  est  virtus  quae  se  diu  multumque 
circumspexit  et  rexit  et  ex  lento  ac  destinato  provexit. 

1  12.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  "  inquit,  "  vir  bonus  non  iras- 
citur,  si  caedi  patrem  suum  viderit,  si  rapi  matrem  ?  " 
Non  irascetur,  sed  vindicabit,  sed  tuebitur.  Quid 
autem  times,  ne  parum  magnus  illi  stimulus  etiam 
sine  ira  pietas  sit  ?  Aut  die  eodem  modo  :  "  Quid 
ergo  ?  Cum  videat  secari  patrem  suum  filiumve, 
vir  bonus  non  flebit  nee  linquetur  animo  ?  "  Quae 
accidere  feminis  videmus,  quotiens  illas  levis  periculi 

2  suspicio  perculit.  Officia  sua  vir  bonus  exsequetur 
inconfusus,  intrepidus  ;  et  sic  bono  viro  digna  faeiet, 
ut  nihil  faciat  viro  indignum.  Pater  caedetur,  de- 
fendam  ;  caesus  est,  exsequar,  quia  oportet,  non  quia      ^ 

3  dolet.     "  Irascuntur  boni  viri  pro  suorum  iniuriis."  ^ 
Cum  hoc  dicis,  Theophraste,  quaeris  invidiam  prae- 
ceptis  fortioribus  et  relicto  iudice  ad  coronam  venis.      j 
Quia  unusquisque  in  eiusmodi  suorum  casu  irascitur,      - 
putas    iudicaturos    homines    id    fieri    debere    quod 
faciunt ;  fere  enim  iustum  quisque  affectum  iudicat 

4  quem  adgnoscit.     Sed   idem   faciunt,    si    calda  non 


*  The  words  irascuntur  .  .  .  iniuriis  Gertz  places  here  ;  in 
AL  they  appear  after  adgnoscit  below, 
136 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XI.  8-xn.  4 

r  o^vn  swords.  Ang«r,  therefore,  is  not  expedient 
I  in  battle  or  in  war  ;  for  it  is  prone  to  rashness, 
while  it  seeks  to  bring  about  danger,  does  not 
d  against  it.  The  truest  form  of  ^^-isdom  is  to  "-^  ' 
;-  a  wide  and  long  inspection,  to  put  self  in  sub- 
on,  and  then  to  move  forward  slowly  and  in  a 
■  lirection. 

What  then  ?  "  vou  ask  ;  "  \\\\\  the  good  man  not 
3e  angrv  if  his  father  is  murdered,  his  mother  out-  , 
agedJjfiforeJhis  eyes  ?  "     No.  he  will  not  be  angry, » 
)ut  he  ^^■ill_  avenge  them,  will  protect  them.     Why,  ^«^  "^^ 
noreover,  are  you  afraid  that  fiUal  affection,  even  ■  =•' 

thout  anger,  may  not  prove  a  sufficiently  strong 
nceEtive  for  him  ?  Or  you  might  as  well  say  : 
*  What  then  ?  if  a  good  man  should  see  his  father  or 
lis  son  under  the  knife,  ^\•ill  he  not  weep,  Avill  he  not 
'aint  ?  "  But  this  is  the  way  we  see  women  act 
rhenever  they  are  upset  by  the  slightest  suggestion 
if  danger.  The  good  man  will  perform  his  duties 
disturbed  and  unafraid  ;  and  he  %\-ill  in  such  a  way 
io  all  that  is  worthy  of  a  good  man  as  to  do  nothing  -- 
that  is  unworthy  of  a  man.  My  father  is  being 
tturdered — I  will  defend  him  ;  he  is  slain — I  will 
.venge  him,  not  because  I  grieve,  but  because  it  is 
tty  duty.  "  Gcod.  men  are  made  angry  by  the 
injuries  of  those  they  love."  When  you  say  this, 
rheophrastus,  you  seek  to  make  more  heroic  doctrine 
anpopuTar^^-you  turn  from  the  judge  to  the  by- 
standers. Because  each  indixidual  grows  angry  when 
uch  a  mishap  comes  to  those  he  loves,  you  think  that 
men  vriW  judge  that  what  they  do  is  the  right  thing 
to  be  done;  for  as  a  mle  every -man  decides  that 
that  is  a  justifiable  passion  which  he  acknowledges 
as  JuSLDwn.     But  they  act  in  the  same  way  if  they 

137 


SENECA 

bene  praebetur,  si  vitreum  fractum  est,  si  calceus  luto 
sparsus  est.  Non  pietas  illam  iram  sed  infirmitas 
movet,  sicut  pueris,  qui  tam  parentibus  amissis  flebunt  j 

5  quam  nucibus.     Irasci  pro  suis  non  est  pii  animi  sed  ' 
infirmi  ;   illud  pulehrum  dignumque,  pro  parentibus, 
liberis,  amicis,  civibus  prodire  defensorem  ipso  officio 
ducente,   volentem,   iudicantem,   providentem,   non 
impulsum  et  rabidum.     Nullus  enim  afFectus  vindi- 
candi  cupidior  est  quam  ira  et  ob  id  ipsum  ad  vindi- 
candum  inhabilis  ;    praerapida  et  amens,  ut  omnis 
fere  cupiditas,  ipsa  sibi  in  id  in  quod  properat  op- 
ponitur.     Itaque  nee  in  pace  nee  in  bello  umquam  j 
bono  fuit  ;  pacem  enim  similem  belli  efficit,  in  armis  j 
vero  obliviscitur  Martem  esse  communem  venitque 

6  in  alienam  potestatem,  dum  in  sua  non  est.  Deinde 
non  ideo  vitia  in  usum  recipienda  sunt,  quia  ali- 
quando  aliquid  efFecerunt  ;  nam  et  febres  quaedam 
genera  valetudinis  levant,  nee  ideo  non  ex  toto  illis 
caruisse  melius  est.  Abominandum  remedi  genus 
est  sanitatem  debere  morbo.  Simili  modo  ira,  etiam 
si  aliquando  ut  venenum  et  praecipitatio  et  nau- 
fragium  ex  inopinato  profuit,  non  ideo  salutaris  iudi- 
canda  est ;  saepe  enim  saluti  fuere  pestifera. 

1  13.  Deinde  quae  habenda  sunt,  quo  maiora  eo 
meliora  et  optabiHora  sunt.     Si  iustitia  bonum  est, 


"  Cf.  Shakespeare,  King  Henrij  IV,  Pt.  2,  Act  1,  Sc.  1 

In  poison  there  is  physic ;  and  these  news. 
Having  been  well,  that  would  have  made  me  sick, 
Being  sick,  have  in  some  measure  made  me  well. 

138 


ON  ANGER,  I.  xii.  4-xm.  1 

are  not  well  supplied  with  hot  water,  if  a  glass  goblet 
is  broken,  if  a  shoe  gets  splashed  ^\-ith  mud.  Such 
anger  comes,  not  from  affection,  but  from  a  weak- 
ness— the  kind  we  see  in  children,  who  ^^■ill  shed  no 
more  tears  over  lost  parents  than  over  lost  toys.  To 
feel  anger  on  behalf  of  loved  ones  is  the  mark  of  a 
weak  mind,  not  of  a  loyal  one.  For  a  man  to  stand 
forth  as  the  defender  of  parents,  children,  friends, 
and  fellow-citizens,  led  merely  by  his  sense  of  duty, 
acting  yoTiintarily,  using  judgement,  using  foresight, 
moved  ireither  by  impulse  nor  by  fury — this  is  noble 
and  becbmirig.  Now  no  passion  is  more  eager  for  j 
revenge  than  anger,  and  for  that  ver}'  reason  is  unfit  r' 
tojtakg  it)  being  unduly  ardent  and  frenzied,  as  most 
lusts  are,  it  blocks  its  own  progress  to  the  goal  toward 
which  it  hastens.  Therefore  it  has  never  been  of 
advantage  either  in  peace  or  in  war  ;  for  it  makes 
peace  seem  like  war,  and  amid  the  clash  of  arms 
it  forgets  that  the  War-god  shows  no  favour  and, 
failing  to  control  itself,  it  passes  into  the  control 
of  another.  Again,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  vices  } 
are  to  be  adopted  for  use  from  the  fact  that  they'T" 
have  sometimes  been  to  some  extent  profitable.  For 
a  fever  may  bring  relief'ih  certain  kinds  of  sickness, 
and  yet  it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  it  is  not 
better  to  be  altogether  free  from  fever.  A  method 
of  ciiTfiJthat  makes  good  health  dependent  upon 
disease  must  be  regarded  ^\'ith  detestation.  In 
like  manner  anger,  like  poison,  a  fall,  or  a  ship- 
^^Teck,  even  if  it  has  sometimes  proved  an  unexpected 
good,  ought  not  for  that  reason  to  be  adjudged  whole- 
some ;  for  ofttimes  poisons  have  saved  life." 

Again,  if  aiiy_quality  is  worth  having,  the  more  of  it 
there  is,  the  better  and  the  more  desirable  it  becomes. 

139 


SENECA 

nemo  dicet  meliorem  futuram,  si  quid  detractum  ex 

2  ea  fuerit ;  si  fortitude  bonum  est,  nemo  illam  de- 
siderabJt  ex  aliqua  parte  deminui.  Ergo  et  ira  quo 
maior  hoc  melior  ;  quis  enim  ullius  boni  accessionem 
recusaverit  ?  Atqui  augeri  illam  inutile  est ;  ergo 
et  esse.     Non  est  bonum  quod  incremento  malum  fit. 

3  "  Utilis,"  inquit,  "  ira  est,  quia  pugnaciores  facit." 
Isto  modo  et  ebrietas  ;  facit  enim  protervos  et  audaces 
multique  meliores  ad  ferrum  fuere  male  sobrii  ;  isto 
modo  die  et  phrenesin  atque  insaniam  viribus  neces- 

4  sariam,  quia  saepe  validiores  furor  reddit.  Quid  ? 
Non  aliquotiens  metus  ex  contrario  fecit  audacem, 
et  mortis  timor  etiam  inertissimos  excitavit  in  proe- 
lium  ?  Sed  ira,  ebrietas,  metus  aliaque  eiusmodi 
foeda  et  caduca  irritamenta  sunt  nee  virtutem  in- 
struunt,  quae  nihil  vitiis  eget,  sed  segnem  alioqui 

3  animum  et  ignavum  paullum  adlevant.  Nemo  iras- 
cendo  fit  fortior,  nisi  qui  fortis  sine  ira  non  fuisset. 
Ita  non  in  adiutorium  virtutis  venit,  sed  in  vicem. 
Quid  quod,  si  bonum  esset  ira,  perfectissimum  quem 
que  sequeretur  ?  Atqui  iracundissimi  infantes 
senesque  et  aegri  sunt,  et  invalidum  omne  natura 
querulum  est. 

I  14.  "  Non  potest,"  inquit,  "  fieri "  Theophrastus 
"  ut  non  vir  bonus  irascatur  malis."  Isto  modo  quo 
140 


i 


ON  ANGER,  I.  xiii.  1-xiv.  1 

If  justice  is  a  good,  no  one  will  say  that  it  becomes 
a  greater  good  after  something  has  been  AvithdrawTi 
from  it  ;  if  bravery  is  a  good,  no  one  ^\•ill  desire  it 
to  be  in  any  measure  reduced.  Consequently,  also, 
the  greater  anger  is,  the  better  it  is  ;  for  who  would 
oppose  the  augmentation  of  any  good  ?  And  yet,itis  - 
not  profitable  that  anger  should  be  increased  ;  there- 
fnreTTBat  Anger  sluiuld  exist  either.  That  is  not  a 
goo4_  which  _by  increase  becomes  an  evil.,  "  Anger 
is  profitable,"  it  is  said,  "  because  it  makes  men 
more  warlike. "  By  that  reasoning,  so  is  drunkenness 
too  ;  for  it  makes  men  forward  and  bold,  and  many 
have  been  better  at  the  sword  because  they  were 
the  worse  for  drink.  By  the  same  reasoning  you 
must  also  say  that  lunacy  and  madness  are  essential 
to  strength,  since  frenzy  often  makes  men  more 
powerful.  But  telLJILe^Jioes  not  fear,  in  the  opposite 
wayj  sometimes  make  a  man  bold,  and  does  not  the 
terror  of  death  arouse  even  arrant  cowards  to  fight  ? 
But  anger,  drunkenness,  fear,  and  the  Hke,  are  base 
and  fleeting  incitements  and  do  not  give  arms  to 
virtue,  which  never  needs  the  help  of  vice  ;  they 
do,  however,  assist  somewhat  the  mind  that  is  other- 
wise slack  and  cowardly.  No  man  is  ever  made 
braver  through  anger,  except  the  one  who  would 
never  have  been  brave  without  anger.  It  comes, 
then,  not  as  a  help  to  virtue,  but  as  a  substitute  for 
it.  And  is  it  not  true  that  if  anger  were  a  good,  it 
would  come  naturally  to  those  who  are  the  most 
perfect  ?  But  the  fact  is,  children,  old  men,  and  the 
sick  are  most  prone  to  anger,  and  weakness  of  any 
sort  is  by  nature  captious. 

"  It  is   impossible,"   says  Theophrastus,   "  for  a 
good  mag  not  to  be  angry  with  bad  men."     Accord- 

141 


SENECA 


I 


melior  quisque,  hoc  iracundior  erit ;   vide  ne  contra 
placidior  solutusque  afFectibus  et  cui  nemo  odio  sit. ' 

2  Peccantis  vero  quid  habet  cur  oderit,  cum  error  illos  i 
in  eiusmodi  delicta  compellat  ?  Non  est  autem  pru- 
dentis  errantis  odisse  ;  alioqui  ipse  sibi  odio  erit. 
Cogitet  quam  multa  contra  bonum  morem  faciat, 
quam  multa  ex  is,  quae  egit,  veniam  desiderent ; 
iam  irascetur  etiam  sibi.  Neque  enim  aequus  iudex 
aliam  de  sua,  aliam  de  aliena  causa  sententiam  fert. 

3  Nemo,  inquam,  invenietur  qui  se  possit  absolvere,  et 
innocentem  quisque  se  dicit  respiciens  testem,  non 
conscientiam.  Quanto  humanius  mitem  et  patrium 
animum  praestare  peccantibus  et  illos  non  persequi, 
sed  revocare  !  Errantem  per  agros  ignorantia  viae 
melius  est  ad  rectum  iter  admovere  quam  expellere. 

1  15.  Corrigendus  est  itaque,  qui  peccat,  et  ad- 
monitione  et  vi,  et  molliter  et  aspere,  meliorque  tarn 
sibi  quam  aliis  faciendus  non  sine  castigatione,  sed 
sine  ira ;  quis  enim  cui  medetur  irascitur  ?  At 
corrigi  nequeunt  nihilque  in  illis  lene  aut  spei  bonae 
capax  est.  Tollantur  e  coetu  mortaHum  factxiri 
peiora  quae  contingunt,  et  quo  uno  modo  possunt 

2  desinant  maH  esse,  sed  hoc  sine  odio.     Quid  enina 

142 


ON  ANGER,  1.  XIV.  1-xv.  2 

ing  to  this,  the  better  a  man  is,  the  more  irascible    . 
he'^wiTr^  ;    on  the  contrary,  be  sure  that  none  is  -/-^ 
more  peaceable,  more  free  from  passion,  and  less 
given   toT^te.     Indeed,   -what   reason   has   he   for 
hating   ^^Tong-doers,   since    it   is    error   that    drives  y 
them  to  such  mistakes  ?     But  no  man  of  sense  ^^"ill^ '  f^'  ^ 
hate^jhe   erring  ;    otherwise   lie   ^\ill  hate  himselL -"^^^  *  *■ 
Let  him  rettect  how  many  times  he  offends  against 
morall1yriio%v  many  of  his  acts  stand  in  need  of 
pardonj_theii  he  will  be  angry  with  himself  also. 
For  no  just  judge  %\ill  pronounce  one  sort  of  judge- 
menFTnThls^wn  case  dfrd* a  different  one  in  the  case 
of  others.     No  one  will  be  found,  I  say,  who  is  able 
to  acquit  himself,  and  any  man  who  calls  himself 
innocent  is  thinking  more   of  ^ntnesses   than  con- 
science.    How    much    more    human    to     manifest 
toward  ^\Tong-doers  a  kind  and  fatherly  spirit,  not 
hunting  them  do^\•n  but  calhng  them  back  !     If  a  man 
has  lost  his  way  and  is  roaming  across  our  fields,  it 
is  better  to  put  him  upon  the  right  path  than  to 
drive  him  out. 

And  so  the  man  who  does  wTong  ought  to  be  set  j^ 
right  both  by  admonition  and  by  force,  by  measures 
both  gentle  and  harsh,  and  we  should  try  to  make  him 
a  better  man  for  his  own  sake,  as  well  as  for  the  sake 
of  others,  stinting,  not  our  reproof,  but  our  anger. 
For  what  physician  %sill  show  anger  toward  a  patient  ? 
"  But,"  you  say,  "  they  are  incapable  of  being 
reformed,  there  is  nothing  pliable  in  them,  nothing 
that  gives  room  for  fair  hope."  Then  let  them  be 
removed  from  human  society-  if  they  are  bound  to 
make  worse  all  that  they  touch,  and  let  them,  in  the 
only  way  this  is  possible,  cease  to  be  e\il — but  let  this 
be  done  without  hatred.     For  what  reason  have  I  for 

143 


SENECA 

est,  cur  oderim  eum,  cui  turn  maxime  prosum,  cum 
ilium  sibi  eripio  ?  Num  quis  membra  sua  tunc  odit, 
cum  abscidit  ?  Non  est  ilia  ira,  sed  misera  curatio. 
Rabidos  effligimus  canes  et  trucem  atque  immansue- 
tum  bovem  occidimus  et  morbidis  pecoribus,  ne  gre- 
gem  poUuant,  ferrum  demittimus  ;  portentosos  fetus 
exstinguimus,  liberos  quoque,  si  debiles  monstrosique 
editi  sunt,  mergimus  ;  nee  ira,  sed  ratio  est  a  sanis 
3  inutilia  secernere.  Nil  minus  quam  irasci  punientem 
decet,  cum  eo  magis  ad  emendationem  poena  pro- 
ficiat,  si  iudicio  lata  est.  Inde  est,  quod  Socrates 
servo  ait :  "  Caederem  te,  nisi  irascerer."  Admoni- 
tionem  servi  in  tempus  sanius  distulit,  illo  tem- 
pore se  admonuit.  Cuius  erit  tandem  temperatus 
affectus,  cum  Socrates  non  sit  ausus  se  irae  com- 
mittere  ? 

1  16.  Ergo  ad  coercitionem  errantium  sceleratorum- 
que  irato  castigatore  non  opus  est ;  nam  cum  ira 
delictum  animi  sit,  non  oportet  peccata  corrigere 
peccantem.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  irascar  latroni  ? 
Quid  ergo  ?  Non  irascar  venefico  ?  "  Non  ;  neque 
enim   mihi   irascor,   cum   sanguinem   mitto.     Omne 

2  poenae  genus  remedi  loco  admoveo.  Tu  adliuc  in 
prima  parte  versaris  errorum  nee  graviter  laberis  sed 
frequenter  ;  obiurgatio  te  primum  secreta  deinde 
publicata  emendare  temptabit.  Tu  longius  iam  pro- 
cessisti,  quam  ut  possis  verbis  sanari ;    ignominia 


144 


ON  ANGER,  I    XV.  2-x\i.  2 

hating  a  man  to  whom  I  am  offering  the  greatest 
ser\"ice  when  I  save  him  from  himself  ?  Does  a  man 
hate  the  members  of  his  own  body  when  he  uses  the 
knife  upon  them  ?  There  is  no  anger  there,  but  the 
pitying  desire  to  heal.  Mad  dogs  we  knock  on  the 
head  ;  the  fierce  and  savage  ox  we  slay  ;  sickly 
sheep  we  put  to  the  knife  to  keep  them  from  infect- 
ing the  flock  ;  unnatural  progeny  we  destroy  ;  we 
drown  even  children  who  at  birth  are  weakly  and 
abnormal.  Yet  it_  is  not  anger,  but  ^gjison  that 
separates  the  harmful.from  the  sound — For  the  one 
who  administers  punisliment  nothing  is  so  unfitting 
as  anger,  since  punishment  is  all  the  better  able  to 
work  reform  if  it  is  bestowed  with  judgement.  This 
is  the  reason  Socrates  says  to  his  slave  :  "I  would 
beat  you  if  I  were  not  angry."  The  slave's  reproof 
he  postponed  to  a  more  rational  moment  ;  at  the 
time  it  was  himself  he  reproved.  Will  there  be  any 
one,  pray,  who  has  passion  under  control,  when  even 
Socrates  did  not  dare  to  trust  himself  to  anger  ? 

Consequently,  there  is  no  need  that  correction 
be  given  in  anger  in  order  to  restrain  the  erring  . 
and  the  A^icked.  For  since  anger  is  a  mental  sin, 
it  is  not  right  to  correct  wrong-doing  by  doing 
^vrong.  "  What  then  ?  "  you  exclaim  ;  "  shall  I  not 
be  angry  ^vith  a  robber  ?  Shall  I  not  be  angry  ^vith 
a  poisoner  ?  "  No  ;  for  I  am  not  angr}'  >\'ith  myself 
when  I  let  my  o^^^l  blood.  To  every:  form  of  punish- 
ment ^\•ill  I  resort,  but  only  as  a  remedy.  If  you  are 
hngering  as  yet  in  the  first  stage  of  error  and  are 
lapsing,  not  seriously,  but  often,  I  shall  try  to  correct 
you  by  chiding,  first  in  private,  then  in  public.  If  you 
have  aheady  advanced  so  far  that  words  can  no 
longer  bring  you  to  your  senses,  then  you  shall  be 
VOL.  I  L  145 


SENECA 

contineberis.^  Tibi  fortius  aliqmd  et  quod  sentias 
inurendum  est ;  in  exilium  et  loca  ignota  mitteris. 
In  te  duriora  remedia  iam  solida  nequitia  desiderat ; 

3  et  vincula  publica  et  career  adhibebitur.  Tibi  in- 
sanabilis  animus  et  sceleribus  scelera  contexens,  et 
iam  non  causis,  quae  nvunquam  malo  defuturae  sunt, 
impelleris,  sed  satis  tibi  est  magna  ad  peccandimi 
causa  peccare,  perbibisti  nequitiam  et  ita  visceribus 
immiscuisti,  ut  nisi  cum  ipsis  exire  non  possit ;  olim 
miser  mori  quaeris  ;  bene  de  te  merebimur,  aufere- 
mus  tibi  istam  qua  vexas,  vexaris  insaniam  et  per 
tua  alienaque  volutato  supplicia  id  quod  unum  tibi 
bonum  superest  repraesentabimus,  mortem.  Quare 
irascar  cui  cum  maxime  prosum  ?     Interim  optimum 

4  misericordiae  genus  est  occidere.  Si  intrassem  vale- 
tudinarium  exercitus  ut  sciens  aut  domus  divitis,  non 
idem  imperassem  omnibus  per  diversa  aegrotantibus  ; 
varia  in  tot  animis  vitia  video  et  civitati  curandae 
adhlbitus  sum  ;  pro  cuiusque  morbo  medicina  quae- 
ratur,   hunc   sanet   verecundia,   hunc    peregrinatio, 

6  hunc  dolor,  hunc  egestas,  hunc  ferrum.     Itaque  etsi 
perversa  induenda  magistratui  vestis  et  convocanda 
classico  contio  est,  procedam  in  tribunal  non  furens 
^  Hermes,  after  Pincianus,  inserts  non. 

"  The  meaning  of  perversa  vestis  is  not  clear,  but  the 
phrase  evidently  implies  some  unusual  manner  of  wearing 
the  toga  aflfected  by  the  magistrate  presiding  at  a  trial 
on  a  capital  charge. 

''  By  an  old  custom,  when  a  citizen  was  arraigned  on  a 
capital  charge  before  the  centuriate  assembly,  the  trumpet 
was  sounded  in  various  public  places  and  before  the  house 
of  the  accused. 

146 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XVI.  2-5 

held  in  check  by  public  disgrace.  Should  it  be 
necessary  to  brand  you  in  more  drastic  fashion,  AN-ith  a 
punishment  you  can  feel,  you  shall  be  sent  into  exile, 
banished  to  an  unkno^^-n  region.  Should  your  >vicked- 
ness  have  become  deep-rooted,  demanding  harsher 
remedies  to  meet  your  case,  to  chains  and  the  state- 
prison  we  shall  have  resort.  If  ^vith  mind  incurable 
you  link  crime  to  crime  and  are  actuated  no  longer 
by  the  excuses  -which  \\i\\  never  fail  the  evil  man, 
but  WTong-doing  itself  becomes  to  you  pretext 
enough  for  doing  ^\Tong  ;  if  you  have  drained  the 
cup  of  AWckedness  and  its  poison  has  so  mingled 
with  your  \itals  that  it  cannot  issue  forth  without 
them ;  if,  poor  ^^Tetch !  you  have  long  desired  to 
die,  then  we  shall  do  you  good  serWce — we  shall 
take  from  you  that  madness  by  which,  while  you 
harass  others,  you  yourself  are  harassed,  and  to  you 
who  have  long  wallowed  in  the  suffering  of  yourself 
and  others  we  shall  gladly  give  the  only  boon  still 
left  for  you,  death  !  Why  should  I  be  angry  with  a  -f 
man  to  \vhoin.I.am  giving  ^'^'^gp^-^^^****^^  Help  1  Some- 
times  the  truest  form  of.  pity_  is.to  -kill.  If  with 
the  training  of  an  expert  physician  I  had  entered  a 
hospital  or  a  rich  man's  household,  I  should  not  have 
prescribed  the  same  treatment  to  all,  though  their 
diseases  differed.  Diverse,  too,  are  the  ills  I  see 
in  countless  minds,  and  I  am  called  to  cure  the  -V- 
body  pohtic  ;  for  each  man's  malady  the  proper  ' 
treatment  should  be  sought ;  let  this  one  be 
restored  by  his  o^\ti  self-respect,  this  one  by  a 
sojourn  abroad,  this  one  by  pain,  this  one  by  poverty, 
this  one  by  the  sword !  Accordingly,  even  if  as 
a  magistrate  I  must  put  on  my  robe  a\\Ty  <»  and 
summon   the  assembly   by    the    trumpet,^    I    shall 

147 


SENECA 

nee  infestus  sed  vultu  legis  et  ilia  sollemnia  verba 
leni  magis  gravique  quam  rabida  voce  concipiam  et 
agi  lege^  iubebo  non  iratus  sed  severus  ;  et  cum 
cervicem  noxio  imperabo  praecidi  et  cum  parricidas 
insuam  cuUeo  et  cum  mittam  in  supplicium  militare 
et  cum  Tarpeio  proditorem  hostemve  publicum  im- 
ponam,  sine  ira  eo  vultu  animoque  ero,  quo  serpentes 

6  et  animalia  venenata  percutio.  "  Iracundia  opus  est 
ad  puniendum."  Quid  ?  Tibi  lex  videtur  irasci  iis 
quos  non  novit,  quos  non  vidit,  quos  non  futuros 
sperat  ?  Illius  itaque  sumendus  est  animus,  quae 
non  irascitur,  sed  constituit.  Nam  si  bono  viro  ob 
mala  facinora  irasci  convenit,  et  ob  secundas  res 
malorum  hominum  invidere  conveniet.  Quid  enim 
est  indignius  quam  florere  improbos^  quosdam  et  eos 
indulgentia  fortunae  abuti,  quibus  nulla  potest  satis 
mala  inveniri  fortuna  ?  Sed  tam  commoda  illorum 
sine  invidia  videbit  quam  scelera  sine  ira  ;  bonus 

7  iudex  damnat  improbanda,  non  odit.  "  Quid  ergo  ? 
Non,  cum  eiusmodi  aliquid  sapiens  habebit  in  manibus, 
tangetur  animus  eius  eritque  solito  commotior  ?  " 
Fateor  ;  sentiet  levem  quendam  tenuemque  motum  ; 
nam,  ut  dicit  Zenon,  in  sapientis  quoque  animo,  etiam 
cum  vulnus  sanatum   est,  cicatrix  manet.     Sentiet 

^  lege  added  by  Gertz,  after  Pincianus. 
^  improbos  added  by  Gemoll. 

148 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XVI.  5-7 

advance  to  the  high  tribunal,  not  in  rage  nor  in 
enmity,  but  -with  the  \-isage  of  the  law,  and  as  I 
pronounce  those  solemn  words  my  voice  ^vill  not  be 
fierce,  but  rather  grave  and  gentle,  and  not  M-ith 
anger,  but  ^vith  sternness,  I  shall  order  the  law  to 
be  enforced.     And  when  I  command  a  criminal  to 
be  beheaded,  or  sew  up  a  parricide  in  the  sack,"  or 
send  a  soldier  to  his  doom,  or  stand  a  traitor  or  a 
public  enemv  upon  the  Tarpeian  Rock,  I  shall  have 
no  trace  of  anger,  but  shall  look  and  feel  as  I  might 
if  I  were  kilUng  a  snake  or  any  poisonous  creature. 
"  We_Jiax^__to_be_angryyl'-you-say,  "in  order  to 
punisL.'l_Athat-I~  Think  you  the  law  is  angry  \vith 
men  it  does  not  know,  whom  it  has  never  seen,  Avho 
it  hopes  wiU.  never  be  ?     The  spirit  of  the  law,  there- 
fore, we  should  make  our  ovm — the  laiv  which  shows 
not  "ailgef  but  determination.     For  if  it  is  right  for 
a  good  man  to  be  angry  at  the  crimes  of  ^^•icked 
men,  it  will  also  be  right  for  him  to  be  envious  of 
their_grosperity,     And  what,   indeed,   seems   more 
unjust  than  that  certain  reprobates  should  prosper 
and  become  the  pets  of  fertune — men  for  whom 
there  could  be  found  no  fortune  bad  enough  ?     But 
the  good  man  \vi\\  no  more  \iew  their  blessings  with 
en\y   than  he  views   their  crimes  with  anger.     A 
good  judge  condemns  vvTongful  deeds,  but  he  does 
not  hate  them.     "  What  then  ?"  you  say ;  "when  the 
Avise-^wsm  shall  have  something  of  this  sort  to  deal 
■with,  will  not  his  mind  be  aifected  by  it,  will  it  not 
be  moved  from  its  usual  calm  ?  "    I  adrnit  that  it  v^ill ; 
it  will  experience  some  shght  and  superficial  emotion. 
For  as  Zeno  says  :   "  Even  the  wise  man's  mind  will 
keep  its  scar  long  after  the  wound  has  healed."  He  will 
»  i.e.,  to  be  drowned. 

149 


SENECA 

itaque   suspiciones   quasdam   et  umbras  afFectuum, 
ipsis  quidem  carebit. 

1  17.  Aristoteles  ait  affectus  quosdam,  si  quis  illis 
bene  utatur,  pro  armis  esse.  Quod  verum  forpt, 
si  velut  bellica  instrumenta  sumi  deponique  possent 
induentis  arbitrio.  Haec  arma,  quae  Aristoteles  vir- 
tuti  dat,  ipsa  per  se  pugnant,  non  expectant  manum, 

2  et  habent,  non  habentur.  Nil  aliis  instrumentis  opus 
est,  satis  nos  instruxit  ratione  natura.  Hoc  dedit 
telum  firmum,  perpetuum,  obsequens,  nee  anceps  nee 
quod  in  dominum  remitti  posset.  Non  ad  providendum 
tantum,  sed  ad  res  gerendas  satis  est  per  se  ipsa 
ratio  ;  etenim  quid  est  stultius  quam  hanc  ab  iracundia 
petere  praesidium,  rem  stabilem  ab  incerta,  fidelem 

3  ab  infida,  sanam  ab  aegra  ?  Quid,  quod  ad  actiones 
quoque,  in  quibus  solis  opera  iracundiae  videtur 
necessaria,  multo  per  se  ratio  fortior  est  ?  Nam  cum 
iudicavit  aliquid  faciendum,  in  eo  perseverat ;  nihil 
enim  melius  inventura  est  se  ipsa,  quo  mutetur  ;  ideo 

4  stat  semel  constitutis.  Iram  saepe  misericordia  retro 
egit ;  habet  enim  non  solidum  robur  sed  vanum 
tumorem  violentisque  principiis  utitur,  non  aliter 
quam  qui  a  terra  venti  surgunt  et  fluminibus  paludi- 
busque   concepti   sine  pertinacia  vehementes   sunt. 

5  Incipit  magno  impetu,  deinde  deficit  ante  tempus 
fatigata,  et,  quae  nihil  aliud  quam  crudelitatem  ac 


"  Cf.  the  citation  in  chap.  ix. 
150 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XVI.  7-xvii.  5 

erience^ttiereforejCertainsugge'^tions  and  shadows      J^ 
:  lassion,  but  from  pas-ion  itself  he  %nll  be  free.  ' 

Aristotle'savs''  that  certain  passions,  if  one  makes  a 
per  use  of  them,  serve  as  arm^.  And^  tills  would  be 
-  if,  Uke  the  impTehients  of  war,  they  could  be  put 
and  laid  aside  at  the  pleasure  of  the  user.  But 
the9e-ii-a«aa9  -■'which  Aristotle  would  grant  to  virtue 
figlit  under  their  o%\ti  orders  ;  they  await  no  man's 
gesture  and  are  not  possessed,  but  possess.  Nature  i^ 
has  given  to  us  an  adequate  equipment  in  reason  ;  we  ^ 
need  no  other  implements.  This  is  the  weapon  she 
has  bestowed  ;  it  is  strong,  enduring,  obedient,  not 
double-edged  or  capable  of  being  turned  against  its 
owner.  Reason  is  all-sufficient  in  itself,  ser\"tng  not  ' 
merely  for  counsel,  but  for  action  as  well.  WTiat, 
really,  is  more  foohsh  than  that  reason  should  seek 
protection  from  anger — that  which  is  steadfast  from 
that  ^hif h' is  "wavering ,  that  which  is  trustworthy 
from  that  which  is  untrustrvvorthy,  that  which  is  well 
from  thatJivhich,  is  sick  ?  Even  in  matters  of  action, 
in  which  alone  the  help  of  anger  seems  necessary,  is 
it  not  true  that  reason,  if  left  to  itself,  has  far  more 
power  ?  For  reason,  ha\'ing  decided  upon  the ' 
necessit}-  of  some  action,  persists  in  her  purpose, 
since  she  herself  can  discover  no  better  thing  to  put 
in  her  place  ;  therefore  her  determinations,  once 
made,  stand.  But  anger  is  oftert  forced  back  by 
pit}'  ;  for  it  has  no  enduring  strength,  but  is  a 
deligtve^inflation.  \iolent  at  the  outset.  It  is  like 
the  \Ainds  that  rise  from  off  the  earth  ;  generated 
from  streams  and  marshes  they  have  vehemence, 
but  do  nol  Tast^  So  anger  begins  Avith  a  mighty 
rush,  then  breaks  down  from  untimely  exhaustion, 
and  though  all  its  thoughts  had  been  concerned  %vith 

151 


SENECA 

nova  genera  poenarum  versaverat,  cum  animadver- 
tendum  est,  iam  fracta  lenisque  est.     Affectus  cito 

6  cadit,  aequalis  est  ratio.  Ceterum  etiam  ubi  perse- 
veravit  ira,  nonnumquam,  si  plures  sunt  qui  perire 
meruerunt,  post  duorum  triumve  sanguinem  occidere 
desinit.  Primi  eius  ictus  acres  sunt ;  sic  serpentium 
venena  a  cubili  erepentium  nocent,  innoxii  dentes 

7  sunt,  cum  illos  frequens  morsus  exhausit.  Ergo  non 
paria  patiuntur  qui  paria  commiserant,  et  saepe  qui 
minus  commisit  plus  patitur,  quia  recentiori  obiectus 
est.  Et  in  totum  inaequalis  est  ;  modo  ultra  quam 
oportet  excurrit,  modo  citerius  debito  resistit  ;  sibi 
enim  indulget  et  ex  libidine  iudicat  et  audire  non 
vult  et  patrocinio  non  relinquit  locum  et  ea  tenet 
quae  invasit  et  eripi  sibi  iudicium  suum,  etiam  si 
pravum  est,  non  sinit. 

1  18.  Ratio  utrique  parti  tempus  dat,  deinde  advqca- 
tionem  et  sibi  petit,  ut  excutiendae  veritati  spatium 
habeat ;  ira  festinat.  ^  Ratio  id  iudicare  vult  quod 
aequum  est ;  ira  id  aequum  videri  vult  quod  iudicavit. 

2  Ratio  nil  praeter  ipsum  de  quo  agitur  spectat ;. 
ira  vanis  et  extra  causam  obversantibus  commovetur. 
Vultus  illam  securior,  vox  clarior,  sermo  liberior,  cultus 
dedicatior,  advocatio  ambitiosior,  favor  popularis  ex- 
asperant ;  saepe  infesta  patrono  reum  damnat  ;  etiam 


152 


ON  ANGER,  I.  xvii.  5-x\iii.  2 

cruelty  aiicLiuiheiud-of  forms  of  torture,  yet  when 
the  time  is  ripe  for  punishment  it  has  already  become 
crippled  and  weak.  Passion  quickly  falls,  reason  is 
balanced.  But  even  if  anger  persists,  it  ^\"ill  often 
happeii  that  having  taken  the  blood  of  two  or  three 
victims  it  ^^•ill  cease  to  slay,  although  there  are  more 
who  deserve  to  die.  Its  first  blows  are  fierce  ;  so 
serpents  when  they  first  crawl  from  their  lair  are 
charged  with  venom,  but  their  fangs  are  harmless 
after  they  have  been  drained  by  repeated  biting. 
Consequently,  not  all  who  have  sinned  ahke  are 
punished  alike,  and  often  he  who  has  committed  the 
smaller  sin  receives  the  greater  punishment,  because 
he  was  subjected  to  anger  when  it  was  fresh.  And 
anger  is  altogether  ujibalanced ;  it  now  rushes 
farther  than  itsEould,  now  halts  sooner  than  it  ought. 
For  it~m3utges  its  own  impulses,  is  capricious  in 
judgement,  refuses  to  listen  to  e\'idence,  grants  no 
opportunity  for  defence,  maintains  whatever  position 
it  has  seized,  and  is  never  AWlling  to  surrender  its 
judgement  even  if  it  is  wTong.  p^ 

Keason^rants  a  hearing  to  both  sides,  then  seeks 
to  postpone  action,  even  ifs  o^\^\,  in  order  that  it  may 
gain  time  to  sift  out  the  truth  ;  but  anger  is  pre- 
cipitate. Reason  -wishes  the  decision  that  it  gives 
to  be  just  ;  anger  wishes  to  have  the  decision  which 
it  has  given  seem  the  just  decision.  Reason  considers 
nothing  except  the  question  at  issue  ;  anger  is  moved 
by  trifling  things  that  lie  outside  the  case.  An  over- 
confident demeanour,  a  voice  too  loud,  boldness  of 
speech,  foppishness  in  dress,  a  pretentious  show  of 
patronage,  popularity  ^\ith  the  pubhc — these  inflame 
anger.  Many  times  it  \*ill  condemn  the  accused 
because  it  hates  his  lawyer  ;    even  if  the  truth  is 

153 


SENECA 

si  ingeritur  oculis  Veritas,  amat  et  tuetur  errorem  ; 
coargui  non  vult  et  in  male  coeptis  honestior  illi 
pertinacia  videtur  quam  paenitentia. 

3  Cn.  Piso  fuit  memoria  nostra  vir  a  multis  vitiis  in- 
teger, sed  pravus  et  cui  placebat  pro  constantia  rigor. 
Is  cum  iratus  duci  iussisset  eum,  qui  ex  commeatu  sine 
commilitone  redierat,  quasi  interfecisset  quem  non 
exhibebat,  roganti  tempus  aliquod  ad  conquirendum 
non  dedit.  Damnatus  extra  vallum  productus  est  et 
iam  cervicem  porrigebat,  cum  subito  apparuit  ille 

4  commilito  qui  occisus  videbatur.  Tunc  centurio 
supplicio  praepositus  condere  gladium  speculatorem 
iubet,  damnatum  ad  Pisonem  reducit  redditurus 
Pisoni  innocentiam  ;  nam  militi  fortuna  reddiderat. 
Ingenti  concursu  deducuntur  complexi  alter  alterum 
cum  magno  gaudio  castrorum  commilitones.^  Con- 
scendit  tribunal  furens  Piso  ac  iubet  duci  utrumque, 
et  eum  militem  qui  non  occiderat  et  eum  qui  non 

5  perierat.  Quid  hoc  indignius  ?  Quia  unus  innocens 
apparuerat,  duo  peribant.  Piso  adiecit  et  tertium. 
Nam  ipsum  centurionem,  qui  damnatum  reduxerat, 
duci  iussit.     Constituti  sunt  in  eodem  illo  loco  perituri 

6  tres  ob  unius  innocentiam.  O  quam  sollers  est 
iracundia  ad  fingendas  causas  furoris  !  "  Te,"  inquit, 
"  duci  iubeo,  quia  damnatus  es  ;  te,  quia  causa  dam- 


"  That  grave  inflexibility  of  sou] 
Which  Reason  can't  convince,  nor  fear  control. 

Churchill,  Gotham,  iii.  335  f. 
154 


ON  ANGER,  I.  xviii.  2-6 

piled  up  before  its  ven'  eyes,  it  loves  error  and  clings 
to  it ;  it  refuses  to  be  con\-inced,  and  ha\-ing  entered 
upon  wTong  it  counts  persistence  to  be  more  honour-   i 
able  than  penitence. 

There  was  Gnaeus  Piso,  whom  I  can  remember  ;  a 
man  free  from  many  %'ices,  but  misguided,  in  that 
he  mistook  inflexibihty  "  for  firmness.  Once  when  he 
was  angry  he  ordered  the  execution  of  a  soldier  who 
had  returned  from  leave  of  absence  A\ithout  his 
comrade,  on  the  ground  that  if  the  man  did  not  pro- 
duce his  companion,  he  had  killed  him  ;  and  when  the 
soldier  asked  for  a  httle  time  to  institute  a  search,  the 
request  was  refused.  The  condemned  man  was  led 
outside  the  rampart,  and  as  he  was  in  the  act  of  pre- 
senting his  neck,  there  suddenly  appeared  the  very 
comrade  who  was  supposed  to  have  been  murdered. 
Hereupon  the  centurion  in  charge  of  the  execution 
bade  the  guardsman  sheathe  his  sword,  and  led  the 
condemned  man  back  to  Piso  in  order  to  free  Piso 
from  blame  ;  for  Fortune  had  freed  the  soldier.  A 
huge  crowd  amid  great  rejoicing  in  the  camp  escorted 
the  two  comrades  locked  in  each  other's  arms.  Piso 
mounted  the  tribunal  in  a  rage,  and  ordered  both 
soldiers  to  be  led  to  execution,  the  one  who  had  done 
no  murder  and  the  one  who  had  escaped  it  !  Could 
anything  have  been  more  unjust  than  this  ?  Two 
were  dpng  because  one  had  been  proved  innocent. 
But  Piso  added  also  a  third  ;  for  he  ordered  the 
centurion  who  had  brought  back  the  condemned  man 
to  be  executed  as  well.  On  account  of  the  innocence 
of  one  man  three  were  appointed  to  die  in  the  self- 
same place.  O  how  clever  is  anger  in  de\'ising 
excuses  for  its  madness  !  ^'^"You7*"it"say^,"r order 
to  be  executed  because  you  were  condemned  ;  you, 

155 


SENECA 

nationis  commilitoni  fuisti ;  te,  quia  iussus  occidere 
imperatori  non  paruisti."  Excogitavit  quemadmodum 
tria  crimina  faceret,  quia  nullum  invenerat. 

1  19.  Habet,  inquam,  iracundia  hoc  mali  ;  non 
vult  regi.  Irascitur  veritati  ipsi,  si  contra  voluntatem 
suam  apparuit  ;  cum  clamore  et  tumultu  et  totius 
corporis  iactatione  quos  destinavit  insequitur  adiectis 

2  conviciis  maledictisque.  Hoc  non  facit  ratio  ;  sed  si 
ita  opus  est,  silens  quietaque  totas  domus  funditus 
tollit  et  familias  rei  publicae  pestilentes  cum  coniugi- 
bus  ac  liberis  perdit,  tecta  ipsa  diruit  et  solo  exaequat 
et  inimica  libertati  nomina  exstirpat.  Hoc  non 
frendens  nee  caput  quassans  nee  quicquam  indecorum 
iudici  faciens,  cuius  turn  maxime  placidus  esse  debet 

3  et  in  statu  vultus,  cum  magna  pronuntiat.  "  Quid 
opus  est,"  inquit  Hieronymus,  "  cum  veHs  caedere 
aliquem,  tua  prius  labra  mordere  ?  "  Quid,  si  ille 
vidisset  desilientem  de  tribunali  proconsulem  et  fasces 
lictori  auferentem  et  suamet  vestimenta  scindentem, 

4  quia  tardius  scindebantur  aliena  ?  Quid  opus  est 
mensam  evertere  ?  Quid  pocula  adfligere  ?  Quid  se 
in  columnas  impingere  ?  Quid  capillos  avellere,  femur 
pectusque  percutere  ?  Quantam  iram  putas,  quae, 
quia  in  alium  non  tam  cito  quam  vult  erumpit,  in  se 
156 


ON  ANGER,  I.  x\iii.  6-xix.  4 

because  you  were  the  cause  of  your  comrade's  con- 
demnation ;  you,  because  you  did  not  obey  your 
commander  when  you  were  ordered  to  kill."  It 
thought  out  three  charges  because  it  had  grounds 
for  none. 

Angeivl  say,  has  this  great  fault — it  refuses  to  be  »■ 
ruled.  It  is  enraged  against  truth  itself  if  this  is 
shown  to  be  contrary  to  its  desire.  With  outcr\'  and 
uproar  and  gestures  that  shake  the  whole  body  it 
pursues  those  whom  it  has  marked  out,  heaping  upon 
them  abuse  and  curses.  Not  thus  does  reason  act. 
But  if  need  should  so  require,  it  silently  and  quietly 
wipeFbut  whole  families  root  and  branch,  and  house- 
holds that  are  baneful  to  the  state  it  destroys  together 
^nth  wives  and  children ;  it  tears  down  their  very 
houses,  levelling  them  to  the  ground,  and  exterminates 
the  very  names  of  the  foes  of  liberty.  All  this  it  will 
do,  but  \^ith  no  gnashing  of  the  teeth,  no  ^vild  tossing 
of  the  head,  doing  nothing  that  would  be  unseemly 
for  a  judge,  whose  countenance  should  at  no  time 
be  more  calm  and  unmoved  than  when  he  is  dehver- 
ing  a  weighty  sentence.  "  What  is  the  need,"  asks 
Hieronymus,*  '•  of  biting  your  own  lips  before  you 
start  to  give  a  man  a  thrashing  ?  "  What  if  he  had 
seen  a  proconsul  leap  dowTi  from  the  tribunal,  snatch 
the  fasces  from  the  lictor,  and  tear  his  own  clothes 
because  some  \'ictim's  clothes  were  still  untorn ! 
^\'hat  is  to  be  gained  by  overturning  the  table,  by 
hurhng  cups  upon  the  floor,  by  dashing  oneself 
against  pillars,  tearing  the  hair,  and  smiting  the 
thigh  and  the  breast  ?  How  mighty  is  the  anger, 
think  you,  which  turns  back  upon  itself  because  it< 
cannot  be  vented  upon  another  as  speedily  as  it 
"  See  Index. 

157 


SENECA 

revertitur  ?     Tenentur  itaque  a  proximis  et  rogantur, 
ut  sibi  ipsi  placentur. 

5  Quorum  nil  facit  quisquis  vacuus  ira  meritam  cuique 
poenam  iniungit.  Dimittit  saepe  eum,  cuius  pec- 
catum  deprendit.  Si  paenitentia  facti  spem  bonam 
pollicetur,  si  intellegit  non  ex  alto  venire  nequitiam, 
sed  summo,  quod  aiunt,  animo  inhaerere,  dabit  im- 
punitatem  nee  accipientibus  nocituram  nee  dantibus  ; 

6  nonnumquam  magna  scelera  levius  quam  minora  com- 
pescet,  si  ilia  lapsu,  non  crudelitate  commissa  sunt, 
his  inest  latens  et  operta  et  inveterata  calliditas  ; 
idem  delictum  in  duobus  non  eodem  malo  afficiet, 
si  alter  per  neglegentiam  admisit,  alter  curavit  ut 

7  nocens  esset.  Hoc  semper  in  omni  animadversione 
servabit,  ut  sciat  alteram  adhiberi,  ut  emendet  malos, 
alteram,  ut  tollat  ;  in  utroque  non  praeterita,  sed 
futura  intuebitur — nam,  ut  Plato  ait,  nemo  prudens 
punit,  quia  peccatum  est,  sed  ne  peccetus  ;  revocari 
enim  praeterita  non  possunt,  futura  prohibentur — , 
et  quos  volet  nequitiae  male  cedentis  exempla  fieri, 
palam  occidet,  non  tantum  ut  pereant  ipsi,  sed  ut 

8  alios  pereundo  deterreant.  Haec  cui  expendenda 
aestimandaque  sunt,  vides  quam  debeat  omni  per- 
turbatione  liber  accedere  ad  rem  summa  diligentia 


"  Laws  xi.  934.  a. 
158 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XIX.  4-8 

desires  !  And  so  such  men  are  seized  by  the  by- 
standers and  begged  to  become  at  peace  vnth 
themselves. 

None  of  these  things  ^\•i^  he  do,  who,  being  free 
from  anger,  imposes  upon  each  one  the  punishment 
that  he  merits.  He  ^^■i^l  often  ,let  a  man  go  free 
even  after  detecting  his  guilt)^  if  regret  for  the  act 
warrants  fair  hope,  if  he  discerns  that  the  sin  does 
not  issue  from  the  inmost  soul  of  the  man,  but,  so 
to  speak,  is  onlv  skin-deep,  he  \\ill  grant  him  im- 
punit}',  seeing  that  it  ^^•ill  injure  neither  the  recipient 
nor  the  giver.  Sometimes  he  ^^^ll  ban  great  crimes 
less  ruthlessly  than  smairdiies,  if  these,  in  the  one 
case,  were  committed  not  in  cruelty  but  in  a  moment 
of  weakness,  and,  in  the  other,  were  instinct  ^^■ith 
secret,  hidden,  and  long-practised  cunning.  To  two 
men  guilty  of  the  same  offence  he  ^\i\\  mete  out 
different  punishment,  if  one  sinned  through  careless- 
ness, while  the  other  intended  to  be  wicked.  Always 
in  ever}-  case  of  punishment  he  \vill  keep  before  him 
the  knowledge  that  one  form  is  designed  to  make  the 
wcked  better,  the  other  to  remove  them  ;  in  either 
case  he  ^^■ill  look  to  the  future,  not  to  the  past.  For 
as  Plato  says  "  :  "  A  sensible  person  does  not  punish 
a  man  because  he  has  sinned,  but  in  order  to  keep 
him  from  sin  ;  for  while  the  past  cannot  be  recalled, 
the  future  may  be  forestalled,"  And  he  will  openly 
kill  those  whom  he  wishes  to  have  serve  as  examples 
of  the  wickedness  that  is  slow  to  jield,  not  so  much 
that  they  themselves  may  be  destroyed  as  that  they 
may  deter  others  from  destruction.  These  are  the 
things  a  man  must  weigh  and  consider,  and  you  see 
how  free  he  ought  to  be  from  all  emotion  when  he 
proceeds  to  deal  v^ith  a  matter  that  requires  the 

159 


SENECA 

tractandam,  potestatem  vitae  necisque  ;   male  irato 
ferrum  committitur.     ^ 

20.  Ne  illud  quidem  iudicandum  est,  aliquid  iram 
ad  magnitudinem  animi  conferre.  Non  est  enim  ilia 
magnitude  ;  tumor  est.  Nee  corporibus  copia  vitiosi 
umoris  intentis  morbus  incrementum  est  sed  pestilens 
abundantia.  Omnes,  quos  vecors  animus  supra  cogi- 
tationes  extollit  humanas,  altum  quiddam  et  sublime 
spirare  se  credunt ;  ceterum  nil  solidi  subest,  sed  in 
ruinam  prona  sunt  quae  sine  fundamentis  crevere. 
Non  habet  ira  cui  insistat.  Non  ex  firmo  mansuroque 
oritur,  sed  ventosa  et  inanis  est  tantumque  abest  a 
magnitudine  animi,  quantum  a  fortitudine  audacia, 
a  fiducia  insolentia,  ab  austeritate  tristitia,  a  severi- 
tate  crudelitas.  Multum,  inquam,  interest  inter  sub- 
limem  animum  et  superbum.  Iracundia  nihil  amplum 
decorumque  molitur  ;  contra  mihi  videtur  veternosi 
et  infelicis  animi,  imbecillitatis  sibi  conscii,  saepe 
indolescere,  ut  exulcerata  et  aegra  corpora,  quae  ad 
tactus  levissimos  gemunt.  Ita  ira  muliebre  maxime 
ac  puerile  vitium  est.  "  Atincidit  et  in  viros."  Nam 
viris  quoque  puerilia  ac  muliebria  ingenia  sunt. 
:  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  aliquae  voces  ab  iratis  emittuntur 
quae  magno  emissae  videantur  animo  ?  "  Immo^ 
veram  ignorantibus  magnitudinem,  qualis  ilia  dira 
et  abominaq.da  :  "  Oderint,  dum  metuant."  Sullano 
scias  saeculo  scriptam.  Nescio  utrum  sibi  peius 
^  immo  added  by  Madvig. 


<»  Accius,  Atreus  {Trag.  Rom,  Frag,  v.,  Ribbeck). 
160 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XIX.  8-xx.  4 

utmost  caution — the  use  of  power  over  life  and  death.    ^„^^ 
Tis  ill  trusting  an  angry  man  .^\■ith  a  sword.  •^''^ 

And^.j;SiiJ[]?ust  not  suppose  this,  either— ^that  anger  3nijtt  Jf 
contributes  anything  to  greatness  of  soul.  That  is  mar^'J/i 
not  greatness,  it  is  a  swelling  ;  nor  when  disease  dis- 
ten(£'the  Body  with  a  mass  of  watery  corruption  is 
the  result  growth,  hut  a  pestilent  excess.  All  whom 
frenzy  of  soul  exalts  to  powers  that  are  more  than 
human  believe  that  they  breathe  forth  something 
lofty  and  sublime  ;  but  it_x£stsJ3li-O0thing  sohd,  and 
whatever  rises  without  a  firm  foundation  is  liable 
to  fall.  Anger  has  nothing  on  which  to  stand ;  it  -^ 
springs  from  nothing  that  is  stable  and  lasting,  but 
is  a  pufFed-up,  empty  thing,  as  far  removed  from 
greatness  of  soul  as  foolhardiness  is  from  bravery,^ 
arrogance  from  confidence,  sullenness  from  austerity, 
or  cruelt}'  from  sternness.  The  difference  between 
a  lofty  and  a  haughty  soul,  I  say,  is  great.  Anger 
aims  at  nothing  splendid  or  beautiful.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  seems  to  me  to  show  a  feeble  and  harassed 
spirit,  one  conscious  of  its  ovm  weakness  and  over- 
sensitive, just  as  the  body  is  when  it  is  sick  and 
covered  ^\ith  sores  and  makes  moan  at  the  shghtest 
touch.  Thus  anger  is  a  most  womanish  and  childish 
weakness.  "  But,"  you  will  say,  "  it  is  found  in 
men  also."  True,  for  even  men  may  have  childish 
and  womanish  natures.  "  WTiat  then?"  you  cry; 
"  do  not  the  utterances  of  angry  men  sometimes 
seem  to  be  the  utterances  of  a  great  soul  ?  "  Yes, 
to  those  who  do  not  know  what  true  greatness  is. 
Take  the  famous  Avords  :  "  Let  them  hate  if  only 
they  fear,"  "  which  are  so  dread  and  shocking  that 
you  might  know  that  they  were  written  in  the  times 
of  Sulla.     I  am  not  sure  which  wish  was  worse — that 

VOL.  I  M  161 


SENECA 

optaverit,  ut  odio  esset,  an  ut  timori.  "  Oderint." 
Occurrit  illi  futurum,  ut  exsecrentur,  insidientur, 
opprimant.  Quid  adiecit  ?  Di  illi  male  faciant,  adeo 
repperit  dignum  odio  remedium.  "  Oderint  " — quid 
turn  ?  Dum  pareant  ?  Non  ;  dum  probent  ?  Non  ; 
quid  ergo  ?     "  Dum  timeant."     Sic  ne  amari  quiden 

5  vellem,  Magno  hoc  dictum  spiritu  putas  ?  Falleris  ; 
nee  enim  magnitudo  ista  est  sed  immanitas. 

Non  est  quod  credas  irascentium  verbis,  quorum 
strepitus  magni,  minaces  sunt,  intra  mens  pavidissima. 

6  Nee  est  quod  existimes  verum  esse,  quod  apud 
disertissimum  virum  T.  Livium  dicitur  :  "  Vir  ingenii 
magni  magis  quam  boni."  Non  potest  istud  separari ; 
aut  et  bonum  erit  aut  nee  magnum,  quia  magni- 
tudinem  animi  inconcussam  intellego  et  introrsus 
solidam  et  ab  imo  parem  firmamque,  qualis  inesse 

7  malis  ingeniis  non  potest.  Terribilia  enim  esse  et 
tumultuosa  et  exitiosa  possunt  ;  magnitudinem  qui- 
dem,  cuius  firmamentum  roburque  bonitas  est,  non 
habebunt.     Ceterum  sermone,  conatu  et  omni  extra 

8  paratu  facient  magnitudinis  fidem  ;  eloquentur  ali- 
quid,  quod  tu  magni  animi^  putes,  sicut  C.  Caesar, 
qui  iratus  caelo,  quod  obstreperetur  pantomimis, 
quos  imitabatur  studiosius  quam  spectabat,  quod- 
que  comessatio  sua  fulminibus  terreretur — -prorsus 
parum     certis — ad     pugnam     vocavit     lovem     et 

^  animi  added  by  Gertz. 


many 
162 


Frag.  54  Hertz. 

i.e.y  Caligula,  of  whose  impiety  Suetonius  (xxii.)  records 

ly  instances. 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XX.  4-8 

he  should  be  hated,  or  that  he  should  be  feared. 
"  Let  them  hate,"  quoth  he  ;  then  he  bethinks  him 
that  there  will  come  a  time  when  men  will  curse  him, 
plot  against  him,  overpower  him — so  what  did  he  add? 
O  may  the  gods  curse  him  for  devising  so  hateful  a 
-cure  for  hate  !  "  Let  them  hate  " — and  then  what  ? 
If  only  they  obey  ?  No  !  If  only  they  approve  ? 
No  !  WTiat  then  ?  "  If  only  they  fear !'"  On  such 
tenuis  "T  should  not  have  wished  even  to  be  loved. 
You  thihk  this  the  utterance  of  a  great  soul  ?  You 
deceire  yourself  ;  for  there  is  nothing  great  in  it — it  is 
moBstrous. 

You_need  put  no  trust  in  the  words  of  the  angry, 
for  their  noise  is  loud  and  threatening,  but  within, 
their  heart  is  very  cowardly.  Nor  need  you  count 
as  true  the  saying  found  in  that  most  eloquent  writer, 
Titus  Li\ius  "  :  "A  man  whose  character  was  great 
rather  than  good."  In  character  there  can  be  no— /— ~ 
such  separation ;  it  will  either  be  good  or  else  not 
great,  because  greatness  of  soul,  as  I  conceive  it,  is  t^'*'"- 
a  thing  unshakable,  sound  to  the  core,  uniform  and 
strong  from  top  to  bottom — something  that  cannot 
exist  in  evil  natures.  Evil  men  may  be  terrible, 
turbulent,  and  destructive,  but  greatness  they  will 
never  have,  for  its  support  and  stay  is  goodness. 
Yet  by  speech,  by  endeavour,  and  by  all  outward 
display  they  will  give  the  impression  of  greatness  ; 
they  will  make  utterances  which  you  may  think 
bespeak  the  great  soul,  as  in  the  case  of  Gaius  Caesar.* 
He  grew  angry  at  heaven  because  its  thunder 
interrupted  some  pantomimists,  whom  he  was 
more  anxious  to  imitate  than  to  watch,  and  when 
its  thunderbolts — surely  they  missed  their  mark 
— affrighted  his  own  revels,  he  challenged  Jove  to 

163 


SENECA 

quidem  sine  missione,  Homericum  ilium  exclamans 
versum  : 

H   jx    avaeip    ry   eyw  ere. 

9  Quanta  dementia  fuit !  Putavit  aut  sibi  noceri  ne  ab 
love  quidem  posse  aut  se  nocere  etiam  lovi  posse. 
Non  puto  parum  momenti  hanc  eius  vocem  ad  in- 
citandas  coniuratorum  mentes  addidisse  ;  ultimae 
enim  patientiae  visum  est  eum  ferre,  qui  lovem  non 
ferret ! 

1  21.  Nihil  ergo  in  ira,  ne  cum  videtur  quidem 
vehemens  et  deos  hominesque  despiciens,  magnum, 
nihil  nobile  est.  Aut  si  videtur  alicui  magnum 
animum  ira  producere,  videatur  et  luxuria — ebore 
sustineri  vult,  purpura  vestiri,  auro  tegi,  terras  trans- 
ferre,  maria  concludere,  flumina  praecipitare,  nemora 

2  suspendere  ;  videatur  et  avaritia  magni  animi — 
acervis  auri  argentique  incubat  et  provinciarum 
nominibus  agros  colit  et  sub  singulis  vilicis  latiores 

3  habet  fines  quam  quos  consules  sortiebantur ;  videa- 
tur et  libido  magni  animi — transnat  freta,  puerorum 
greges  castrat,  sub  gladium  mariti  venit  morte  con- 
tempta  ;  videatur  et  ambitio  magni  animi — non  est 
contenta  honoribus  annuis  ;  si  fieri  potest,  uno  nomine 
occupare   fastus    vult,   per    omnem    orbem    titulos 

4  disponere.  Omnia  ista,  non  refert  in  quantum  pro- 
cedant  extendantque  se,  angusta  sunt,  misera,  de- 
pressa ;  sola  sublimis  et  excelsa  virtus  est,  nee 
quicquam  magnum  est  nisi  quod  simul  placidum. 

11 

"  Iliad,  xxiii.  724.     After  a  protracted   wrestling-bout, 
Ajax  thus  challenges  Odysseus  to  some  decisive  manoeuvre. 
*>  The  reference  is  to  artificial  lakes  and  cascades. 

164 


ON  ANGER,  I.  XX.  8-xxi.  4 

fightj  even  to  the  death,  shoutiog  in  the  words  of 
Homer  : 

Or  uplift  me,  or  I  will  thee." 

What  madness  !  He  thought  that  not  even  Jove 
could  harm  him,  or  that  he  could  harm  even  Jove. 
I  suppose  that  these  words  of  his  had  no  httle 
weight  in  arousing  the  minds  of  conspirators  ;  for 
to  put  up  Avith  a  man  who  could  not  put  up  with 
Jove  seemed  the  limit  of  endurance  ! 

There  is  in  anger,  consequently,  nothing  great, 
nothing  noble,  even  when  it  seems  impassioned,  con- 
temptuous alike  of  gods  and  men.     Else  let  him  who 
thir^s'tharXnger  reveals  the  great  soul,  think  that 
luxur£3oes  the  same  ;  it  desires  to  rest  on  ivoiy,  to  be 
arrayed  in^urple,  toT^e  roofed  with  gold,  to  remove 
lanck,  to  confine  the  waters  of  the  sea,  to  hurl  rivers 
headloxig,*  to   hang  gardens  in  the  air.      Let  him 
think  that  avarice  also  betokens  the  great  soul ;    it 
broods  over  heaps  of  gold  and  silver,  it  tills  fields 
that  are  pro\"inces  in  all  but  name,  and  holds  under 
a  single  steward  broader  acres  than  were  allotted 
once    to   consuls.       Let   him   also    think   that   lust 
betokens  the  great  soul ;   it  swims  across  straits,  it    ^ 
unsexes   lads    by   the   score,   and   despising   death 
braves  the  husband's  sword.     And  let  him  think  that 
ambition  also  betokens  the  great  soul ;    it  is  not     y 
content  with  annual  office  ;   it  would  fill  the  calendar  "^ 
with  only  one  name  if  that  might  be,  and  set  up  its 
memorials  throughout  all  the  world.     Such  quahties, 
it  matters  not  to  what  height  or  length  they  reach, 
are  all  narrow,  pitiable,  grovelling.     Virtue  alone  is  — 
lofty  and  subHme,  and  nothing  is  great  that  is  not    ^ 
at  the  same  time  tranquil. 

165 


LIBER  IV 

AD  NOVATVM 

DE  IRA 


1  1.  Primus  liber,  Novate,  benigniorem  habuit  ma- 
teriam  ;  facilis  enim  in  proclivia  vitiorum  decursus 
est.  Nunc  ad  exiliora  veniendum  est  ;  quaerimus 
enim  ira  utrum  iudicio  an  impetu  incipiat,  id  est 
utrum  sua  sponte  moveatur  an  quemadmodum  plera- 
que,    quae    intra    nos    non^   insciis    nobis    oriuntur. 

2  Debet  autem  in  haec  se  demittere  disputatio,  ut  ad 
ilia  quoque  altiora  possit  exsurgere.  Nam  et  in  corpore 
nostro  ossa  nervique  et  articuli,  firmamenta  totius  et 
vitalia,  minime  speciosa  visu,  prius  ordinantur,  deinde 
haec,  ex  quibus  omnis  in  faciem  adspectumque  decor 
est ;  post  haec  omnia,  qui  maxime  oculos  rapit,  color 
ultimus  perfecto  iam  corpore  adfunditur. 

3  Iram  quin  species  oblata  iniuriae  moveat  non  est 
dubium  ;  sed  utrum  speciem  ipsa  statim  sequatur 
et  non  accedente  animo  excurrat,  an  illo  adsentiente 

^  non  added  by  Hermes. 


"  i.e.,  since  men  are  prone  to  vice,  there  has  been  ample 
material  for  the  earlier  discussion. 


166 


BOOK  IV 

TO  NOVATUS 
ON  ANGER 


My  first  book,  Novatus,  had  a  more  bountiful  theme ; 
for  easy  is  the  descent  into  the  dowTiward  course  of 
vice."  Now  we  must  come  to  narrower  matters ; 
for  the  question  is  whether  anger  originates  from 
choice  or  from  impulse,  that  is,  ^vhether  it  is  aroused 
of  its  own  accord,  or  whether,  like  much  else  that 
goes  on  ^vitTun  us,  it  does  not  arise  ^vithout  our  know- 
ledge. But  tHe  discussion  must  be  lowered  to  the 
consideration  of  these  things  in  order  that  it  may 
afterwards  rise  to  the  other,  loftier,  themes.  For  in 
our  bodies,  too,  there  comes  first  the  system  of  bones, 
sinews,  and  joints,  which  form  the  framework  of  the 
whole  and  are  vital  parts,  yet  are  by  no  means  fair  to 
look  upon  ;  next  the  parts 'on  which  all  the  comeliness 
of  face  and  appearance  depend,  and  after  all  these, 
when  the  body  is  now  complete,  there  is  added  last 
that  which  above  all  else  captivates  the  eye,  the  colour. 
Therejcan  bejiodoubt  that  anger  is  aroused  by  the 
direct  impression  of  an  mjury';  "but  the  questFoh  is^vA.  "* 
whet^F  it  fottows  inunediately  upon  the  impression  u/z/A^**-/ 
and  sprmgs  up  without  "assistance  from  the  mind,  or  '^^^^% 
whetherTtTs  aroused  only  \\\\h.  the  assent  of  the  mind. 
'         "-  167 


SENECA 

4  moveatur  quaerimus.  Nobis  placet  nihil  illam  per 
se  audere  sed  animo  adprobante  ;  nam  speciem 
capere  acceptae  iniuriae  et  ultionem  eius  coneupiscere 
et  utrumque  coniungere,  nee  laedi  se  debuisse  et 
vindicari   debere,   non    est    eius   impetus,   qui   sine 

5  voluntate  nostra  concitatur.  Ille  simplex  est,  hie  com- 
positus  et  plura  continens ;  intellexit  aliquid,  in- 
dignatus  est,  damnavit,  ulciscitur  :  haec  non  possunt 
fieri,  nisi  animus  eis  quibus  tangebatur  adsensus  est. 

1  2.  "  Quorsus,"  inquis,  "  haec  quaestio  pertinet  ?  " 
Ut  sciamus  quid  sit  ira.  Nam  si  invitis  nobis  nascitur, 
numquam  rationi  succumbet.  Omnes  enim  motus, 
qui  non  voluntate  nostra  fiunt,  invicti  et  inevitabiles 
sunt,  ut  horror  frigida  aspersis,  ad  quosdam  tactus 
aspernatio  ;  ad  peiores  nuntios  subriguntur  pili  et 
rubor  ad  improba  verba  sufFunditur  sequiturque 
vertigo  praerupta  cernentis.  Quorum  quia  nihil  in 
nostra  potestate   est,   nulla   quo   minus   fiant  ratio 

2  persuadet.  Ira  praeceptis  fugatur  ;  est  enim  volun- 
tarium  animi  vitium,  non  ex  his,  quae  condicione 
quadam  humanae  sortis  eveniunt  ideoque  etiam  sa- 
pientissimis  accidunt,  inter  quae  et  primus  ille  ictus 
animi  ponendus  est,  qui  nos  post  opinionem  iniuriae 

3  movet.     Hie  subit  etiam  inter  ludicra  scaenae  spec- 

168 


ON  ANGER,  II.  I.  4-n.  3 

Oui_OEinion  is  that  it  ventures  nothing^  by  itself,  but  - 
acts  mHyLJiyitlL-tlie  approval  oi  the  mind.  For  to 
form  the  impression  of  ha\-ing  received  an  injury 
and  to  long  to  avenge  it,  and  then  to  couple  together 
the  two  propositions  that  one  ought  not  to  have  been 
wronged  and  that  one  ought  to  be  avenged — this  is 
not  a  mere  impulse  of  the  mind  acting  -without  our 
volition.  The  one  is  a  single  mental  process,  the 
other  a  complex  one  composed  of  several  elements  ; 
the jMndhas  grasped  something,  has  become  in- 
dignant, has  condemned  the  act,  and  now  tries  to 
avenge  Ttr~These  processes  are  impossible  unless 
the  mind  has  given  assent  to  the  impressions  that 
moved  it. 

"  Butrllyou  askj  "what  is  the  purpose  of  such  an 
inquiry  ?^'  I  answer,  in  order  that  we  may  know 
what  anger  is  ;  for  if  it  arises  against  our  ^\-ill,  it  ^^•i^l 
never  succumb  to  reason.  For  all  sensations  that  do 
notTesviIt  from  our  own  volition  are  uncontrolled  and 
unavoidable,  as,  for  example,  shivering  when  we  are 
dashed  ^yiih  cold  water  and  recoilment  from  certain 
contacts  ;  bad  news  makes  the  hair  stand  on  end,  \i\e 
language  causes  a  blush  to  spread,  and  when  one 
looks  down  from  a  precipice,  dizziness  follows.  Be- 
cause none  of  these  things  lies  A\-ithin  our  control,  no 
reasoning  can  keep  them  from  happening.  But 
anger  may  be  routed  at  our  behest  ;  for  it  is  a  weak-< 
ness  of  the  miad  that  is  subject  to  the  will,  not  one 
of  those  things  that  result  from  some  condition  of 
the  general  lot  of  man  and  therefore  befall  even  the 
■vWsest,  among  which  must  be  placed  foremost  that 
mental  shock  which  affects  us  after  we  have  formed 
the  rmpression  of  a  ^\Tong  committed.  This  steals 
upon  us  even  from  the  sight  of  plays  upon  the  stage 

169 


SENECA 

tacula  et  lectiones  rerum  vetustarum.  Saepe  Clodio 
Ciceronem  expellenti  et  Antonio  occidenti  videmur 
irasci  ;  quis  non  contra  Mari  arma,  contra  Sullae 
proscriptionem  concitatur  ?  Quis  non  Theodoto  et 
Achillae  et  ipsi  puero  non  puerile  auso  facinus  in- 

4  festus  est  ?  Cantus  nos  nonnumquam  et  citata 
modulatio  instigat  Martiusque  ille  tubarum  sonus  ; 
movet    mentes    et    atrox    pictura    et   iustissimorum 

5  suppliciorum  tristis  adspectus  ;  inde  est  quod  ad- 
ridemus  ridentibus  et  contristat  nos  turba  maerentium 
et  efFervescimus  ad  aliena  certamina.  Quae  non  sunt 
irae,  non  magis  quam  tristitia  est,  quae  ad  conspectum 
mimici  naufragii  contrahit  frontem,  non  magis  quam 
timor,  qui  Hannibale  post  Cannas  moenia  eircum- 
sidente  lectorum  percurrit  animos,  sed  omnia  ista 
motus  sunt  animorum  moveri  nolentium  nee  adfectus 

6  sedprincipiaproludentiaadfectibus.  Sicenimmilitaris 
viri  in  media  pace  iam  togati  aures  tuba  suscitat 
equosque  castrenses  erigit  crepitus  armorum.  Alex- 
andrum  aiunt  Xenophanto  canente  manum  ad  arma 
misisse. 

1  3.  Nihil  ex  his,  quae  animum  fortuito  impellunt, 
adfectus  vocari  debet  ;  ista,  ut  ita  dicam,  patitur 
magis  animus  quam  facit.  Ergo  adfectus  est  non  ad 
oblatas  rerum  species  moveri,  sed  permittere  se  illis 


"  The  youthful  king  Ptolemy  XII.,  who  compassed  the 
murder  of  Pompey  when  he  sought  refuge  in  Egypt  after 
the  battle  of  Pharsalus  (48  B.C.).  Achillas,  commander  of 
the  army,  and  Theodotus,  the  king's  adviser,  shared  the 
responsibility  of  the  crime. 

*  Timotheus  is  the  name  of  the  flutist  in  other  versions  of 
the  story  ;  cf.  Dion  Chrys.  Or.  i.  1  ;   Suidas,  s.v. 

170 


ON  ANGER,  II.  11.  3-m.  1 

and  from  reading  of  happenings  of  long  ago.  _Hqw 
often  we  seem  to  grow  angry  with  Clodius  for  banish- 
ing Cicero^  with  Antony  for  kilhng  him  !  Who  is  not 
aroused  against  the  arms  which  Marius  took  up, 
against  the  proscription  which  Sulla  used  ?  WTio  is 
not  incensed  against  Theodotus  and  Achillas,  and  the 
child  himself  "  who  dared  an  unchildish  crime  ?  Sing- 
ing sometimes  stirs  us,  and  quickened  rhythm,  and 
the  well-known  blare  of  the  War-god's  trumpets  ; 
our  minds  are  perturbed  by  a  shocking  picture  and 
by  the  melancholy  sight  of  punishment  even  when  it 
is  entirely  just  ;  in  the  same  way  we  smile  when 
others  smile,  we  are  saddened  by  a  throng  of 
mourners,  and  are  thrown  into  a  ferment  by  the 
struggles  of  others.  Such_sensations,  however,  are 
no  more  anger  than  that  is  sorrow  which  furrows  the 
brow  at-Si^ght  of  a  mimic  shipwTCck,  no  more  anger 
than  that  is  fear  which  thrills  our  minds  when  we 
read  how  Hannibal  after  Cannae  beset  the  walls  of 
Rome^  but_they  are  all  emotions  of  a  mind  that \ 
wottkL  prefer -^  not  to  be  so  affected  ;  they  are  nolj- 
passions,  but  the  beginnings  that  are  prehminaryi 
to  passions.  So,  too,  the  warrior  in  the  midst  of 
peace,  wearing  now  his  ci\"ihan  dress,  will  prick  up 
his  ears  at  the  blast  of  a  trumpet,  and  army  horses 
are  made  restive  by  the  clatter  of  arms.  It  is  said 
that  Alexander,  when  Xenophantus  *  played  the 
flute,  reached  for  his  weapons. 

None  of  these  things  which  move  the  mind  through 
the  agency  of  chance  should  be  called  passions  ;  the 
mind  suffers  them,  so  to  speak,  rather  than  causes 
them.  Passion,  consequently,  does  not  consist  in 
being  moved  by  the  impressions  that  are  presented 
to  the  mind,  but  in  surrendering  to  these  and  follow-  '■ 
^  171 


SENECA 

2  et  liunc  fortuitum  motum  prosequi.  Nam  si  quis 
pallorem  et  lacrimas  procidentis  et  irritationem  umoris 
obsceni  altumve  suspirium  et  oculos  subito  acriores 
aut  quid  his  simile  indicium  adfectus  animique  signum 
putat,  fallitur  nee  intellegit  corporis  hos  esse  pulsus. 

3  Itaque  et  fortissimus  plerumque  vir  dum  armatur 
expalluit  et  signo  pugnae  dato  ferocissimo  militi 
paulum  genua  tremuerunt  et  magno  imperatori  ante- 
quam  inter  se  acies  arietarent  cor  exsiluit  et  oratori 
eloquentissimo  dum  ad  dicendum  componitur  summa 

4  riguerunt.  Ira  non  moveri  tantum  debet  sed  ex- 
currere  ;  est  enim  impetus  ;  numquam  autem  impetus 
sine  adsensu  mentis  est,  neque  enim  fieri  potest  ut  de 
ultione  et  poena  agatur  animo  nesciente.  Putavit  se 
aliquis  laesum,  voluit  ulcisci,  dissuadente  aliqua  causa 
statim  resedit.  Hanc  iram  non  voco,  motum  animi' 
rationi  parentem  ;   ilia  est  ira,  quae  rationem  trans- 

5  silit,  quae  secum  rapit.  Ergo  prima  ilia  agitatio ' 
animi,  quam  species  iniuriae  incussit,  non  magis  ira 
est  quam  ipsa  iniuriae  species  ;  ille  sequens  impetus, 
qui  speciem  iniuriae  non  tantum  accepit  sed  adpro^. 
bavit,  ira  est,  concitatio  animi  ad  ultionem  voluntate 
et  iudicio  pergentis.  Numquam  dubium  est  quin 
timor  fugam  habeat,  ira  impetum  ;  vide  ergo  an  put(  - 
aliquid  sine  adsensu  mentis  aut  peti  posse  aut  caveri. 
172 


ON  ANGER,  II.  III.  2-5 

ing—ap^  such  a  chance  prompting.  For  if  any  one 
supposes  that  pallor,  falling  tears,  prurient  itching 
or  deep-d^a^%•n  sigh,  a  sudden  brightening  of  the 
eyes,  and  the  Hke,  are  an  e\'idence  of  passion  and  a 
manifestation  of  the  mind,  he  is  mistaken  and  fails  to 
understand  that  these_ar£  .disturbances  of  the  body. 
And  so  very  often  even  the  bravest  man  turns  pale 
while  he  fits  on  his  arms,  the  knees  of  the  boldest 
soldier  often  tremble  a  little  when  the  battle-signal 
is  given,  the  might}*  commander  has  his  heart  in  his 
throat  before  the  battle-lines  clash,  and  while  the 
most  eloquent  orator  is  getting  ready  to  speak, 
his  extremities  becpme  rigid.  Anger  must  not  only 
be  aroused  but  it  must  rush  forth,  for  it  is  an  active 
impulse  ;  but  an^  active  impulse  never  comes  without 
th^e  consent  of  the  will,  for  it  is  impossible  for  a  man 
to  aim  at  revenge  and  punishment  ^\ithout  the 
cognizance  of  his  mindL_  A  nian  thinks  himself 
injured,  ^\•ishes  to  take  vengeance,  but  dissuaded  by 
some  consideration  immediately  calms  down.  This 
I  do  not  call  anger,  this  prompting  of  the  mind  which 
is  submissive  to  reason  ;  anger  is  that  which  over- 
leaps reason  and  sweeps  it  away.  Therefore  that 
primarj'  disturbance  of  the  mind  which  is  excited 
by  the  impression  of  injury  is  no  more  anger  than 
the  impression  of  injury  is  itself  anger  ;  the  active 
impulse  consequent  iipon  it,  which  has  not  only 
admitted  the  impression  of  injury  but  also  approved 
it,  is  really  anger — the  tumult  of  a  mind  proceeding 
to  revenge  by  choice  and  determination.  There  can 
never  be  any  doubt  that  as  fear  involves  flight,  anger 
involves  assault ;  consider,  therefore,  whether  you 
beheve  that  anything  can  either  be  assailed  or 
avoided  without  the  mind's  assent. 

173 


SENECA 

1  4.  Et  ut  scias  quemadmodum  incipiant  adfectus 
aut  crescant  aut  efferantur,  est  primus  motus  non 
voluntarius,  quasi  praeparatio  adfectus  et  quaedam 
comminatio  ;  alter  cum  voluntate  non  contumaci, 
tamquam  oporteat  me  vindicari,  cum  laesus  sim,  aut 
oporteat  hunc  poenas  dare,  cum  scelus  fecerit ;  tertius 
motus  est  iam  impotens,  qui  non  si  oportet  ulcisci  vult, 

2  sed  utique,  qui  rationem  evicit.  Primum  ilium  animi 
ictum  efFugere  ratione  non  possumus,  sicut  ne  ilia 
quidem  quae  diximus  accidere  corporibus,  ne  nos 
oscitatio  aliena  sollicitet,  ne  oculi  ad  intentationem 
subitam  digitorum  conprimantur.  Ista  non  potest 
ratio  vincere,  consuetudo  fortasse  et  adsidua  ob- 
servatio  extenuat.  Alter  ille  motus,  qui  iudicio 
nascitur,  iudicio  tollitur, 

1  5.  lUud  etiamnunc  quaerendum  est,  ii  qui  vulgo 
saeviunt  et  sanguine  humano  gaudent  an  irascantur, 
cum  eos  occidunt,  a  quibus  ne.c  acceperunt  iniuriam 
nee  accepisse  ipsi  se  existimant ;   qualis  fuit  Apollo- 

2  dorus  aut  Phalaris.  Haec  non  est  ira,  feritas  est  ; 
non  enim  quia  accepit  iniuriam  nocet,  sed  parata  est, 
dum  noceat,  vel  accipere,  nee  illi  verbera  lacerationes- 

3  que  in  ultionem  petuntur  sed  in  voluptatem.  Quid 
ergo  est^  ?     Origo  huius  mali  ab  ira  est,  quae  ubi 

^  est  added  by  Oertz. 

"  See  Index. 
174 


ON  ANGER,  II.  IV.  l-v.  3 

That  you  may  know,  further,  how  the  passions 
begin,  grow,  and  run  riot,  I  may  say  that  the  Jirst 
promptings  isJiLYoluntary,  a  preparation  for  passiion, 
as  it  werej_and^asort  of  rnenace  ;  the  next  is  combined 
with  an  act  of  volition,  although  not  an  unruly  one, 
which  assumes  jthat  it  is  right  for  me  to  avenge 
myself  because  I  have  been  injured,  or  that  it  is 
right  for  the  other  person  to  be  punished  because 
he  has  committed  a  crime  ;  the  tliird  prompting  is 
now  beyond  control,  in  that  it  wishes  to  take  venge- 
ance, not  if  it  is  right  to  do  so,  but  whether  or  no, 
and  has  utterly  vanquished  reason.  We  can  no 
more  avoid  by  the  use  of  reason  that  first  shock 
which  the  mind  experiences  than  we  can  avoid 
those  effects  mentioned  before  which  the  body 
experiences — the  temptation  to  yawn  when  another 
yawns,  and  \\'inking  when  fingers  are  suddenly  pointed 
toward  the  eyes.  Such  impulses  cannot  be  overcome 
by  reason,  although  perchance  practice  and  constant 
watchfulness  will  weaken  them.  Different  is  that 
prompting  which  is  born  of  the  judgement,  is 
banished  by  the  judgement. 

This  point  also  must  now  be  considered,  ^vhether 
thosejffho  are  habitually  cruel  and  rejoice  in  human 
blood  are  angrywhen  tKev  kill  people  from  whom 
thej[_haye_neither  received  injury  nor  think  even 
themselvesjthat  they  have  received  one  ;  of  such 
sort  were  Apollodorus  "  and  Phalaris."  But  this  is 
not  anger,  it  is  brutahty ;  for  it  does  not  harm 
because  it  has  received  an  injur}',  but  it  is  even 
ready  to  receive  one  provided  that  it  can  harm,  and 
its  purpose  in  desiring  to  beat  and  to  mangle  is  not 
vengeance  but  pleasure.  And  why  does  it  happen  ? 
The  source  of  this  evil  is  anger,  and  when  anger  from 
-         — —  175 


SENECA 

frequenti  exercitatione  et  satietate  in  oblivionem 
clementiae  venit  et  omne  foedus  humanum  eiecit 
animo,  novissime  in  crudelitatem  transit.  Rident 
itaque  gaudentque  et  voluptate  multa  perfruuntur 
plurimumque  ab  iratorum  vultu  absunt,  per  otium 
saevi. 

4  Hannibalem  aiunt  dixisse,  cum  fossam  sanguine 
humano  plenam  vidisset :  "  O  formonsum  speeta- 
culum  !  "  Quanto  pulchrius  illi  visum  esset,  si  flumen 
aliquod  lacumque  complesset !  Quid  mirum,  si  hoc 
maxime  spectaculo  caperis  innatus  sanguini  et  ab 
infante  caedibus  admotus  ?  Sequetur  te  fortuna 
crudelitati  tuae  per  viginti  annos  secunda  dabitque 
oculis  tuis  gratum  ubique  spectaculum  ;  videbis  istud 
et  circa  Trasumennum  et  circa  Cannas  et  novissime 

5  circa  Carthaginem  tuam,  Volesus  nuper  sub  divo 
Augusto  proconsul  Asiae,  cum  trecentos  uno  die 
securi  percussisset,  incedens  inter  cadavera  vultu 
superbo,  quasi  magnificum  quiddam  conspiciendum- 
que  fecisset,  graece  proclamavit  :  "  O  rem  regiam  !  " 
Quid  hie  rex  fecisset  ?  Non  fuit  haec  ira  sed  maius 
malum  et  insanabile. 

1  6.  "  Virtus,"  inquit,  "  ut  honestis  rebus  propitia 
est,  ita  turpibus  irata  esse  debet."  Quid,  si  dicat  w- 
tutem  et  humilem  et  magnam  esse  debere  ?  Atqui 
hoc  dicit,  illam^  extolli  vult  et  deprimi,  quoniam 
laetitia  ob  recte  factum  clara  magnificaque  est,  ira 
ob  alienum  peccatum  sordida  et  angusti  pectoris  est. 

^  illam  Hermes,  after  Miiller  :  qui  illam  uss, 
176 


ON  ANGER,  II.  V.  ^vi.  1 

nft-rpppatfH  inrlnlgpnr'i^  f^p^j  surfeJt  has  arrived  at  a 
disregard^or  mercy  and  has  expelled  from  tHe  mind 
every  conception  oTfheTiuman  bonclT  it  passes  at  last 
into_cnj£ity.  And  so  these  men  Taugh  and  rejoice 
and  experience  great  pleasure,  and  wear  a  counten- 
ance utterly  unlike  that  of  anger,  making  a  pastime 
of  ferocity. 

WTien  Hannibal  saw  a  trench  flowing  with  human 
blood,  he  is  said  to  have  exclaimed,  "  O  beauteous 
sight  !  "  How  much  more  beautiful  would  it  have 
seemed  to  him  if  the  blood  had  filled  some  river  or 
lake  !  WTiat  wonder,  O  Hannibal,  if  you,  born  to 
bloodshed  and  from  childhood  famihar  with  slaughter, 
find  especial  dehght  in  this  spectacle  ?  A  fortune  will 
attend  you  that  for  twenty  years  ^vill  gratifv  vour 
cruelty,  and  will  everywhere  supply  to  your  eyes  the 
welcome  sight ;  you  will  see  it  at  Trasumennus  and 
at  Cannae,  and  last  of  all  at  your  own  Carthage  ! 
Only  recently  Volesus,  governor  of  Asia  under  the 
deified  Augustus,  beheaded  three  hundred  persons 
in  one  day,  and  as  he  strutted  among  the  corpses 
\vith  the  proud  air  of  one  who  had  done  some  glorious 
deed  worth  beholding,  he  cried  out  in  Greek,  "  What 
a  kingly  act  !  "  But  what  would  he  have  done  if  he 
had  been  a  king  ?  No,  this  was  not  anger y, but  an 
e\TLstill  greatenand -iacurAble . 

"  If/'_sorae_one  arguesj.''  Airtue  is  well  disposed  a/>gf^^ 
toward  what  is  honourable,  it  is  her  duty  to  feel  anger 
towarrd  what  i^  Ixi^^e."  "^liat  if  he  should  say  that 
virtue  must  be  both  low  and  great  ?  And  yet  this 
is  \\-Hat  he  does  say— he  would  have  her  be  both 
exalted  and  debased,  since  joy  on  account  of  a  right 
action  is  splendid  and  glorious,  wlaile  anger  on 
account  of  another's  sin  is  mean  and  narrow-minded. 
VOL.  I  N  -— —--  j^^ 


SENECA 

2  Nee  umquam  eommittet  virtus,  ut  vitia,  dum  com- 
pescit,  imitetur  ;  iram  ipsam  castigandam  habet,  quae 
nihilo  melior  est,  saepe  etiam  peior  is  delictis  quibus 
irascitur.  Gaudere  laetarique  proprium  et  naturale 
virtutis  est  ;  irasci  non  est  ex  dignitate  eius,  non 
magis  quam  maerere.  Atqui  iracundiae  tristitia 
comes  est  et  in  hanc  omnis  ira  vel  post  paenitentiam 

3  vel  post  repulsam  revolvitur.  Et  si  sapientis  est 
peccatis  irasci,  magis  irascetur  maioribus  et  saepe 
irascetur  ;  sequitur,  ut  non  tantum  iratus  sit  sapiens, 
sed  iracundus.  Atqui  si  nee  magnam  iram  nee 
frequentem  in  animo  sapientis  locum  habere  credi- 
mus,  quid  est,  quare  non  ex  toto  ilium  hoc  adfectu 

4  liberemus  ?  Modus  enim  esse  non  potest,  si  pro  facto 
cuiusque  irascendum  est ;  nam  aut  iniquus  erit,  si 
aequaliter  irascetur  delictis  inaequalibus,  aut  ira- 
cundissimus,  si  totiens  excanduerit  quotiens  iram 
scelera  meruerint. 

1  7.  Et  quid  indignius  quam  sapientis  adfectum  ex 
aliena  pendere  nequitia  ?  Desinet  ille  Socrates  posse 
eundem  vultum  domum  referre,  quem  domo  ex 
tulerat  ?  Atqui  si  irasci  sapiens  turpiter  factis  debet 
et  concitari  contristarique  ob  scelera,  nihil  est 
aerumnosius    sapiente  ;     omnis   illi   per   iracundiam 

2  maeroremque  vita  transibit.  Quod  enim  momentum 
erit,  quo  non  improbanda  videat  ?  Quotiens  pro- 
cesserit  domo,  per  sceleratos  illi  avarosque  et  prodigos 

178 


ON  ANGER,  II.  VI.  2-vii.  2 

And  virtue  will  never  be  guilty  of  simulating  vice  in 
thev^xrtDfre^es&Jng  it :  anger  in  itself  she  considers 
repFeheasible*  fox  it  is  in  no  way  better,  often  even 
worse,  than  those  shortcomings  which  provoke  anger. 
The  distinctive  and  natural  property  of  wtue  is  to 
rejoicgiand  be'gTad  ;  it  no  more  comports  \\ith  her 
dignit}'  to  be  angry  than  to  be  sad.  But  sorrow  is  the 
cornp2nl5S~of 'angler,  and  all  anger  comes  round  to 
this  as  the  result  either  of  remorse  or  of  defeat. 
Besides,  irit  is  the  part  of  a  ^\ise  man  to  be  angry 
at-,siSiI3Ee  greater  this  is  the  more  angry  will  he 
be,  .aaiL  he  A^ill  be  angry  often ;  it  follows  that  the 
wise  Jiian  will  not  only  become  angr}',  but  A^ill  be 
prone  to  anger.  But  if  we  believe  that  neither  great 
anger  nor  frequent  anger  has  a  place  in  the  mind  of 
a  wise  man,  is  there  any  reason  why  we  should  not 
free  him  from  this  passion  altogether  ?  No  limit, 
surely,  can  be  set  if  the  degree  of  his  anger  is  to 
be  determined  by  each  man's  deed.  For  either  he 
will  be  unjust  if  he  has  equal  anger  toward  unequal 
delinquencies,  or  he  will  be  habitually  angry  if  he 
blazes  up  every  time  crimes  give  him  warrant. 

And  what  is  more  unworthy  of  the  A^ise  man  than  / 
that  his  passion  should  depend  upon  the  wickedness  \ , 
of  ^hers  ?  Shall  great  Socrates  lose  the  power  to 
carr}-  back  home  the  same  look  he  had  brought  from 
jhome  ?  But  if  the  \\-ise  man  is  to  be  angered  by  base 
[deeds,  if  he  is  to  be  perturbed  and  saddened  by 
crimes,  surely  nothing  is  more  woeful  than  the  \sise 
man's  Tot  ;  his  whole  life  >\ill  be  passed  in  anger 
and  in  grief.  For  what  moment  will  there  be  when 
hewlH-notr^ee  something  to  disapprove  of  ?  Every 
time  he  leaves  his  house,  he  will  have  to  walk 
among  criminals  and  misers  and  spendthrifts   and 

179 


SENECA 

et  impudentis  et  ob  ista  felices  incedendum  erit ; 
nusquam  oculi  eius  flectentur,  ut  non  quod  in- 
dignentur  inveniant.  Deficiet,  si  totiens  a  se  iram 
3  quotiens  causa  poscet  exegerit.  Haec  tot  milia  ad 
forum  prima  luce  properantia  quam  turpes  lites, 
quanto  turpiores  advocatos  habent !  Alius  iudicia 
patris  accusat,  quae  vereri  satius  fuit,  alius  cum  matre 
consistit,  alius  delator  venit  eius  criminis,  cuius 
manifestior  reus  est ;  et  iudex  damnaturus  quae 
fecit  eligitur  et  corona  pro  mala  causa  stat^  bona 
patroni  voce  corrupta. 

1  8.  Quid  singula  persequor  ?     Cum  videris  forum 
multitudine  refertum  et  saepta  concursu  omnis  fr 
quentiae  plena  et  ilium  circum,  in  quo  maximam  s 
partem  populus  ostendit,  hoc  scito,  istic  tantundera' 

2  esse  vitiorum  quantum  hominum.  Inter  istos  quos 
togatos  vides  nulla  pax  est  ;  alter  in  alterius  exitium 
levi  compendio  ducitur  ;  nulli  nisi  ex  alterius  iniuria 
quaestus  est ;  felicem  oderunt,  infelicem  contemnunt ; 
maiorem  gravantur,  minori  graves  sunt ;  diversis 
stiraulantur  cupiditatibus  ;  omnia  perdita  ob  levem 
voluptatem  praedamque  cupiunt.  Non  alia  quam 
in  ludo  gladiatorio  vita  est  cum  isdem  bibentium 

3  pugnantiumque.  Ferarumisteconventus  est, nisi  quod 
illae  inter  se  placidae  sunt  morsuque  similium  abs- 

^  stat  added  by  Gertz. 
180 


i 


ON  ANGER,  II.  VII.  2-^^II.  3 

profligates  —  men  who  are  happy  in  being  such. 
Nowhere  will  he  turn  his  eyes  without  finding  some- 
thing to  move  them  to  indignation.  He  \n\\  give  out 
if  he  forces  himself  to  be  angry  ever}'  time  occasion 
requires.  All  these  thousands  hurrj-ing  to  the  forum 
at  break  of  day — how  base  their  cases,  and  how 
much  baser  are  their  advocates  !  One  assails  his 
father's  will,  which  it  were  more  fitting  that  he 
respect ;  another  arraigns  his  mother  at  the  bar  ; 
another  comes  as  an  informer  of  the  very  crime  in 
which  he  is  more  openly  the  culprit  ;  the  judge, 
too,  is  chosen  who  will  condemn  the  same  deeds 
that  he  himself  has  committed,  and  the  crowd,  mis- 
led by  the  fine  voice  of  a  pleader,^  shows  favour  to 
a  wicked  cause. 

But  why  recount  all  the  different  t}-pes  ?  When-, 
ever  you^aee-jthe forum,  with  its  thronging  multitude, 
and  the  polling-places  filled  with  all  the  gathered 
concourse,  and  the  great  Circus  where  the  largest 
part  of  the  populace  displays  itself,  you  may  be  sure 
that  just  as  many  vices  are  gathered  there  as  men._^ 
Aroong  those  whom^ymTsee  in  civilian  garb  there  is 
no  peace  ;  for  a  slight  reward  any  one  of  them  can 
be  led  to  compass  the  destruction  of  another  ;  ng 
one  makes  gain  save  by  another's  loss  3  the  pros- 
perous  they  hate,  the  unprosperous  they  despise ; 
superiors  they  loathe,  and  to  inferiors  are  loathsome  ; 
they  are  goaded  on  by  opposite  desires  ;  they  desire 
for  the  sake  of  some  httle  pleasure  or  plunder  to 
see  the  whole  world  lost.  They  hve  as  though  they 
were  in  a  gladiatorial  school — those  with  whom  they 
eat,  they  likewise  fight.  It  is  a  community  of  wild 
beasts,  only~thaTbeasts  are  gentle  toward  each  other 
and  reirion  from  tearing  their  own  kind,  while  men 

181 


SENECA 

tinent,  hi  mutua  laceratione  satiantur.  Hoc  omnino'^ 
ab  animalibus  mutis  difFerunt,  quod  ilia  mansuescunt 
alentibus,  horum  rabies  ipsos  a  quibus  est  nutrita 
depascitur.  i 

1  9.  Numquam    irasci    desinet    sapiens,    si    semel   I 
coeperit.     Omnia  sceleribus  ac  vitiis  plena  sunt  ;  plus 
committitur   quam   quod   possit   coercitione   sanari. 
Certatur  ingenti  quidem  nequitiae  certamine.    Mai  or 
cottidie  peccandi  cupiditas,  minor  verecundia  est ; 
expulso  melioris  aequiorisque  respectu  quocumque  I 
visum  est  libido  se  impingit,  nee  furtiva  iam  scelera  ^ 
sunt.     Praeter   oculos    eunt,   adeoque   in   publicum 
missa  nequitia  est  et  in  omnium  pectoribus  evaluit,  ut 

2  innocentia  non  rara  sed  nulla  sit.  Numquid  enim 
singuli  aut  pauci  rupere  legem  ?  U ndique  velut  signo 
dato  ad  fas  nefasque  miscendum  coorti  sunt  : 

Non  hospes  ab  hospite  tutus, 
non  socer  a  genero  ;  fratrum  quoque  gratia  rara  est. 
imminet  exitio  vir  coniugis,  ilia  mariti ; 
lurida  terribiles  miscent  aconita  novercae  ; 
filius  ante  diem  patrios  inquirit  in  annos. 

3  Et  quota  ista  pars  scelerum  est  !  Non  descripsit 
castra  ex  uno  partu  contraria  et  parentium  libero- 
rumque  sacramenta  diversa,  subiectam  patriae  civis 
manu  flammam  et  agmina  infestorum  equitum  ad  in- 
quirendas  proscriptorum  latebras  circumvolitantia  et 
violatos  fontes  venenis  et  pestilentiam  manu  factam  et 
praeductam  obsessis  parentibus  fossam,  plenos  carce- 

^  hoc  omnino  Vahlen  :  hoc  in  uno  A. 


"  Ovid,  Met.  i.  144  sqq. 
182 


ON  AXGER,  II.  Mil.  3-LX.  3 

glut  themselves_with_ren(iing  one  anothfii^  They 
differ  from  the  dumb  animals  in  this  alone — that 
animals  grow  gentle  toward  those  who  feed  them, 
whil£;_jnen  in  their  madness  prey  upon  the  very 
persons  by  whom  they  are  nurtured. 

Never  will  the  wi-e  man  cea^e  to  be  ajigry-  if  oncei 
he  Begins.  "Every  place  is  full  of  crime  and  \lce  ;| 
too  many  crimes  are  committed  to  be  cured  by  any' 
possible  restraint.  Men  struggle  in  a  mighty  rivalry 
of  AV  if  kediie?^.  Every  day  the  desire  for  wTong-doing 
is  greater,  the  dread  of  it  less  ;  all  regard  for  what 
is  better  and  more  just  is  banished,  lust  hurls  itself 
wherever  it  likes,  and  crimes  are  now  no  longer  covert. 
They  stalk  before  our  very  eyes,  and  wickedness  has 
come  to  such  a  pubUc  state,  has  gained  such  power 
over  the  hearts  of  all,  that  innocence  is  not  rare — it 
is_non-existent.  For  is  it  only  the  casual  man  or  the 
few  wlio  break  the  law  ?  On  ever}'  hand,  as  if  at  a 
given  >ignal,  men  rise  to  level  all  the  barriers  of 
right  and  WTong  : 

No  guest  from  host  is  safe,  nor  daughter's  sire 
From  daughter's  spouse ;  e'en  brothers'  love  is  rare. 
The  husband  doth  his  wife,  she  him,  ensnare  ; 
Ferocious  stepdames  brew  their  ghastly  banes  ; 
The  son  too  soon  his  father's  years  arraigns." 

And  yet  how  few  of  all  the  crimes  are  these  !  The 
poet  makes  no  mention  of  the  battling  camps  that 
claim  a  common  blood,  of  the  parents  and  the  children 
sundered  by  a  soldier's  oath,  of  the  flames  a  Roman 
hand  applied  to  Rome,  of  the  hostile  bands  of  horse- 
men that  scour  the  land  to  find  the  hiding-places  of 
citizens  proscribed,  of  springs  defiled  by  poison,  of 
plague  the  hand  of  man  has  made,  of  the  trench  flung 
around  beleaguered  parents,  of  crowded  prisons,  of 

183 


SENECA 

resetincendiatotas  urbes  concremantia  dominationes- 
que  funestas  et  regnorum  publicorumque  exitiorum 
clandestina  consilia,  et  pro  gloria  habita,  quae  quam 
diu  opprimi  possunt,  scelera  sunt,  raptus  ac  stupra  et 
4  ne  OS  quidem  libidini  exceptum.  Adde  nunc  publica 
periuria  gentium  et  rupta  foedera  et  in  praedam^ 
validioris  quidquid  non  resistebat  abductum,  eircum- 
scriptiones,  furta,  fraudes,  infitiationes,  quibus  trina 
non  sufficiunt  fora.  Si  tantum  irasci  vis  sapientem, 
quantum  scelerum  indignitas  exigit,  non  irascendum 
illi  sed  insaniendum  est. 

1  10.  Illud  potius  cogitabis,  non  esse  irascendum 
erroribus.  Quid  enim,  si  quis  irascatur  in  tenebris 
parum  vestigia  certa  ponentibus  ?  Quid,  si  quis 
surdis  imperia  non  exaudientibus  ?  Quid,  si  pueris, 
quod  neglecto  dispectu  officiorum  ad  lusus  et  ineptos 
aequalium  iocos  spectent  ?  Quid,  si  illis  irasci  velis, 
qui,^  quod  aegrotant  senescunt,  fatigantur  ?  Inter 
cetera  mortalitatis  incommoda  et  hoc  est,  caligo 
mentium  nee  tantum  necessitas  errandi  sed  errorum 

2  amor.  Ne  singulis  irascaris,  universis  ignoscendum 
est,  generi  humano  venia  tribuenda  est.  Si  irasceris 
iuvenibus  senibusque,  quod  peccant,  irascere  et^  in- 
fantibus  :  peccaturi  sunt.  Numquis  irascitur  pueris, 
quorum  aetas  nondum  novit  rerum  discrimina  .''  Maioi 

^  80  editors  :  praedam  A  :  pro  praeda  Gertz, 

*  qui  added  by  Hermes, 

*  et  added  by  Gertz. 

»  i.e.,  the  Roman  Forum,  the  Forum  of  Julius  Caesai^ 
and  the  Forum  of  Augustus. 

184 


ON  ANGER,  II.  IX.  3-x.  2 

fires  that  burn  whole  cities  to  the  ground,  of  baleful 
tyrannies  and  secret  plots  for  regal  power  and  for 
subversion  of  the  state,  of  acts  that  now  are  glorified, 
but  still  are  crimes  so  long  as  power  endures  to  crush 
them,  rape  and  lechery  and  the  lust  that  spares  not 
even  human  mouths.  Add  now  to  these,  pubhc  acts 
of  perjury  between  nations,  broken  treaties,  and  all 
the  booty  seized  when  resistance  could  not  save  it 
from  the  stronger,  the  double-dealings,  the  thefts 
and  frauds  and  debts  disowned — for  such  crimes  all 
three  forums "  supply  not  courts  enough  I  If  you 
expect  the  ^\ise.  man  to  be  as  angry  as  the  shameful-  / 
negs  of,crimes  compels,  he  must  not  be  angrj'  merely, 
butgo  mad. 

TIus  rather  is  what  you  should  tliink — that  no  one  -s  ,"- 
should  be  angry  at  the  mistakes  of  men.  For  tell  me, 
should  one  be  angry  Miih  those  who  move  -with 
stumbling  footsteps  in  the  dark  ?  with  those  who  do 
not  heed  commands  because  they  are  deaf  ?  \s.-iih 
children  because  forgetting  the  observance  of  their 
duties  they  watch  the  games  and  foohsh  sports  of 
their  playmates  ?  Would  you  want  to  be  angr}'  with 
those  who  become  weary  because  they  are  sick  or 
gro\\'ing  old  ?  Among  the  various  ills  to  which 
humanity  is  prone  there  is  this  besides — the  darkness 
that  fills  the  mind,  and  not  so  much  the  necessity  of 
going  astray,  as  the  love  of  straying.  Th*L-yauxaay-J 
not  Jtie^angry  with  individuals,  you  must  forgive  man-  ' 
kind  at  large,  you  must  grant  indulgence  to  the 
human  race.  If  you  are  ,angry  with  the  young  and 
tbe^d^^cause  they  sin,  be  angry  with  babes  as  well ; 
they  are  destined  to  sin.  But  who  is  angry  \vith 
children  who  are  still  too  young  to  have  the  power  of 
discrimination  ?    Yet  to  be  a  himian  being  is  an  even 

185 


SENECA 

est  excusatio  et  iustior  hominem  esse  quam  puerum. 

3  Hac  condicione  nati  sumus,  animalia  obnoxia  non 
paucioribus  animi  quam  corporis  morbis,  non  quidem 
obtusa  nee  tarda,  sed  acumine  nostro  male  utentia, 
alter  alteri  vitiorum  exempla.  Quisquis  sequitur  prio- 
res  male  iter  ingressos,  quidni  habeat  excusationem, 

4  cum  publica  via  erraverit  ?  In  singulos  severitas 
imperatoris  destringitur,  at  necessaria  venia  est,  ubi 
totus  deseruit  exercitus.  Quid  tollit  iram  sapientis  ? 
Turba  peccantium.  Intellegit  quam  et  iniquum  sit  et 
periculosum  irasci  publico  vitio. 

6  Heraclitus  quotiens  prodierat  et  tantum  circa  se 
male  viventium,  immo  male  pereuntium  viderat, 
flebat,  miserebatur  omnium,  qui  sibi  laeti  felicesque 
occurrebant,  miti  animo,  sed  nimis  irabecillo,  et  ipse 
inter  deplorandos  erat.  Democritum  contra  aiunt 
numquam  sine  risu  in  publico  fuisse  ;  adeo  nihil  illi 
videbatur  serium  eorum  quae  serio  gerebantur.  Ubi 
istic  irae  locus  est  ?  Aut  ridenda  omnia  aut  flenda 
sunt. 

6  Non  irascetur  sapiens  peccantibus.  Quare  ?  Quia 
scit  neminem  nasci  sapientem  sed  fieri,  scit  paucis- 
simos  omni  aevo  sapientis  evadere,  quia  condicionem 
humanae  vitae  perspectam  habet,  nemo  autem 
naturae  sanus  irascitur.  Quid  enim,  si  mirari  velit 
186 


ON  ANGER,  ir.  X.  ^-6 

greater  and  truer  excuse  for  error  than  to  be  a  child. 
This  isThe  lot  to  which  we  are  born — we  are  creatures 
subject  to  as  many  ills  of  the  mind  as  of  the  body, 
and  though  our  power  of  discernment  is  neither 
blunted  nor  dull,  yet  we  make  poor  use  of  it  and 
become  examples  of  \'ice  to  each  other.  If  any  one 
follows  in  the  footsteps  of  others  who  have  taken 
the  wrong  road,  should  he  not  be  excused  because 
it  was  the  public  highway  that  led  him  astray  ? 
Upon  the  individual  soldier  the  commander  may 
unsheathe  all  his  sternness,  but  he  needs  must  for- 
bear Avhen  the  whole  army  deserts.  ^\^latJ  then, 
ke^s_the  wise  man  from  anger  ?  The  great  mass  ^ 
of  sinners!!  TTe  understands  both  how  unjust  and 
how  dangerous  it  is  to  grow  angry  at  universal  sin. 

Whenever  Heraclitus  went  forth  from  his  house 
and  saw  all  around  him  so  many  men  who  were 
li\ing  a  wTetched  life — no,  rather,  were  dpng  a 
wretched  death — he  would  Aveep,  and  all  the  joyous 
and  happy  people  he  met  stirred  his  pity  ;  he  was 
gentle-hearted,  but  too  weak,  and  was  himself  one  of 
those  who  had  need  of  pity.  Democritus,  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  said,  never  appeared  in  pubhc 
without  laughing  ;  so  little  did  the  serious  pursuits 
of  men  seem  serious  to  him.  \yhere  in  all  this  is 
there  room  for  anger  ?  Everything  gives  cause  for 
erEhcr  laughter  or  tears. 

The  wi-e  man  will  have  no  anger  toward  sinners. 
Do  you  ask  why  ?  Because  he  knows  that  no  one  is 
born  wise  but  becomes  so,  knows  that  only  the  fewest  ■< 
in  ever\'  age  turn  out  wise,  because  he  has  fully 
grasped  the  conditions  of  human  life,  and  no  sensible 
man  becomes  angry  with  nature.  Think  you  a  sane 
man  would  marvel  because  apples  do  not  hang  from 

187 


SENECA 

non  in  silvestribus  dumis  poma  pendere  ?  Quid,  si 
miretur  spineta  sentesque  non  utili  aliqua  fruge  com- 
pleri  ?     Nemo  irascitur,  ubi  vitium  natura  defendit. 

7  Placidus  itaque  sapiens  et  aequus  erroribus,  non 
hostis  sed  corrector  peccantium,  hoc  cottidie  procedit 
animo  :  "  Multi  mihi  occurrent  vino  dediti,  multi 
libidinosi,  multi  ingrati,  multi  avari,  multi  furiis 
ambitionis  agitati."  Omnia  ista  tam  propitius  aspiciet 

8  quam  aegros  suos  medicus.  Numquid  ille,  cuius 
navigium  multam  undique  laxatis  compagibus  aquam 
trahit,  nautis  ipsique  navigio  irascitur  ?  Occurrit 
potius  et  aliam  excludit  undam,  aliam  egerit,  mani- 
festa  foramina  praecludit,  latentibus  et  ex  occulto 
sentinam  ducentibus  labore  continuo  resistit,  nee  ideo 
intermittit,  quia  quantum  exhaustum  est  subnascitur. 
Lento  adiutorio  opus  est  contra  mala  continua  et 
fecunda,  non  ut  desinant,  sed  ne  vincant.  Mi 

1  11.  "  Utilis  est,"  inquit,  "  ira,  quia  contemptuir 
efFugit,  quia  malos  terret."  Primum  ira,  si  quantum 
minatur  valet,  ob  hoc  ipsum  quod  terribilis  est  et  j 
invisa  est ;  periculosius  est  autem  timeri  quam  de- 
spici.  Si  vero  sine  viribus  est,  magis  exposita  con- 
temptui  est  et  derisum  non  efFugit ;  quid  enim  est 
iracundia    in    supervacuum    tumultuante    frigidius  ? 

2  Deinde  non  ideo  quaedam,  quia  sunt  terribiliora, 
188 


! 


ON  ANGER,  II.  X.  6-xi.  2 

the  brambles  of  the  woodland  ?  Would  he  marvel 
because  thorns  and  briars  are  not  covered  ^\■ith  some 
useful  fruit  ?  No^one  becomes  angry  Avith  a  fault  for 
which  nature  stands  sponsor.  And  so  the  wise  man  i 
is  kindly  and  just  toward  errors,  he  is  not  the  foe,-^ 
but  the  reformer  of  sinners,  and  as  he  issues  forth  • 
each  day  his  thought  will  be  :  "I  shall  meet  many 
who  are  in  bondage  to  wine,  many  who  are  lustful, 
many  ungrateful,  many  grasping,  many  who  are 
lashed  by  the  frenzy  of  ambition."  He  will  view  all 
these  things  in  as  kindly  a  way  as  a  physician  \iews 
the  sick.  When  the  skipper  finds  that  his  ship  has 
sprung  her  seams  and  in  every  part  is  letting  in  a 
copious  flow  of  water,  does  he  then  become  angry 
with  the  seamen  and  with  the  ship  herself?  No, 
he  rushes  rather  to  the  rescue  and  shuts  out  a  part 
of  the  flood,  a  part  he  bales  out,  and  he  closes  up 
the  \'isible  openings,  the  hidden  leaks  that  secretly 
let  water  into  the  hold  he  tries  to  overcome  by 
ceaseless  labour,  and  he  does  not  relax  his  effort 
simply  because  as  much  water  springs  up  as  is 
pumped  out.  The  succour  against  continuous  and  < 
prolific  e\-ils  must  be  tenacious,  aimed  not  at  their 
cessation  but  against  their  victory. 

"  Anger,"  it  is  said,  "  is   expedient   because  it  k  tC  c<t5 
escapes  contempt,  because  it  terrifies  the  wicked,"  ^  ^    .^^^ 
In  the  first  place,  if  the  power  of  anger  is  commen- 
surate with  its  threats,  for  the  very  reason  that  it  is 
terrible    it   is  likewise    hated  ;    besides,  it   i-.  more 
dangerousto  be  feared  than  to  be  scorned.     If,  how- 
ever, anger  is  powerless,  it  is  even  more  exposed  to 
contesipr^and  does  not  escape  ridicule.     For  what  is   L- 
more  silly  than  the  futile  blustering  of  anger  ?     In 
the  second.  place,_because_e£rtaiu  things  are  more 

189 


SENECA 

potiora  sunt,  nee  hoc  sapienti  dici  velim  :  "  Quod  ferae, 
sapientis  quoque  telum  est,  timeri."  Quid  ?  Non 
timetur  febris,  podagra,  ulcus  malum  ?  Numquid 
ideo  quicquam  in  istis  boni  est  ?  An  contra  omnia 
despecta  foedaque  et  turpia,  ipsoque  eo  timentur  ? 
Sic  ira  per  se  deformis  est  et  minime  metuenda,  at 
timetur   a   pluribus   sicut   deformis   persona   ab   in- 

3  fantibus.  Quid,  quod  semper  in  auctores  redundat 
timor  nee  quisquam  metuitur  ipse  securus  ?  Occurrat 
hoc  loco  tibi  Laberianus  ille  versus,  qui  medio  civili 
bello  in  theatro  dictus  totum  in  se  populum  non  aliter 
convertit,  quam  si  missa  esset  vox  publici  adfectus  : 

Necesse  est  multos  timeat  quem  multl  timent. 

4  Ita  natura  constituit,  ut  quidquid  alieno  metu  mag- 
num est,  a  suo  non  vacet.  Leonum  quam  pavida 
sunt  ad  levissimos  sonos  pectora  !  Acerrimas  feras 
umbra  et  vox  et  odor  insolitus  exagitat.  Quidquid 
terret  et  trepidat.  Non  est  ergo  quare  concupiscat 
quisquam  sapiens  timeri,  nee  ideo  iram  magnum 
quiddam  putet,  quia  formidini  est,  quoniam  quidem 
etiam  contemptissima  timentur  ut  venena  et  ossa 

5  pestifera  et  morsus.^  Nee  mirum  est,  cum  maximos 
ferarum  greges  linea  pinnis  distincta  eontineat  et  in 

^  venena  .  .  .  morsus  so  A  :  mortifera  for  pestifera  L  : 
venenato  bestiae  pestiferae  morsu  Haupt  :  venenato  aspis 
viperave  morsu  Gertz  :  venenato  serpens  pestifera  morsu 
Hermes. 

"  Laberius  126  (Com.  Rom.  Frag.  Ribbeck). 

*  By  Laberius  himself,  impersonating  a  Syrian  slave,  in 
the  presence  of  Julius  Caesar,  at  whom  it  was  aimed  ;  cf. 
Macrobius,  Sat.  ii.  7.  4. 

"  If  "  contemptible,"  probably  the  trumpery  of  magic  ! 

**  For  their  use  in  magic  see  Hor.  Sat.  i.  8.  22;  Tac.j 
Ann.  ii.  69.  5. 

]90 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XI.  2-5 

terrible,  they  are  not  for  that  reason  preferable,  and 
I  woulcT  not  Tiave  it  said  to  the  wise  man:  "The 
■wild  bea'-t  and  the  v.  ise  man  have  the  same  weapon  ; 
they  are  feared."  What  ?  Is  not  a  fever  feared, 
the  gout,  a  malignant  sore  ?  And  do  they  for  that 
reason  have  any  good  in  them  ?  Or  are  they,  on 
the  contrary,  all  despised  and  loathsome  and  ugly, 
and  for  this  and  no  other  reason  are  feared  ?  So 
anger  is  in  itself  onlj^  repulsive  and  is  by  no  means 
to  be  Hreaded,  yet  most  people  fear  it  just  as  children 
f&ar  a" repulsive  maslu-— Andr-wha^of  the  fact  that 
fear  ahtays  recoils  upon  those  who  inspire  it  and 
that  no  one  whois  feared  is  himself  unafraid  ?  You 
may  recall  m  this  connexion  the  famous  line  of 
Laberius  : 

Full  many  he  must  fear  whom  many  fear," 

which  when  delivered  in  the  theatre  ''  in  the  height 
of  civil  war  caught  the  ear  of  the  whole  people  as  if 
utterance  had  been  given  to  the  people's  voice. 
Nature  has  so  ordained  it  that  wliatever  is  misrlitv 
through  the  fearthat  otheTsTeel  is  not  without  its 
own.  Htow  even"  the  Tioh^s  heart  quakes  at  the 
shghtest  sound !  The  boldest  of  wild  beasts  is 
startled  by  a  shadow  or  a  voice  or  an  unfamiliar 
smell.  Whatever  terrifies  must  also  tremble.  There 
is  no  reasmi,  then,  why  any  wise  man  should  desire 
to  be  leaFed,  nor  should  he  think  that  anger  is  a 
naighty^thing'  simply  because  it  arouses  dread,  since 
yen  the  most  contemptible  things,  such  as  poisonous 
>rews  "  and  iioxious  bones  <*  and  bites  are  likewise 
•eared.  Since  a  cord  "hung  with  feathers  will  stop 
he  mightiest  droves  of  wild  beasts  and  guide  them 
nto  traps,  it  is  not  strange  that  this  from  the  very 

191 


SENECA 

insidias  agat,  ab  ipso  efFectu  dicta  formido  ;  vanis 
enim  vana  terrori  sunt.  Curriculi  motus  rotarumque 
versata  fades  leones  redegit  in  caveam,  elephantos 
6  porcina  vox  terret.  Sic  itaque  ira  metuitur,  quomodo 
umbra  ab  infantibus,  a  feris  rubens  pinna.  Non  ipsa 
in  se  quicquam  habet  firmum  aut  forte,  sed  leves 
animos  movet. 

1  12.  "  Nequitia,"  inquit,  "  de  rerum  natura  toUenda 
est,  si  velis  iram  tollere  ;  neutrum  autem  potest 
fieri."  Primum  potest  aliquis  non  algere,  quamvis 
ex  rerum  natura  hiemps  sit,  et  non  aestuare,  quamvis 
menses  aestivi  sint.  Aut  loci  beneficio  adversus  in- 
temperiem    anni    tutus    est    aut    patientia    corporis 

2  sensum  utriusque  pervicit.  Deinde  verte  istud : 
necesse  est  prius  virtutem  ex  animo  tollas  quam 
iracundiam  recipias,  quoniam  cum  virtutibus  vitia 
non  coeunt,  nee  magis  quisquam  eodem  tempore  et 
iratus  potest  esse  et  vir  bonus  quam  aeger  et  sanus. 

3  "  Non  potest,"  inquit,  "  omnis  ex  animo  ira  tolli, 
nee  hoc  hominis  natura  patitur."  Atqui  nihil  est 
tam  difficile  et  arduum  quod  non  humana  mens  vincat 
et  in  familiaritatem  perducat  adsidua  meditatio, 
nullique  sunt  tam  feri  et  sui  iuris  adfectus,  ut  non 

4  disciplina  perdomentur.  Quodcumque  sibi  imperavit 
animus,  obtinuit.  Quidam  ne  umquam  riderent  con- 
secuti  sunt ;  vino  quidam,  alii  venere,  quidam  omiii 
umore  interdixere  corporibus ;  alius  contentus  brevi 

»  Cf.  Virgil,  Aen.  xii.  750  sq. : 

cervum  aut  puniceae  saeptum  formidine  pennae 
venator  cursu  canis  et  latratibus  instat. 

*■  The  implication  would  then  be  that  if  a  man  cannot 
banish  anger,  no  man  can  be  virtuous, 

192 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XI.  5-xii.  4 

result  should  be  called  a  "  scare  "  "  ;  for  to  the  foolish 
fooUsh  things  are  terrible.  The  speeding  of  the  race- 
chariot  and  the  sight  of  its  revohing  wheels  will  drive 
back  lions  to  their  cage,  and  elephants  are  terrified  by 
the  squealing  of  a  pig.  And  so  we  fear  anger  just  as 
children  fear  the  dark  and  -svild  beasts  fear  a  gaudy  ; 
feather.  Anger  in  itself  has  nothing  of  the  strong  J" 
or  the  heroic,  but  shallow  minds  are  affected  by  it. 

"  Wickedness,"  it  is  said,  "  must  be  eliminated  ^'>'<i'>''«^ 
from  ttrrrcheme  of  nature,  if  you  would  eliminate  ^  vtrfttt 
anger  ;  neither,  however,  is  possible."  In  the  first  Z^"*^*'^ 
place,  one  can  avoid  being  cold  although  in  the 
scheme  of  nature  it  is  ^Wnter,  and  one  can  avoid  being 
dot  although  the  hot  months  are  here.  A  man  may 
either  ■&€  protected  against  the  inclemency  of  the 
season  by  a  favourable  place  of  residence,  or  he  may 
l>y  physical  endurance  subdue  the  sensation  of  both 
deat  and  cold.  In  the  second  place,  reverse^  this 
jtatgment  :  A  man  must  banish  wtue  from  his  heart 
t)efore  he  can  admit  >vrath,  since  vices  do  not  consort 
with  virtues,  and  a  man  can  no  more  be  both  angry  >__ 
md  good  at  the  same  time  than  he  can  be  sick  and 
B^ell.  "  But  it  is  not  possible,"  you  say,  "  to  banish 
mger  altogether  from  the  heart,  nor  does  the  nature 
jf  man  permit  it."  Yet  nothing  is  so  hard  and 
iifficult  that  it  cannot  be  conquered  by  the  himaan 
nteUect  and  be  brought  through  persistent  study  into 
ntimate  acquaintance,  and  there  are  no  passions  so 
ierce  and  self-willed  that  they  cannot  be  subjugated 
>y^_discipline.  \Vhatever  command  the  mind  gives 
»_ltself  holds  its  ground.  Some  have  reached  the 
)oint^f  never  smilirigV  some  have  cut  themselves  off 
rem  Avine,  others  from  sexual  pleasure,  others  from 
ivery  kind  of  drink  ;  another,  satisfied  by  short 
VOL.  I  o  193 


SENECA 

somno  vigiliam  indefatigabilem  extendit ;  didicerunt 
tenuissimis  et  adversis  funibus  currere  et  ingentia 
vixque  humanis  toleranda  viribus  onera  portare  et  in 
immensam  altitudinem  mergi  ac  sine  ulla  respirandi 

5  vice  perpeti  maria.  Mille  sunt  alia,  in  quibus  per- 
tinacia  impedimentum  omne  transcendit  ostenditque 
nihil  esse  difficile  cuius  sibi  ipsa  mens  patientiam  in- 
diceret.  Istis  quos  paulo  ante  rettuli  aut  nulla  tarn  perti- 
nacis  studii  aut  non  digna  merces  fuit — quid  enim  mag- 
nificum  consequitur  ille  qui  meditatus  est  per  intentos 
funes  ire  ?  qui  sarcinae  ingenti  cervices  supponere  ? 
qui  somno  non  summittere  oculos  ?  qui  penetrare  in 
imum  mare  ? — et  tamen  ad  finem  operis  non  magno 

6  auctoramento  labor  pervenit.  Nos  non  advocabimus 
patientiam,  quos  tantum  praemium  expectat,  felicis 
animi  immota  tranquillitas  ?  Quantum  est  efFugere 
maximum  malum,  iram,  et  cum  ilia  rabiem,  saevitiam, 
crudelitatem,  furorem,  alios  comites  eius  adfectus  ! 

1  13.  Non  est  quod  patrocinium  nobis  quaeramus 
et  excusatam  licentiam,  dicentes  aut  utile  id  esse  aut 
inevitabile ;  cui  enim  tandem  vitio  advocatus  defuit  ? 
Non  est  quod  dicas  excidi  non  posse  ;  sanabilibus 
aegrotamus  malis  ipsaque  nos  in  rectum  genitos  na- 
tura,  si  emendari  velimus,  iuvat.  Nee,  ut  quibusdam 
visum  est,  arduum  in  virtutes  et  asperum  iter  est ; 

"  The  thought  is  a  commonplace  and  is  found  as  early  as 
Hesiod,  Works  and  Bays,  289  sqq.  : 

Tijy  5'  dpeTTJs  iSptDra  Oeol  TrpoirapoiOev  iOr/Kav 
addvaroL'  fj.aKpbs  5i  Kal  6pdios  oi/nos  es  avrijv 
Kal  Tp7)x^s  rb  TrpuTov. 

Cf.  the  beginning  of  Aristotle's  Hymn  to  Virtue  (Bergk, 
Poet.  Lyr.  Graec.  ii.  p.  360) : 

'Aperd,  woKvfioxde  yivei.  ^porelij), 
d-qpajia  KaWicrrov  ^i<^. 

194 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XII.  i-xiii.  l 

sleep,  prolongs  his  waking  hours  unwearied  ;  some 
have  learned  to  run  on  very  small  and  slanting  ropes, 
to  carry  huge  burdens  that  are  scarcely  ^\'ithin  the 
compass  of  human  strength,  to  dive  to  unmeasured 
depths  and  to  endure  the  sea  ^^ithout  any  drawing 
of  breath.  There  are  a  thousand  other  instances  to 
show  that  persistence  giiT-rnnnntg.  every  obstacle  and 
that  nothiiig-is-i:eaUy.di£ettlt  which  the  mind  enjoins 
itself  to  endure.  The  men  I  mentioned  a  httle 
while  ago  had  either  no  reward  for  their  unflagging 
zeal  or  none  worthy  of  it — for  what  glory  does  he 
attain  who  has  trained  himself  to  walk  a  tight  rope, 
to  carry  a  huge  load  upon  his  shoulders,  to  Avithhold 
his  eyes  from  sleep,  to  penetrate  to  the  bottom  of  the 
sea  ? — and  yet  by  effort  they  attained  the  end  for 
which  they  worked  although  the  remuneration  was 
not  great.  Shall  we,  then,  not  summon  ourselves  to 
endurance  when  so  great  a  reward  awaits  us — the 
unbro5?Tr~cahn  of  the  happy  soul  ?  How  great  a 
blessingto  r?cape  anger,  the  greatest  of  all  ills,  and 
along  with  it  madnes's,  ferocity,  cruelty,  rage,  and 
the  xjther  passions  that  attend  anger  ! 

It  is  not  for  us  to  seek  a  defence  for  ourselves  and 
an  excuse  for  such  indulgence  by  saying  that  it  is 
either  expedient  or  unavoidable  ;  for  what  \ice,  prav, 
has  ever  lacked  its  defender  ?  It  is.  not  for  vou  to  say 
that  anger  cannot  be  eradicated  ;  the  ills  from  which 
we  suffeTlire  curable,  and  sirice~xrH~aTe"^6rn  to  do 
right,  nature  herself  hetp<"  us' tf  tre  desirr'+o  be 
improved.  Nor.  as  some  think.  i"=  the  path  to  the 
virtues  steep  and  rough ,g4_ they  are^jeachgd  by  a 


195 


SENECA 

2  piano  adeuntur,  Non  vanae  vobis  auctor  rei  venio. 
Facilis  est  ad  beatam  vitam  via  ;  inite  modo  bonis 
auspiciis  ipsisque  dis  bene  iuvantibus.  Multo  diffi- 
cilius  est  facere  ista  quae  facitis.  Quid  est  animi 
quiete  otiosius,  quid  ira  laboriosius  ?  Quid  dementia 
remissius,  quid  crudelitate  negotiosius  ?  Vacat  pudi- 
citia,  libido  occupatissima  est.  Omnium  denique 
virtutum  tutela  facilis   est,   vitia  magno  coluntur. 

3  Debet  ira  removeri — hoc  ex  parte  fatentur  etiam  qui 
dicunt  esse  minuendam  ;  tota  dimittatur,  nihil  pro- 
futura  est.  Sine  ilia  facilius  rectiusque  scelera 
tollentur,  mali  punientur  et  transducentur  in  melius. 
Omnia  quae  debet  sapiens  sine  ullius  malae  rei 
ministerio  efficiet  nihilque  admiscebit,  cuius  modum 
soUicitius  observet. 

1  14.  Numquam  itaque  iracundia  admittenda  est ; 
aliquando  simulanda,  si  segnes  audientium  animi  con- 
citandi  sunt,  sicut  tarde  consurgentis  ad  cursum  equos 
stimuhs  facib usque  subditis  excitamus .  Aliquando  in- 
cutiendus  est  iis  metus  apud  quos  ratio  non  proficit ; 
irasci  quidem  non  magis  utile  est  quam  maerere,  quam 

2  metuere.  "  Quid  ergo  ?  Non  incidunt  causae  quae 
iram  lacessant  ?  "  Sed  tunc  maxime  ilh  opponendae 
manus  sunt.  Nee  est  difficile  vincere  animum,  cum 
athletae  quoque  in  vilissima  sui  parte  occupati  tamen 
ictus  doloresque  patiantur,  ut  vires  caedentis  ex- 
hauriant,  nee  cum  ira  suadet,  feriant,  sed  cum  occasio. 
196 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xiii.  2-xiv.  2 

level  road^  It  is-naidl^^  tale  that  I  come  to  teU  you,    / 
The  road  to  the  happy  life  is  an  easy  one  ;    do  but    / 
enter  on  it — with  good  auspices  and  the  good  help 
of  th,e^ods  themselves  !     It  is  far  harder  to  do  what 
you  are  now  doing.     \\Tiat  is  more  reposeful  than 
peace   of  mind,   what  more   toilsome  than  anger  ? 
What  is"  more  disengaged  than  mercy,  what  more 
busy  than  cruelty?     Chastity  keeps  holiday,  while  r" 
lust  is  ahvays^  occupied.     IrL,short,  the  maintenance 
of  alL_the^yirtues  is  easy,  but  it  iscoitly  to  cultivate 
the  vices.    Anger  must  be  dislodged — even  those  who 
say  that  it  ought  to  be  reduced  admit  this  in  part ; 
let  us  be  rid  of  it  altogether,  it  can  do  us  no  good.  < 
Without   it  we  shall  more  easily  and  more  justly 
abolish    crimes,  punish  the   A\-icked,   and  set   them 
upon  the  better  path.     The  wise  man  \vi\\  accom- 
phsf^is  whole  duty  without  the  assistance  of  any- 
thing evil,  and  he  Avill  associate  with  himself  nothing 
whichTieeds  to  be  controlled  Mith  anxious  care. 

Wrath  is  therefore  never  admissible  ;  sometimes  , 
we  must  feign  it  if  we  have  to  arouse  the  sluggish 
minds  of  our  hearers,  just  as  we  apply  goads  and 
brands  to  arouse  horses  that  are  slow  in  starting  upon 
their  course.  Sometimes  we  must  strike  fear  into 
the  hearts  of  those  ^^•ith  whom  reason  is  of  no  avail ; 
yet  it  is  no  more  expedient  to  be  angry  than  to  be_ 
sad  or  to  be  afraid.  "  What  then  ?  "  you  say  ;  "  do 
not  incidents  occur  which  provoke  anger  ?  "  Yes, 
but  it  is  then  most  of  all  that  we  must  grapple  mth 
it  hand  to.iiand.  Nor  is  it  difficult  to  subdue  the 
spirit,  since  even  aJhlfiifiSjL  concerned  as  they  are 
'with  pawn's  basest  part,  nevertheless  endure  blows 
and  pain  in  order  that  they  may  drain  the  strength 
of  their  assailant  and  strike,  not  when  anger,  but 

197 


SENECA 

3  Pyrrhum  maximum  praeceptorem  certaminis  gymnici 
solitum  aiunt  iis  quos  exercebat  praecipere,  ne 
irascerentur  ;  ira  enim  perturbat  artem  et  qua  noceat 
tantum  aspicit,  Saepe  itaque  ratio  patientiam  suadet, 
ira  vindictam,  et  qui  primis  defungi  malis  potuimus,  in 

4  maiora  devolvimur.  Quosdam  unius  verbi  contumelia 
non  aequo  animo  lata  in  exilium  proiecit,  et  qui  levem 
iniuriam  silentio  ferre  noluerant,  gravissimis  malis 
obruti  sunt,  indignatique  aliquid  ex  plenissima 
libertate  deminui  servile  in  sese  adtraxerunt  iugum. 

1  15.  "  Ut  scias,"  inquit,  "  iram  habere  in  se  generosi 
aliquid,  liberas  videbis  gentes,  quae  iracundissimae 
sunt,  ut  Germanos  et  Scythas."  Quod  evenit,  quia 
fortia  solidaque  natura  ingenia,  antequam  disciplina 
molliantur,  prona  in  iram  sunt.  Quaedam  enim  non 
nisi  melioribus  innaseuntur  ingeniis,  sicut  valida 
arbusta  laeta  quamvis  necleeta  tellus  creat,  et  alta 

2  fecundi  soli  silva  est.  Itaque  et  ingenia  natura  fortia 
iracundiam  ferunt  niliilque  tenue  et  exile  capiunt 
ignea  et  fervida,  sed  imperfectus  ilBs  vigor  est  ut 
omnibus,  quae  sine  arte  ipsius  tantum  naturae  bono 
exsurgunt,  sed  nisi  cito  domita  sunt,  quae  fortitudini 

3  apta  erant,  audaeiae  temeritatique  consuescunt.  Quid? 
Non  mitioribus  animis  vitia  leniora  coniuncta  sunt,  ut 

198 


' 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XIV.  3-xv.  3 

when  advantage,  prompts.  PjTrhus,  the  most 
famous  trainer  for  gymnastic  contests,  made  it  a  rule, 
it  is  said,  to  warn  those  whom  he  was  training  against 
getting  angr)^ ;  for  anger  confounds  art  and  looks 
onlyjfqr  a  chance  to  injure.  Often,  therefore,  reason 
counsels  patience,  but  anger  revenge,  and  when  we 
have"  been  able  to  escape  our  first  misfortunes,  we 
are  plunged  into  greater  ones.  Some  have  been 
caTt  into  exile  because  they  could  not  bear  calmly 
one  insulting  word,  and  those  who  had  refused  to  bear 
in  silence  a  slight  >\Tong  have  been  crushed  -w-ith  the 
severest  misfortunes,  and,  indignant  at  any  diminu- 
tion of  the  fullest  liberty,  have  brought  upon  them- 
selves the  yoke  of  slavery. 

"  That  you  may  be  con\-inced,"  says  our  opponent, 
"  that  anger  does  have  in  it  something  noble,  you 
\vi\\  see  that  such  nations  as  are  free — for  example, 
the  Germans'  and  Scythians — are  those  which  are 
most  prone  t«  anger."  The  reason  of  this  is 
that  natures  which  are  inherently  brave  and  sturdy 
are  prone  to  anger  before  they  become  softened  by 
disciphne.  For  certain  qualities  are  innate  only  in 
better  natures,  just  as  rich  ground,  although  it  is 
neglected,  produces  a  strong  growth  and  a  tall  forest 
is  the  mark  of  fertile  soil.  And  so  natures^that  have^ 
innate  \igoiir_like\vise  produce  A\Tath,  and  being  hot 
and  fiery  they  have  no  room  for  anything  weak  and 
feeble,  but  their  energj'  is  defective,  as  is  the  case 
witli  even'thing  that  springs  up  A^thout  cultivation 
through  the  bounty  merely  of  nature  herself ;  yes, 
and,  unless  such  natures  are  quickly  tamed,  wliat  was 
a  disposition  to  braverv'  tends  to  become  recklessness 
and  temerit}".  And  tell  me,  is  it  not  A\-ith  the  more 
gen'Eteteniprei^-that  th^  "ffilMer  fatdtsrsuch  as  pityi 

199 


SENECA 

misericordia  et  amor  et  verecundia  ?  Itaque  saepe 
tibi  bonam  indolem  malis  quoque  suis  ostendam  ;  sed 
non  ideo  vitia  non  sunt,  si  naturae  melioris  indicia  sunt. 

4  Deinde  omnes  istae  feritate  liberae  gentes  leonum 
luporumque  ritu  ut  servire  non  possunt,  ita  nee 
imperare ;  non  enim  humani  vim  ingenii,  sed  feri 
et  intractabilis  habent ;   nemo  autem  regere  potest 

6  nisi  qui  et  regi.  Fere  itaque  imperia  penes  eos 
fuere  populos,  qui  mitiore  caelo  utuntur.  In  frigora 
septemtrionemque  vergentibus  immansueta  ingenia 
sunt,  ut  ait  poeta  : 

Suoque  simillima  caelo. 

1  16.  "Animalia,"  inquit,  "generosissima  habentur, 
quibus  multum  inest  irae."  Errat  qui  ea  in  exemplum 
hominis  adducit,  quibus  pro  ratione  est  impetus  ;  ho- 
mini  pro  impetu  ratio  est.  Sed  ne  illis  quidem  omni- 
bus idem  prodest ;    iracundia  leones  adiuvat,  pavor 

2  cervos,  accipitrem  impetus,  columbam  fuga.  Quid, 
quod  ne  illud  quidem  verum  est,  optima  animalia  esse 
iracundissima?  Feras  putem,  quibus  ex raptu  alimenta 
sunt,  meliores  quo  iratiores  ;  patientiam  laudaverim 
boum  et  equorum  frenos  sequentium.  Quid  est  autem 
cur  hominem  ad  tam  infelicia  exempla  revoces,  cum 
habeas  mundum  deumque,  quem  ex  omnibus  animali- 

»  Frag.  Poet.  Rom.  p.  359.  23  Baehrens. 
200 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XV.  3-xvi.  2 

and  love^and-Jiashfulness,  are-fJound  combined?  j 
Accordinglyj  I  can  often  prove  to  you  even  by  a  man's 
own  e\'ils  that  his  natural  bent  is  good  ;  but  these 
e\'ils~'aTe~noneThe  less  \-ices  even  though  they  are 
indicative  of  a  superior  nature.  Then,  again,  all  those 
peoples  which  are,  like  lions  and  wolves,  free  by  reason 
of  their  very  ^\ildness,  even  as  they  cannot  submit  to  / 
servitude,  neither  can  they  exercise  dominion  ;  for 
the  ability  they  possess  is  not  that  of  a  human  being 
but  of  something  v.  ild  and  ungovernable  ;  and  no 
man  is  able  to  rule  unless  he  can  also  submit  to  be 
ruled.  Consequently,  the  peoples  who  have  held 
empire^  arelJDiOiSolily  those  who  live  in  a  rather  mild 
climate.  Those  who  Ke  toward  the  frozen  north  have 
savage  tempers — tempers  which,  as  the  poet  says,  are 

Most  like  their  native  skies." 

"  Those  animals,"  you  say,  "  which  are  much  given 
to  anger  are  held  to  be  the  noblest."  But  it  is  -WTong 
for  one  to  hold  up  the  creatures  in  whom  impulse 
takes  the  place  of  reason  as  a  pattern  for  a  human 
being  ;  in  roan  reason  takes  the  place  of  impulse.  ■( 
But  not  even  in  the  case  of  such  animals  is  the  same 
impulse  equally  profitable  for  all ;  anger  serves  the 
lion,  fear  the  stag,  aggressiveness  the  hawk,  cowardice 
the  dove.  But  what  if  it  is  not  even  true  that  it 
is  the  best  animals  that  are  most  prone  to  anger  ? 
Wild  beasts  which  gain  their  food  by  rapine,  I  can 
beheve,  do  so  the  better  the  angrier  they  are ; 
but  it  is  the  endurance  of  the  ox  and  the  horse, 
obedient  to  the  rein,  that  I  would  commend.  For 
what  reason,  however,  do  you  direct  man  to  such 
miserable  standards  when  you  have  the  universe 
and  God,  whom  man  of  all  creatures  alone  com- 

201 


'-♦• 


SENECA 

3  bus,  ut  solus  imitetur,  solus  intellegit  ?  "  Sim- 
plicissimi,"  inquit,  "  omnium  habentur  iracundi." 
Fraudulentis  enim  et  versutis  comparantur  et  sim- 
plices  videntur,  quia  expositi  sunt.  Quos  quidem 
non  simplices  dixerim  sed  incautos  ;  stultis,  luxuriosis 
nepotibusque  hoc  nomen  imponimus  et  omnibus  vitiis 
parum  callidis. 

1  17.  "  Orator,"  inquit,  "  iratus  aliquando  meliof 
est."  Immo  imitatus  iratum  ;  nam  et  histriones 
pronuntiando  non  irati  populum  movent,  sed  irati 
bene  agentes  ;  et  apud  iudiees  itaque  et  in  eontione  ei 
ubicumque  alieni  animi  ad  nostrum  arbitrium  agenc 
sunt,  modo  iram,  modo  metum,  modo  misericordiar 
ut  aliis  incutiamus,  ipsi  simulabimus,  et  saepe  idl 
quod  veri  adfectus  non  effecissent,  effecit  imitatio 
adfectuum.     "  Languidus,"  inquit,  "  animus  est  qui 

2  ira  caret."  Verum  est,  si  nihil  habet  ira  valentius. 
Nee  latronem  oportet  esse  nee  praedam,  nee  miseri- 
cordem  nee  crudelem  ;  illius  nimis  molUs  animus, 
huius  nimis  durus  est.  Temperatus  sit  sapiens  et  ad 
res  fortius  agendas  non  iram  sed  vim  adhibeat. 

1  18.  Quoniam  quae  de  ira  quaeruntur  tractavimus, 
accedamus  ad  remedia  eius.  Duo  autem,  ut  opinor, 
sunt  :  ne  incidamus  in  iram  et  ne  in  ira  peccemus. 
Ut  in  corporum  cura  alia  de  tuenda  valetudine,  alia  de 
restituenda  praecepta  sunt,  ita  aliter  iram  debemus 
202 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XVI.  3-xyiii.  1 

prebends  in  order  that  he  alone  naay  imitate  him  ?  • 
"  Tho^e  who  are  prone  to  anger,"  you  say,  "  are  of 
all  men  considered  the  most  ingenuous."  Yes,  in 
contrast  with  the  tricky  and  the  crafts'  they  do  seem 
ingenuous  because  they  are  undisguised.  I,  however, 
should  call  them,  not  ingenuous,  but  reckless;  that 
is  the-^^wrr^ire  appbr  to  fools,  to  voluptuaries  and 
spendthrifts,  and  to  all  who  ill  disguise  their  %-ices. 

"  Tbg^orator,"  you  say.  "  at  times  does  better  when 
he  is  angr\'.  Not  so,  but  when  he  pretends  to  be  -V" 
angrv.  For  the  actor  likev.i^e  stir^  an  audience  by 
his  declamation  not  when  he  is  angry,  but  when  he  i- 
plavs  well  the  role  of  the  angiy  man  ;  consequently 
before  a  jury,  in  the  popular  assembly,  and  wherever 
we  have  to  force  our  will  upon  the  minds  of  other 
people,  we  must  pretend  now  anger,  now  fear,  now 
pity,  in  order  that  we  may  inspire  others  with  the 
same,  and  often  the  feigning  of  an  emotion  produces 
an  effect  which  would  not  be  produced  by  genuine 
emotiorn  "  The  mind  that  is  devoid  of  anger," 
yoiTsay,  "  is  inert."  Very  true,  unless  it  is  actuated 
by  something  more  powerful  than  anger.  A  man 
should  be  neither  a  highwayman  nor  his  victim, 
neither  soft-hearted  nor  cruel ;  the  one  is  too  mild 
in  spirit,  the  other  too  harsh.  Let,  the— wise  man 
show  moderation,  and  to  situations  that  require  strong 
measufesTeTTiim  apply,  not  anger,  but  force. 

Ha%'ing  dealt  with  the  questions  that  arise  con-  r,  ■ 
cerni^^nger,  let  us  now  pass  to  the  Consideration 
of  its  remedies'.  In  my  opinion,  however,  there  are 
but  two  rules — not  to  fall  into  anger,  and  in  anger  to 
do  no  wTong.  Just  as  in  caring  for  the  body  certain 
ruTes'~are  to  be  obser^^ed  for  guarding  the  health, 
others  for  restoring  it,  so  vjue_JSLyst_-Use-xuie_naeans 

203 


SENECA 

repellere,  aliter  compescere.  Ut  vitemus,  quaedam 
ad  universam  vitam  pertinentia  praecipientur  ;  ea  in 
educationem  et  in  sequentia  tempora  dividentur. 
2  Educatio  maximam  diligentiam  plurimumque  pro- 
futuram  desiderat ;  facile  est  enim  teneros  adhue 
animos  componere,  difficulter  reciduntur  vitia  quae 
nobiscum  creverunt. 

1  19.  Opportunissima  ad  iracundiam  fervidi  animi 
natura  est.  Nana  cum  elementa  sint  quattuor,  ignis, 
aquae,  aeris,  terrae,  potestates  pares  his  sunt,  fervida, 
frigida,  arida  atque  umida.  Et  locorum  itaque  et  ani- 
malium  et  corporum  et  morum  varietates  mixtura 
elementorum  facit,  et  proinde  aliquo  magis  incumbunt 
ingenia,  prout  alicuius  elementi  maior  vis  abundavit. 
Inde  quasdam  umidas  vocamus  aridasque  regiones  et 
calidas  et  frigidas.     Eadem  animalium  hominumque 

2  discrimina  sunt ;  refert  quantum  quisque  umidi  in 
se  calidique  contineat ;  cuius  in  illo  elementi  portio 
praevalebit,  inde  mores  erunt.  Iracundos  fervida 
animi  natura  faciet,  est  enim  actuosus  et  pertinax 
ignis  ;  frigidi  mixtura  timidos  facit,  pigrum  est  enim 

3  contractumque  frigus.  Volunt  itaque  quidam  ex 
nostris  iram  in  pectore  moveri  efFervescente  circa  cor 
sanguine  ;  causa  cur  hie  potissimum  adsignetur  irae 
locus  non  alia  est,  quam  quod  in  toto  corpore  caUdis- 

4  simum  pectus  est.     Quibus  umidi  plus  inest,  eorum 


"  In  the  order  of  the  corresponding  elements  these  are : 
hot,  moist,  cold,  dry.  According  to  the  Stoic  view,  in  the 
processes  of  nature  the  four  elements  were  changed  from  one 
into  the  other  in  fixed  order.  Cf.  Cicero,  De  Nat,  Deor.  ii. 
33.  84:  "nam  ex  terra  aqua,  ex  aqua  oritur  aer,  ex  aere 
aether  {i.e.  ignis) ;  deinde  retrorsum  vicissim  ex  aethere  aer, 
inde  aqua,  ex  aqua  terra  infima." 

204 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xviii.  1-xix.  4 

to  re£el_anger,_another  to  restrain  it.  In  order  that 
;  njayavoid  anger,  certain  rules  will  be  laid  dowTi 
which  appTyTo"  the  whole  period  of  life  ;  these  ^\ill 
fall  under  two  heads— the  period  of  education  and 
the  l^erjpengds  of  life . 

The  period  of  education  calls  for  the  greatest,  and 
what  >\'ill  also  prove  to  be  the  most  profitable, 
attentionT"^r  it  is  easy  to  train  the  mind  while  it 
is  stiir~"tender7nBiut  it  is  a  difiicult  matter  to  curb 
the  \'ices  that  have  gro^^Ti  up  with  us. 

Th^fiery  mind  i^  by  it-  nature  most  hable  to  wrath. 
For  as  there  are  t!ie  four  elements  of  fire,  water,  air, 
and  earth;~s()  there  are  the  corresponding  properties, 
the  hot,  the  cold, the  dry, and  the  moist."  Accordingly, 
the  various  diiferences  of  regions,  of  animals,  of  sub- 
stances, and  of  characters  are  caused  by  the  minghng 
of  the  elements  ;  consequently,  also,  dispositions 
show  a  greater  bent  in  some  one  direction,  according 
as  they  abound  in  a  larger  supply  of  some  one  element. 
Hence  it  is  that  we  call  some  regions  moist,  some  dry, 
some  hot,  some  cold.  The  same  distinctions  apply 
to  animals  and  to  men  ;  it  makes  a  great  difference 
how  much  of  the  moist  and  the  hot  each  man  has 
in  him;  his  character  vnW  be  determined  by  that 
element  in  him  of  which  he  will  have  a  dominant 
proportion.  A  fiery  constitution  of  mind  ^\i\\  pro- 
duce A^Tathful  men,  for  fire  is  active  and  stubborn  ; 
a  mixture  of  cold  makes  cowards,  for  cold  is  sluggish 
and  shrunken.  Consequently,  some  of  our  school 
hold  that  anger  is  aroused  in  the  breast  by  the  boiling 
of  the  blood  about  the  heart ;  the  reason  why  this 
particular  spot  is  assigned  to  anger  is  none  other  than 
the  fact  that  the  warmest  part  of  the  whole  body  is 
the  breast.     In  the  case  of  those  who  have  more  of 

205 


SENECA 

paulatim  crescit  ira,  quia  non  est  paratus  illis  calor 
sed  motu  adquiritur  ;  itaquepuerorumfeminarumque 
irae  acres  magis  quam  graves  sunt  levioresque  dum 
incipiunt.  Siccis  aetatibus  vehemens  robustaque  est 
ira,  sed  sine  incremento,  non  multum  sibi  adiciens, 
quia  inclinaturum  calor  em  frigus  insequitur.  Senes 
difficiles  et  queruli  sunt,  ut  aegri  et  convalescentes  et 
quorum  aut  lassitudine  aut  detractione  sanguinis  ex- 
5  haustus  est  calor  ;  in  eadem  causa  sunt  siti  fameque 
tabidi  et  quibus  exsangue  corpus  est  maligneque 
alitur  et  deficit.  Vinum  incendit  iras,  quia  calor  em 
auget  ;  pro  cuiusque  natura  quidam  ebrii  efferves- 
cunt,  quidam  saucii.  Neque  ulla  alia  causa  est,  cur 
iracundissimi  sint  flavi  rubentesque,  quibus  talis 
natura  color  est,  qualis  fieri  ceteris  inter  iram  solet  ; 
mobilis  enim  illis  agitatusque  sanguis  est. 

1  20.  Sed  quemadmodum  natura  quosdam  proclives 
in  iram  facit,  ita  multae  incidunt  causae,  quae  idem 
possint  quod  natura.  Alios  morbus  aut  iniuria  cor- 
porum  in  hoc  perduxit,  alios  labor  aut  continua  per- 
vigilia  noctesque  sollicitae  et  desideria  amoresque ; 
quidquid  aliud  aut  corpori  nocuit  aut  animo,  aegram 

2  mentem  in  querellas  parat.  Sed  omnia  ista  initia 
causaeque  sunt  ;  plurimum  potest  consuetude,  quae 
si  gravis  est,  alit  vitium.  Naturam  quidem  mutare 
difllicile  est,  nee  licet  semel  mixta  nascentium 
elementa  convertere  ;    sed  in  hoc  nosse  profuit,  ut 

"  Apparently  the  dominating  element,  and  consequently 
the  natural  tendency,  varies  according  to  age  and  condition. 

*  Designating  conditions  where  in  the  combination  of  the 
dry,  the  hot,  and  the  cold,  cold  becomes  dominant.  "  Cold  " 
was  the  property  of  air,  and  this  element  was  associated  with 
calmness  and  poise  (Lucretius,  iii.  292  sq.).  We  may  think 
here,  probably,  of  the  middle  periods  of  life. 

"  i.e.,  of  the  body. 
206 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XIX.  4-xx.  2 

the  moist  in  them,  anger  grows  up  gradually  because 
they  have  no  heat  ready  at  hand  but  obtain  it  by 
movement :  and  so  theanger  of  children  '^  and  women 
is  more  vehement  than  serious,  and  it  is  hghter  at  the 
start.  In  the  dry  periods  of  life  ^  anger  is  powerful 
anB'strong,  but  is  ^\ithout  increase,  sho^^'ing  Uttle 
gain  because  cold  succeeds  heat,*^  which  is  now  on  the 
dechne.  Old  men  are  simply  testy  and  querulous, 
as  also  are  invahds  and  convalescents  and  all  whose 
heat  has  been  drained  either  by  exhaustion  or  by 
loss  of  blood  ;  the  same  is  the  condition  of  those  who 
are  gaunt  from  thirst  and  hunger  and  of  those  whose 
bodies  are  anaemic  and  ill-nourished  and  weak.  Wine 
kindles  anger  because  it  increases  the  heat  ;  some 
boil  over  when  thev  are  drunk,  others  when  thev  are 
simply  tipsy,  each  according  to  his  nature.  And  the 
only  reason  why  red-haired  and  ruddy  people  are 
extremely  hot-tempered  is  that  they  have  by  nature 
the  colour  which  others  are  wont  to  assume  in  anger  ; 
for  their  blood  is  active  and  restless. 

But  while  nature  makes  certain  persons  prone  to 
anger,  tliere  are  hke\\'ise  many  accidental  causes 
which  are  just  as  effective  as  nature.  Some  are 
brought  into  this  condition  by  sickness  or  injury  of 
the  body,  others  by  toil  or  unceasing  \'igils,  by 
nights  of  anxiety,  by  yearnings  and  the  affairs  of 
love  ;  whatever  else  impairs  either  body  or  mind, 
produces  a  diseased  mental  state  prone  to  complaint. 
But  these  are  all  only  beginnings  and  causes  ;  habit 
counts  for  most,  and  if  this  is  deep-seated,  it  fosters 
theTault:  As  for  nature,  it  is  difficult  to  alter  it,  and 
we  may  not  change  the  elements  that  were  combined 
once  for  all  at  our  birth  ;  but  though  this  be  so,  it 
is  prQfitablejtp  know  that  fiery  temperaments  should 

207 


SENECA 

calentibus  ingeniis  subtrahas  vinum,  quod  pueris 
Plato  negandum  putat  et  ignem  vetat  igne  incitari. 
Ne  cibis  quidem  implendi  sint ;    distendentur  enim 

3  corpora  et  animi  cum  corpora  tumescent.  Labor  illos 
citra  lassitudinem  exerceat,  ut  minuatur,  non  ut 
consumatur  calor  nimiusque  ille  fervor  despumet. 
Lusus  quoque  proderunt ;  modica  enim  voluptas  laxat 

4  animos  et  temperat.  Umidioribus  siccioribusque  et 
frigidis  non  est  ab  ira  periculum,  sed  ignaviora  vitia 
metuenda  sunt,  pavor  et  difficultas  et  desperatio  et 
suspiciones.  Extollenda  itaque  fovendaque  talia 
ingenia  et  in  laetitiam  evocanda  sunt.  Et  quia  aliis 
contra  iram,  aliis  contra  tristitiam  remediis  utendum 
est  nee  dissimillimis  tantum  ista  sed  contrariis 
curanda  sunt,  semper  ei  occurremus  quod  in- 
creverit. 

1  21.  Plurimum,  inquam,  proderit  pueros  statim 
salubriter  institui ;  difficile  autem  regimen  est,  quia 
dare  debemus  operam,  ne  aut  iram  in  illis  nutriamus 

2  aut  indolem  retundamus.  Diligenti  observatione  res 
indiget ;  utrumque  enim,  et  quod  extollendum  et 
quod  deprimendum  est,  similibus  alitur,  facile  autem 

3  etiam  adtendentem  similia  decipiunt.  Crescit  licentia 
spiritus,  servitute  comminuitur ;  adsurgit,  si  lau- 
datur  et  in  spem  sui  bonam  adducitur,  sed  eadem 
ista   insolentiam    et   iracundiam   generant ;     itaque 


»  Laws,  ii.  Q6Q  a. 
208 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XX.  2-xxi.  3 

be  kept_awa^froDCL  wine,  which  Plato  "  thinks  ought 
to  be  forbidden  to  children,  protesting  against  adding 
fire  to  fire.  Neither_should  such  men  gorge  ihem- 
selves  with  food  ;  for  their  bodies  will  be  distended 
and'iKeir  spirits  mil  become  swollen  along  with  the 
body.  They  should  get  exercise  in  toil,  stopping 
short  of  exhaustion,  to  the  end  that  their  heat  may 
be  reduced,  but  not  used  up,  and  that  their  excessive 
fever  may  subside.  Games  also  will  be  beneficial ; 
for  pleasure  in  moderation  relaxes  the  mind  and 
gives  it  balance.-  The  more  moist  and  the  drier 
natures,  and  also  the  cold,  are  in  no  danger  from 
anger,  but  they  must  beware  of  faults  that  are 
more  base — fear,  moroseness,  discouragement,  and 
suspicion.  And  so  such  natures  have  need  of 
encouragement  and  indulgence  and  the  summons  to 
cheerfulness.  And  since  certain  remedies  are  to  be 
employed  against  anger,  others  against  sullenness, 
and  the  two  faults  are  to  be  cured,  not  merely  by 
different,  but  even  by  contrary,  methods,  we  shall 
always  attack  the  fault  that  has  become  the  stronger. 
It^jvill  be  of  the  utmost  profit,  I  say,  to  give 
children  sound  training  from  the  very  beginning  ; 
guidance,  however,  is  difficult,  because  we  ought  to 
take  pains  neither  to  develop  in  them  anger  nor 
to  blunt  their  native  spirit.  The  matter  requires 
careful"  watching  ;  for  both  qualities — that  which 
should  be  encouraged  and  that  which  should  be 
checked — are  fed  by  like  things,  and  like  things  easily 
deceive  even  a  close  observer.  By  freedom  the 
spirit  growSjJjy^  servitude  it  isjcrushed  ;  if  it  is  com- 
mended and  is  led^to  expect  good  things  of  itself, 
it  mounts  up,  but  these  same  measures  breed  in- 
solence and  temper  ;  therefore  we  must  guide  the 
VOL.  1  p  209 


SENECA 

sic  inter  utrumque  regendus   est,  ut  modo  frenis 

4  utamur  modo  stimulis.  Nihil  humile,  nihil  servile 
patiatur  ;  numquam  illi  necesse  sit  rogare  sup- 
pliciter  nee  prosit  rogasse,  potius  causae  suae  et 
prioribus  factis  et  bonis  in  futurum  promissis  donetur. 

5  In  certaminibus  aequalium  nee  vinci  ilium  patiamur 
nee  irasci  ;  demus  operam,  ut  familiaris  sit  iis  cum 
quibus  contendere  solet,  ut  in  certamine  adsuescat 
non  nocere  velle  sed  vincere  ;  quotiens  superaverit 
et  dignum  aliquid  laude  fecerit,  attolli  non  gestire 
patiamur,    gaudium    enim    exultatio,    exultationem 

6  tumor  et  nimia  aestimatio  sui  sequitur  Dabimus 
aliquod  laxamentum,  in  desidiam  vero  otiumque 
non  resolvemus  et  procul  a  contactu  dehciarum  re- 
tinebimus  ;  nihil  enim  magis  facit  iracundos  quam 
educatio  mollis  et  blanda.  Ideo  unicis  quo  plus 
indulgetur,  pupillisque  quo  plus  licet,  corruptior 
animus  est.  Non  resistet  offensis  cui  nihil  umquam 
negatum  est,  cuius  lacrimas  sollicita  semper  mater 

7  abstersit,  cui  de  paedagogo  satisfactum  est.  Non 
vides,  ut  maiorem  quamque  fortunam  maior  ira 
comitetur  ?  In  divitibus  et  nobilibus  et  magistratibus 
praecipue  apparet,  cum  quidquid  leve  et  inane  in 
animo    erat    secunda    se    aura    sustulit.     Felicitas 

<»  i.e.,  the  slave  who  was  the  child's  special  guardian,  not 
his  teacher. 
210 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXI.  3-7 

child  between  the  two  extremes,  using  now  the  curb, 
no w_ the  spm\  He  shouM  be  subjected  to  nothing 
that  is  humiliating,  nothing  that  is  servile  ;  it  should 
never  be  necessar}-  for  him  to  beg  submissively,  nor 
should  begging  ever  prove  profitable — rather  let  his 
own  desert  and  his  past  conduct  and  good  promise 
of  it  in  the  future  be  rewarded.  In  struggles  with 
his  playmates  we  should  not  permit  him  either  to 
be  beaten  or  to  get  angry  ;  we  should  take  pains  to 
see  that  he  is  friendly  toward  those  A^ith  whom  it  is 
his  practice  to  engage  in  order  that  in  the  struggle 
he  may  form  the  habit  of  wishing  not  to  hurt  his 
opponent  but  merely  to  mn.  \Mienever  he  gets  the 
upper  hand  and  does  something  praiseworthy,  we 
should  allow  him  to  be  encouraged  but  not  elated,  for 
joy  leads  to  exultation,  exultation  to  over-conceit  and 
a  too  high  opinion  of  oneself.  We  shall  grant  him 
some  relaxation,  though  we  shall  not  let  him  lapse 
into  sloth  and  ease,  and  we  shall  keep  him  far  from 
all  taint  of  pampering  ;  for  there  is  nothing  that 
makes  the  child  hot-tempered  so  much  as  a  soft 
and  coddhng  bringing  up.  Therefore  the  more  an 
only  child  is  indulged,  and  the  more  liberty  a  ward 
is  allowed,  the  more  will  his  disposition  be  spoiled. 
He  will  not  withstand  rebuffs  who  has  never  been 
denied  anything,  whose  tears  have  always  been 
wiped  away  by  an  anxious  mother,  who  has  been 
allowecl^fo"'have  his  own  way  with  his  tutor."  Do 
you  not  observe  that  ^vith  each  advancing  grade  of 
fortune  there  goes  the  greater  tendency  to  anger  ? 
It  is  especially  apparent  in  the  rich,  in  nobles,  and 
in  officials  when  all  that  was  light  and  tri\ial 
in  "their  mind  soars  aloft  upon  the  breeze  of  good 
fortune.     Prosperity  fosters  wrath  when  the  crowd 

211 


SENECA 

iracundiam  nutrit,  ubi  aures  superbas  adsentatorum] 
turba   circumstetit :     "  Tibi    enim  ille  respondeat  ? 
non  pro  fastigio  te  tuo  metiris  ;   ipse  te  proicis  "  et 
alia  quibus   vix   sanae   et  ab   initio   bene  fundatae 

8  mentes  restiterunt.  Longe  itaque  ab  adsentatione 
pueritia  removenda  est ;  audiat  verum.  Et  timeat 
interim,  vereatur  semper,  maioribus  adsurgat.  Nihil 
per  iracundiam  exoret  ;  quod  flenti  negatum  fuerit, 
quieto  ofFeratur.     Et  divitias  parentium  in  conspectu 

9  habeat,  non  in  usu.  Exprobrentur  illi  perperam 
facta.  Pertinebit  ad  rem  praeceptores  paedago- 
gosque  pueris  placidos  dari.  Proximis  adplicatur 
omne  quod  tenerum  est  et  in  eorum  similitudinem 
crescit ;    nutricum  et  paedagogorum  rettulere  mox 

10  adulescentium  mores,  Apud  Platonem  educatus 
puer  cum  ad  parentes  relatus  vociferantem  videret 
patrem  :  "  Numquam,"  inquit,  "  hoc  apud  Platonem 
vidi."     Non  dubito  quin  citius  patrem  imitatus  sit 

11  quam  Platonem.  Tenuis  ante  omnia  victus  sit^ 
et  non  pretiosa  vestis  et  similis  cultus  cum  aequalibus. 
Non  irascetur  aliquem  sibi  comparari  quern  ab  initio 
multis  parem  feceris. 

1  22.  Sed  haec  ad  liberos  nostros  pertinent ;  in 
nobis  quidem  sors  nascendi  et  educatio  nee  vitii 
locum  nee  iam  praecepti  habet ;  sequentia  ordinanda 

^  sit  added  by  Ruhkopf. 

"  i.e.,  of  older  people.  The  discussion  here  passes  to  the 
second  topic  formulated  in  ch.  18.  2. 

*  In  the  earlier  discussion  the  reverse  was  true — anger  was 
associated  with  the  fortune  of  birth  (ch.  19),  and  precept 
with  the  corrective  value  of  education  (ch.  21). 

212 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXI.  7-xxn.  1 

o£JjtttererSi^athered  around,  whispers  to  the  proud 
ear  :  "\VTiat,  should  that  man  answer  1/011  back  ? 
Your  estimate  of  yourself  does  not  correspond  with 
your  importance  ;  you  demean  yourself  " — these  and 
other  adulations,  which  even  the  sensible  and  origin- 
ally well-poised  mind  resists  Mith  difficult}^.  Child- 
hood, therefore,  should  be  kept  far  from  all  contact 
with  flattery  ;  let  a  child, hear  the  truth,  sometimes 
even  let  him  fear,  let  him  be  respectful  always,  let 
him  rise  before  his  elders.  Let  him  gain  no  request 
by  anger  ;  when  he  is  quiet  let  him  be  offered  what 
was  refused  when  he  wept.  Let  him,  moreover,  have 
the  s^Kf "15iit  hot  the  use  of  his  parents'  wealth. 
Wher^he  has  done  wrong,  let  him  be  reproved.  It 
will  workTo^the  advantage  of  children  to  give  them 
teachers"and  tutors  of  a  quiet  disposition.  Every 
youn^  thing  attaches  itself  to  what  is  nearest  and 
grows  to  be  hke  it  ;  the  character  of  their  nurses  and 
tutors  is  presently  reproduced  in  that  of  the  young 
men.  There  was  a  boy  who  had  been  brought  up 
in  the  house  of  Plato,  and  when  he  had  returned  to 
his  parents  and  saw  his  father  in  a  blustering  rage, 
his  comment  was  :  "I  never  saw  this  sort  of  thing 
at  Plato's."  I  doubt  not  that  he  was  quicker  to 
copy  his  father  than  he  was  to  copy  Plato  !  Above 
all,  let  his  food  be  simple,  his  clothing  inexpensive, 
and  his  style  of  li\-ing  like  that  of  his  companions. 
The  boy  ^vill  never  be  angry  at  some  one  being 
counted  eqnal  to  himself,  whom  you  have  from  the 
first  treated  as  the  equal  of  many. 

But  these  rules  apply  to  our  children.  In  our 
case,**  however,  our  lot  at  birth  and  our  education 
give    no    excuse — the    one    for    the    \'ice,    or    the 

other,    any    longer,    for    instruction *4 jt_Js__their 

213 


SENECA 

2  sunt.     Contra  primas  itaque  causas  pugnare  debe- 
mus.      Causa  autem  iracundiae  opinio  iniuriae  est, 
cui  non  facile  credendum  est.     Ne  apertis  quidem  M 
manifestisque  statim  accedendum  ;    quaedam  enim 

3  falsa  veri  speciem  ferunt.  Dandum  semper  est 
tempus ;  veritatem  dies  aperit.  Ne  sint  aures 
criminantibus  faciles  ;  hoc  humanae  naturae  vitium 
suspectum  notumque  nobis  sit,  quod,  quae  inviti 
audimus,  libenter  credimus  et,  antequam  iudicemus, 

4  Irascimur.  Quid,  quod  non  criminationibus  tantum, 
sed  suspicionibus  impellimur  et  ex  vultu  risuque 
alieno  peiora  interpretati  innocentibus  irascimur  ? 
Itaque  agenda  est  contra  se  causa  absentis  et  in 
suspenso  ira  retinenda  ;  potest  enim  poena  dilata 
exigi,  non  potest  exacta  revocari. 

1  23.  Notus  est  ille  tyrannicida,  qui  imperfecto  opere 
comprehensus  et  ab  Hippia  tortus,  ut  conscios 
indicaret,  circumstantes  amicos  tyranni  nominavit 
quibusque  maxime  caram  salutem  eius  sciebat ;  et 
cum  ille  singulos,  ut  nominati  erant,  occidi  iussisset, 
interroganti,  ecquis  superesset, "  Tu,"  inquit,  "  solus  ; 
neminem  enim  alium  cui  carus  esses  reliqui."  Effecit 
ira,  ut  tyrannus  tyrannicidae  manus  accommodaret 

2  et  praesidia  sua  gladio  suo  caederet.     Quanto  ani- 


"  i.e.,  of  birth  and  education. 
"  See  Index. 


214 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xxn.  2-xxin.  2 

consequences^  that  we  must  regulate.  We  ought, 
therefore,  to  make  our  fight  agamst  the  primary 
causes.  Now  the  cause  of  anger  is  an  impres- 
sion of  injury,  and  to  this  we  should  not  easily  give 
credence.  We  ought  not  to  be  led  to  it  quickly 
even  by  open  and  e\-ident  acts  ;  for  some  things 
are  false,  that, have  the  appearance  of  truth.  We 
should  always  allow  some  time  ;  a  day  discloses  the 
trutK^  EeTus  not  give  ready  ear  to  traducers  ;  this 
weakness  of  human  natm-e  let  us  recognize  and  mis- 
trust— we  are  glad  to  believe  what  we  are  loth  to 
hear,  and  we  become  angry  before  we  can  form  a 
judgement  about  it.  And  what  is  to  be  said  when 
we  are  actuated,  not  merely  by  charges,  but  by  bare 
suspicions,  and  ha\-ing  put  the  worse  interpretation 
on  another's  look  or  smile,  become  angry  at  innocent 
men  ?  Therefore  we  should  plead  the  cause  of  the 
absent  person  against  ourselves,  and  anger  should  be 
held  in  abeyance  ;  for  punishment  postponed  can  still 
be  exacted,  but  once  exacted  it  cannot  be  recalled. 

Every  one  knows  the  story  of  the  tjTannicide  who 
having  been  arrested  before  he  had  finished  his  task 
was  put  to  torture  by  Hippias  *  in  order  that  he 
might  be  forced  to  reveal  his  accomplices  ;  where- 
upon he  named  the  friends  of  the  tyrant  who  were 
gathered  around  him,  the  very  ones  to  whom,  as  he 
knew,  the  safety  of  the  tyrant  was  especially  dear. 
After  Hippias  had  ordered  them  to  be  slain  one  by 
one,  as  they  were  named,  he  asked  whether  there 
was  still  any  other.  "  No,"  said  the  man,  "  you 
alone  remain  ;  for  I  have  left  no  one  else  who  cares 
anything  about  you."  The  result  of  his  anger  was 
that  the  tyrant  lent  his  might  to  the  tyrant-slayer 
and  slew  his  owti  protectors  with   his   own   sword. 

215 


SENECA 

mosius  Alexander !  Qui  cum  legisset  epistulam 
matris,  qua  admonebatur,  ut  a  veneno  Philippi 
medici  caveret,  acceptam  potionem  non  deterritus 

3  bibit.  Plus  sibi  de  amico  suo  credidit.  Dignus  fuit 
qui  innocentem  haberet,  dignus  qui  faceret !  Hoc 
eo  magis  in  Alexandre  laudo,  quia  nemo  tarn  obnoxius 
irae  fuit ;    quo  rarior  autem  moderatio  in  regibus, 

4  hoc  laudanda  magis  est.  Fecit  hoc  et  C.  Caesar 
ille  qui  victoria  civili  clementissime  usus  est ;  cum 
scrinia  deprendisset  epistularum  ad  Cn.  Pompeium 
missarum  ab  iis,  qui  videbantur  aut  in  diversis  aut 
in  neutris  fuisse  partibus,  combussit.  Quamvis 
moderate  soleret  irasci,  maluit  tamen  non  posse  ; 
gratissimum  putavit  genus  veniae  nescire  quid 
quisque  peccasset. 

1  24.  Plurimum  mali  credulitas  facit.  Saepe  ne 
audiendum  quidem  est,  quoniam  in  quibusdam  rebus 
satius  est  decipi  quam  diffidere.  Tollenda  ex  animo 
suspicio  et  coniectura,  fallacissima  irritamenta. 
"  Ille  me  parum  humane  salutavit ;  ille  osculo  meo 
non  adhaesit ;  ille  inchoatum  sermonem  cito  abrupit ; 
ille  ad  cenam  non  vocavit ;    ilUus  vultus  aversior 

2  visus  est."  Non  deerit  suspicioni  argumentatio. 
Simplicitate  opus  est  et  benigna  rerum  aestimatione. 
Nihil  nisi  quod  in  oculos  incurret  manifestumque 
erit    credamus,    et    quotiens    suspicio    nostra   vana 


»  i.e.,  his  own  judgement. 
216 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXIII.  2-xxiv.  2 

How  much  more  courageous  was  Alexander  !  After 
reading  a  letter  from  Ins  mother  warning  him  to 
beware  of  poison  from  his  physician  Philip,  he  took 
the  draught  and  drank  it  without  alarm.  In  the 
case  of  his  own  friend  he  trusted  himself  "^  more.  He 
deserved  to  find  him  innocent,  deserved  to  prove 
him  so  !  I  applaud  this  all  the  more  in  Alexander 
because  no  man  was  so  prone  to  anger  ;  but  the 
rarer  self-control  is  among  kings,  the  more  praise- 
worthy it  becomes.  The  great  Gains  Caesar  also 
showed  this,  he  who,  \ictorious  in  civil  war,  used  his 
victory  most  mercifully  ;  ha\-ing  apprehended  some 
packets  of  letters  wTitten  to  Gnaeus  Pompeius  by  those 
who  were  beheved  to  belong  either  to  the  opposing 
side  or  to  the  neutral  part}',  he  burned  them.  Al- 
though he  was  in  the  habit,  within  bounds,  of  indulg- 
ing in  anger,  yet  he  preferred  being  unable  to  do  so  ; 
he  thought  that  the  most  gracious  form  of  pardon 
was  not  to  know  what  the  offence  of  each  person  had 
been. 

Creduhty  is  a  source  of  very  great  mischief. 
Often  one  should  not  even  hsten  to  report,  since 
under  some  circumstances  it  is  better  to  be  deceived 
thaii^to  be  suspicious.  Suspicion  and  surmise — 
provocations  that  are  most  deceptive — ought  to  be 
banished  from  the  mind.  "  That  man  did  not  give 
me  a  civil  greeting  ;  that  one  did  not  return  my 
kiss  ;  that  one  broke  off  the  conversation  abruptly  ; 
that  one  did  not  invite  me  to  dinner  ;  that  one 
seemed  to  avoid  seeing  me."  Pretext  for  suspicion 
will  jjpt  be  lacking.  But  there  is  need  of  frankness 
and  generosity  in  interpreting  things.  We  should 
beheve  only  what  is  thrust  under  our  eyes  and 
becomes  unmistakable,  and  every  time  our  suspicion 


SENECA 

apparuerit,   obiurgemus   credulitatem ;     haec   enim 
castigatio  consuetudinem  efficiet  non  facile  credendi. 

1  25.  Inde  et  illud  sequitur,  ut  minimis  sordi- 
dissimisque  rebus  non  exacerbemur.  Parum  agilis 
est  puer  aut  tepidior  aqua  poturo  aut  turbatus  torus 
aut  mensa  neglegentius  posita — ad  ista  concitari 
insania  est.  Aeger*  et  infelieis  valetudinis  est  quem 
levis  aura  contraxit,  adfecti  oculi  quos  Candida  vestis 
obturbat,  dissolutus  deliciis  cuius  latus  alieno  labore 

2  condoluit.  Mindyriden  aiunt  fuisse  ex  Sybaritarum 
civitate,  qui  cum  vidisset  fodientem  et  altius  rastrum 
adlevantem,  lassum  se  fieri  questus  vetuit  ilium  opus 
in  conspectu  suo  facere ;  idem  habere  se  peius 
questus  est,  quod  foliis  rosae  duplicatis  incubuisset. 

3  Ubi  animum  simul  et  corpus  voluptates  corrupere, 
nihil  tolerabile  videtur,  non  quia  dura,  sed  quia 
mollis  patitur.  Quid  est  enim,  cur  tussis  alicuius 
aut  sternutamentum  aut  musca  parum  curiose  fugata 
in  rabiem  agat  aut  obversatus  canis  aut  clavis  ne- 

4  glegentis  servi  manibus  elapsa  ?  Feret  iste  aequo 
animo  civile  convicium  et  ingesta  in  contione  curiave 
maledicta,  cuius  aures  tracti  subsellii  stridor  ofFendit  ? 
Perpetietur  hie  famem  et  aestivae  expeditionis 
sitim,    qui    puero    male    diluenti    nivem    irascitur  ? 

"  Wine  was  often  drunk  mixed  with  hot  water  ;  cf.  Mart, 
i.  11.  3. 
218 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXIV.  2-xxv.  4 

proves  to  be  groundless  we  should  chide  our  credulity; 
for  this  self-reproof  will  develop  the  habit  of  being 
slow  to  believe. 

Next,  too,  comes  this — that  we  should  not  be  ex- 
asperated by  trifling  and  paltry  incidents.  A  slave  is 
too  slow,  or  the  water  for  the  wine"  is  lukewarm,  or 
the  couch-cushion  disarranged,  or  the  table  too  care- 
lessly set — it  is  madness  to  be  incensed  by  such  things. 
The  man  is  ill  or  in  a  poor  state  of  health  who  shrinks 
from  a  slight  draught  ;  something  is  WTong  with  a 
man's  eyes  if  they  are  offended  by  white  clothing  ; 
the  man  is  enfeebled  by  soft  living  who  gets  a  pain 
in  his  side  from  seeing  somebody  else  at  work  !  The 
story  is  that  there  was  once  a  citizen  of  Sybaris,  a 
certain  Mindyrides,  who,  seeing  a  man  digging  and 
smnging  his  mattock  on  high,  complained  that  it 
made  him  weary  and  ordered  the  man  not  to  do  such 
work  in  his  sight ;  the  same  man  complained  that 
he  felt  worse  because  the  rose-leaves  upon  which  he 
had  lain  were  crumpled  !  When  pleasures  have  cor- 
rupted both  mind  and  body,  nothing  seems  to  be 
tolerable,  not  because  the  suffering  is  hard,  but 
because  the  sufferer  is  soft.  For  why  is  it  that  we 
are  thro^v•n  into  a  rage  by  somebody's  cough  or 
sneeze,  by  negligence  in  chasing  a  fly  away,  by  a  dog's 
hanging  around,  or  by  the  dropping  of  a  key  that 
has  slipped  from  the  hands  of  a  careless  servant  ? 
The  poor  wretch  whose  ears  are  hurt  by  the  grating 
of  a  bench  dragged  across  the  floor — will  he  be  able 
to  bear  with  equanimity  the  strife  of  public  life  and 
the  abuse  rained  down  upon  him  in  the  assembly  or 
in  the  senate-house  ?  Will  he  be  able  to  endure  the 
hunger  and  the  thirst  of  a  summer  campaign  who 
gets  angry  at  his  slave  for  being  careless  in  mixing 

219 


SENECA 

Nulla  itaque  res  magis  iracundiam  alit  quam  luxuria 
intemperans  et  impatiens  ;  dure  tractandus  animus 
est,  ut  ictum  non  sentiat  nisi  gravem. 

1  26.  Irascimur  aut  iis,  a  quibus  ne  accipere  quidem 
potuimus   iniuriam,  aut   iis,   a   quibus    accipere   in- 

2  iuriam  potuimus.  Ex  prioribus  quaedam  sine  sensu 
sunt,  ut  liber,  quern  minutioribus  litteris  scriptum 
saepe  proiecimus  et  mendosum  laceravimus,  ut  vesti- 
menta,  quae,  quia  displicebant,  scidimus.  His  irasci 
quam  stultum  est,  quae  iram  nostram  nee  meruerunt 

3  nee  sentiunt !  "  Sed  ofFendunt  nos  videlicet  qui  ilia 
fecerunt."  Primum  saepe  antequam  hos  apud  nos 
distinguamus  irascimur.  Deinde  fortasse  ipsi  quoque 
artifices  excusationes  iustas  afferent.  Alius  non 
potuit  melius  facere  quam  fecit,  nee  ad  tuam  con- 
tumeliam  parum  didicit ;  alius  non  in  hoc  ut  te 
ofFenderet  fecit.  Ad  ultimum  quid  est  dementius 
quam  bilem  in  homines  collectam  in  res  effundere  ? 

4  Atqui  ut  his  irasci  dementis  est,  quae  anima  carent, 
sic  mutis  animalibus,  quae  nullam  iniuriam  nobis 
faciunt,  quia  velle  non  possunt ;  non  est  enim  iniuria 
nisi  a  consilio  profecta.  Nocere  itaque  nobis  possunt 
ut  ferrum   aut  lapis,   iniuriam   quidem   facere   non 

6  possunt.  Atqui  contemni  se  quidam  putant,  ubi 
idem  equi  obsequentes  alteri  equiti,  alteri  con- 
tumaces   sunt,  tamquam  iudicio,  non   consuetudine 


"  i.e.,  with  the  wine. 
220 


I 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXV.  4-xx\'i.  5 

the  snow  °  ?  Nothing,  therefore,  is  more  conducive 
to  anger  than  the  intemperance  and  intolerance  that 
comes  from  soft  Hving  ;  the  mind  ought  to  be  schooled 
by  hardship  to  feel  none  but  a  crushing  blow. 

Our  anger  is  stirred  either  by  those  from  whom 
w^^could  notTiave  received  any  injur)'  at  all,  or  by 
those  from  whom  we  might  have  received  one.  To 
the  fbrmer  class  belong  certain  inanimate  things, 
such  as  the  manuscript  which  we  often  hurl  from  us 
because  it  is  WTitten  in  too  small  a  script  or  tear  up 
because  it  is  full  of  mistakes,  or  the  articles  of  cloth- 
ing which  we  pull  to  pieces  because  we  do  not  like 
them.  But  how  foolish  it  is  to  get  angr)-  at  these 
thinga^vvhich  neither  desen'e  our  \\Tath  nor  feel  it  ! 
"  But  of  course,"  you  say,  "  it  is  those  who  made 
them^who  have  given  us  the  affront."  But,  in  the 
first  place,  we  often  get  angry  before  we  make  this 
distinction  clear  to  our  minds  ;  in  the  second  place, 
perhaps  also  the  makers  themselves  -s^ill  have  reason- 
able excuses  to  offer  :  this  one  could  not  do  better 
work  than  he  did,  and  it  was  not  out  of  disrespect  for 
you  that  he  was  poor  at  his  trade  ;  another  did  not 
aim  to  affront  you  by  what  he  did.  In  the  end  what 
can  be  madder  than  to  accumulate  spleen  against  men 
and  then  vent  it  upon  things  ?  But  as  it  is  the  act  of  a 
madman  to  become  angr}-  aFThmgs  'without  life,  it  is 
not  less  mad  to  be  a.ngry  at  dumb  animals,  which  do 
us  no~iiijury  because  they  cannot  ^\^ll  to  do  so  ;  for 
there~can  be  no  injury  unless  it  arises  from  design. 
Therefore  they  can  harm  us  just  as  the  sword  or  a 
stone  may  do,  but  they  cannot  injure  us.  But  some 
people  think  that  a  man  is  insulted  when  the  same 
horses  which  are  submissive  to  one  rider  are  rebelhous 
toward  another,  just  as  if  it  were  due  to  the  animal's 

221 


SENECA 

et  arte  tractandi  quaedam  quibusdam  subiectiora 
6  sint.  Atqui  ut  his  irasci  stultum  est,  ita  pueris  et 
non  multum  a  puerorum  prudentia  distantibus  ; 
omnia  enim  ista  peccata  apud  aequum  iudicem  pro 
innocentia  habent  imprudentiam. 

1  27.  Quaedam  sunt  quae  nocere  non  possunt 
nullamque  vim  nisi  beneficaih  et  salutarem  habent, 
ut  di  immortales,  qui  nee  volunt  obesse  nee  possunt ; 
natura  enim  ilhs  mitis  et  placida  est,  tam  longe  re- 

2  mota  ab  ahena  iniuria  quam  a  sua.  Dementes  itaque 
et  ignari  veritatis  ilUs  imputant  saevitiam  maris, 
immodicos  imbres,  pertinaciam  hiemis,  cum  interim 
nihil  horum  quae  nobis  nocent  prosuntque  ad  nos 
proprie  derigatur.  Non  enim  nos  causa  mundo 
sumus  hiemem  aestatemque  referendi  ;  suas  ista 
leges  habent,  quibus  divina  exercentur.  Nimis  nos 
suspicimus,  si  digni  nobis  videmur  propter  quos  tanta 
moveantur.     Nihil  ergo  horum  in  nostram  iniuriam 

3  fit,  immo  contra  nihil  non  ad  salutem.  Quaedam 
esse  diximus  quae  nocere  non  possint,  quaedam  quae 
nolint.  In  iis  erunt  boni  magistratus  parentesque 
et  praeceptores  et  iudices,  quorum  castigatio  sic 
accipienda   est   quomodo   scalpellum   et   abstinentia 

4  et    alia    quae    profutura    torquent.     AfFecti    sumus 

222 


ox  ANGER,  II.  xx\i.  5-xx\ii.  4 

choice  and  not  rather  to  the  rider's  practised  skill  in 
management  that  certain  animals  prove  more  tract- 
able to  certain  men.  But  it  is  as  foolish  to  be  angry 
with  these  as  it  is  to  be  angr}-  with  children  and  all 
who  are  not  much  different  from  children  in  point  of 
wisdom  :  for  in  the  eyes  of  a  just  judge  all  such 
miitake-  can  plead  ignorance  as  the  equivalent  of 
innocence. 

But  there  are  certain  agents  that  are  unable  to 
harm  us  and  have  no  power  that  is  not  beneficent 
and  salutary,  as,  for  example,  the  immortal  gods, 
who  neither  \A'ish  nor  are  able  to  hurt  ;  for  they 
are  by  nature  mild  and  gentle,  as  incapable  of 
injuring  others  as  of  injuring  themselves.  Those, 
therefore,  are  mad  and  ignorant  of  truth  who  lay  to 
the  gods'  charge  the  cruelt\-  of  the  sea,  excessive  rains, 
and  the  stubbornness  of  ^^inter,  whereas  all  the  while 
none  of  the  phenomena  which  harm  or  help  us  are 
planned  personally  for  us.  For  it  is  not  because  of  us 
that  the  universe  brings  back  winter  and  summer  ; 
these  have  their  ovm  laws,  by  which  the  di\'ine  plan 
operates.  We  have  too  high  a  regard  for  ourselves 
if  we  deem  ourselves  worthy  to  be  the  cause  of 
such  mighty  movements.  Therefore  none  of  these 
phenomena  takes  place  for  the  purpose  of  injuring 
us,  nay,  on  the  contrary,  they  all  tend  toward  our 
benefit.  I  have  said  that  there  are  certain  agents 
that  cannot,  certain  ones  that  would  not,  harm  us.  To 
the  latter  class  Mill  belong  good  magistrates  and 
parents,  teachers  and  judges,  and  we  ought  to 
submit  to  the  chastening  they  give  in  the  same  spirit 
in  which  we  submit  to  the  surgeon's  knife,  a  regimen 
of  diet,  and  other  things  which  cause  suffering  that 
they  may  bring  profit.    We  have  been  visited  \\ith 

223 


SENECA 

poena  ;  succurrat  non  tantum  quid  patiamur,  sed 
quid  fecerimus,  in  consilium  de  vita  nostra  mittamur  ; 
si  modo  verum  ipsi  nobis  dicere  voluerimus,  pluris 
litem  nostram  aestimabimus. 

1  28.  Si  volumus  aequi  rerum  omnium  indices  esse, 
hoc  primum  nobis  persuadeamus,  neminem  nostrum 
esse  sine  culpa ;  hinc  enim  maxima  indignatio 
oritur  :  "  Nihil  peccavi  "  et  "  nihil  feci."  Immo 
nihil  fateris  !  Indignamur  aliqua  admonitione  aut 
coercitione  nos  castigatos,  cum  illo  ipso  tempore 
peccemus,    quod    adicimus    malefactis    adrogantiam 

2  et  contumaciam.  Quis  est  iste  qui  se  profitetur 
omnibus  legibus  innocentem  ?  Ut  hoc  ita  sit,  quam 
angusta  innocentia  est  ad  legem  bonum  esse  ! 
Quanto  latius  officiorum  patet  quam  iuris  regula  ! 
Quam  multa  pietas,  humanitas,  liberalitas,  iustitia, 
fides   exigunt,   quae   omnia   extra  publicas   tabulas 

3  sunt !  Sed  ne  ad  illam  quidem  artissimam  in- 
nocentiae  formulam  praestare  nos  possumus.  Alia 
fecimus,  alia  cogitavimus,  alia  optavimus,  aliis 
favimus  ;   in  quibusdam  innocentes  sumus,  quia  non 

4  successit.  Hoc  cogitantes  aequiores  simus  delin- 
quentibus,  credamus  obiurgantibus  ;  utique  bonis 
ne  irascamur  (cui  enim  non,  si  bonis  quoque  ?), 
minime  diis  ;    non  enim  illorum  vi,^  sed  lege  mor- 

^  vi  added  by  Hermes. 
224 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXVII.  4-xx\'iii.  4 

punishment ;  then  let  it  bring  up  the  thought,  not 
so  much  of  what  we  suffer,  as  of  Avhat  we  have  done  ; 
let  us  summon  ourselves  to  give  a  verdict  upon  our 
past  life  ;  if  only  we  are  wilUng  to  be  frank  ^vith 
ourselves,  we  shall  assess  our  fines  at  a  still  higher 
figure. 

If,  we  are  willing  in  all  matters  to  play  the  just 
judgfiiJet  us  convince  ourselves  first  of  this — that 
no  one  of  us  is  free  from  fault.  For  most  of  our 
indignation  arises  from  our  saying,  "  I  am  not  to 
blairi^"  "  I  have  done  nothing  wTong."  Say, 
rather,  you  admit  nothing  WTong  !  We  chafe  against 
the  censure  oT  some  reprimand  or  chastisement 
although  at  the  very  time  we  are  at  fault  because 
we  are  adding  to  -wrong -doing  arrogance  and 
obstinacy.  What  man  is  there  who  can  claim  that 
in  thg  eyes  of  every  law  he  is  innocent  ?  But  assum- 
ing that  this  may  be,  how  limited  is  the  innocence 
whose  standard  of  virtue  is  the  law  !  How  much 
more  comprehensive  is  the  principle  of  duty  than"/ 
that  of  law  !  How  many  are  the  demands  laid  upon 
us  by  the  sense  of  duty,  humanity,  generosity,  justice, 
integrity — all  of  which  lie  outside  the  statute  books  !  '^ 
But  even  under  that  other  exceedingly  narrow 
definition  of  innocence  we  cannot  vouch  for  our 
claim.  Some  sins  we  have  committed,  some  we 
have^contemplated,  some  we  have  desired,  some 
we  have  encouraged  ;  in  the  case  of  some  we  are 
innocent  only  because  we  did  not  succeed.  Bearing 
this  in  mind,  let  us  be  more  just  to  transgressors, 
more  heedful  to  those  who  rebuke  us  ;  especially  let 
us  not  be  angry  with  the  good  (for  who  will  escape 
if  we  are  to  be  angr}^  even  with  the  good  ?),  and  least 
of^^afrvvillt  the  gods.~';For_it  is  not  by  their  power, 
VOL.  I  Q  225 


SENECA 

talitatis  patimur  quidquid  incommodi  accidit.  "  At 
morbi  doloresque  incurrunt."  Utique  aliquo  de- 
fungendum  est  domicilium  putre  sortitis. 

Dicetur   aliquis   male   de   te   locutus  ;    cogita   an 

5  prior  feceris,  cogita  de  quam  multis  loquaris.  Cogi- 
temus,  inquam,  alios  non  facere  iniuriam  sed  re- 
ponere,  alios  pro  nobis  facere,  alios  coactos  facere, 
alios  ignorantes,  etiam  eos,  qui  volentes  scientesque 
faciunt,  ex  iniuria  nostra  non  ipsam  iniuriam  petere  ; 
aut  dulcedine  urbanitatis  prolapsus  est,  aut  fecit 
aliquid,  non  ut  nobis  obesset,  sed  quia  consequi  ipse 
non   poterat,   nisi   nos   repulisset ;    saepe   adulatio, 

6  dum  blanditur,  offendit.  Quisquis  ad  se  rettulerit, 
quotiens  ipse  in  suspicionem  falsam  inciderit,  quam 
multis  officii  s  suis  fortuna  speciem  iniuriae  induerit, 
quam  multos  post  odimn  amare  coeperit,  poterit 
non  statim  irasci,  utique  si  sibi  tacitus  ad  singula^ 
quibus  offenditur  dixerit  :    "  Hoc  et  ipse  commisi." 

7  Sed  ubi  tam  aequum  iudicem  invenies  ?  Is  qui 
nulUus  non  uxorem  concupiscit  et  satis  iustas  causas 
putat  amandi,  quod  aliena  est,  idem  uxorem  suam 
aspici  non  vult  ;  et  fidei  acerrimus  exactor  est 
perfidus,  et'  mendacia  persequitur  ipse  periurus,  et 
litem  sibi  inferri  aegerrime  calumniator  patitur ; 
pudicitiam  servulorum  suorum  adtemptari  non  vult 
226 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXVIII.  4-7 

but  by  the  terms  of  our  mortality,  that  we  are 
forcea  to  suffer  whatever  ill  befalls.  "  But,"  you 
say,  "  sickness  and  pain  assail  us."  At  any  rate 
there  must  be  an  ending  some  time,  seeing  that  we 
have  been  given  a  crumbling  tenement  ! 

it^wjlljbe  said  thjit  some  one  spoke  ill  of  you  ; 
consider  wheTher  you  spoke  ill  of  him  first,  consider 
how,  many  there  are  of  whom  you  speak  ill.  Let  us 
consider,  1  say,  that  some  are  not  doing  us  an  injury 
but  repaying  one,  that  others  are  acting  for  our  good, 
that  some  are  acting  under  compulsion,  others  in 
ignorance,  that  even  those  who  are  acting  intention- 
ally and  ^vittingly  do  not,  while  injuring  us,  aim  only 
at  the  injury  ;  one  slipped  into  it  allured  by  his  wit, 
another  did  something,  not  to  obstruct  us,  but 
because  he  could  not  reach  his  o^^'n  goal  without 
pushing  us  back ;  often  adulation,  while  it  flatters, 
offends.  If  any  one  will  recall  how  often  he  himself 
has  fallen  under  undeserved  suspicion,  how  many  of 
his  good  services  chance  has  clothed  Avith  the  appear- 
ance of  injury,  how  many  persons  whom  once  he 
hated  he  learned  to  love,  he  -will  be  able  to  avoid  all 
hasty  anger,  particularly  if  as  each  offence  occurs  he 
vnW  first  say  to  himself  in  silence  :  "  I  myself  have 
ak(>  hppn  guilty  nf  thif;"  But  where  will  you  find 
a  judge  so  just  ?  The  man  who  covets  everybody's 
wife  and  considers  the  mere  fact  that  she  belongs 
to  another  an  ample  and  just  excuse  for  loving  her — ■ 
this  same  man  will  not  have  his  own  wife  looked  at ; 
the  strictest  enforcer  of  loyalty  is  the  traitor,  the 
punisher  of  falsehood  is  himself  a  perjurer,  and  the 
trickster  lavvj'er  deeply  resents  an  indictment  being 
brought  against  himself ;  the  man  who  has  no  regard 
for  his  own  chastity  \vi\\  permit  no  tampering  with 

227 


SENECA 

8  qui  non  pepercit  suae.  Aliena  vitia  in  oculis  habe- 
mus,  a  tergo  nostra  sunt  ;  inde  est  quod  tempestiva 
filii  convivia  pater  deterior  filio  castigat,  et  nihil 
alienae  luxuriae  ignoscit  qui  nihil  suae  negavit,  et 
homieidae  tyrannus  irascitur,  et  punit  furta  sacrilegus. 
Magna  pars  hominum  est  quae  non  peccatis  irascitur 
sed  peccantibus.  Faciet  nos  moderatiores  respectus 
nostri,  si  consuluerimus  nos  :  "  Numquid  et  ipsi 
aliquid  tale  commisimus  ?  Numquid  sic  erravimus  ? 
Expeditne  nobis  ista  damnare  ?  " 

1  29.  Maximum  remedium  irae  mora  est.  Hoc  ab 
ilia  pete  initio,  non  ut  ignoscat,  sed  ut  iudicet  :  graves 
habet  impetus  primos  ;  desinet,  si  expectat.  Nee 
universam  illam  temptaveris  tollere  ;   tota  vinceturjj 

2  dum  partibus  carpitur.  Ex  is,  quae  nos  offendunt,! 
alia  renuntiantur  nobis,  alia  ipsi  audimus  aut  videmus. 
De  iis,  quae  narrata  sunt,  non  debemus  cito  credere  ;| 
multi  mentiuntur,  ut  decipiant,  multi,  quia  deceptij 
sunt.  Alius  criminatione  gratiam  captat  et  fingit 
iniuriam,  ut  videatur  doluisse  factam  ;  est  aliquisl 
malignus  et  qui  amicitias  cohaerentis  diducere  veHt ;' 
est  subdicax^  et  qui  spectare   ludos   cupiat  et  ex 

3  longinquo    tutoque    speculetur    quos    conlisit.     Dej 
parvola  summa  iudicaturo  tibi  res  sine   teste  nor 
probaretur,    testis    sine    iureiurando    non    valeretJ 

^  subdicax  Badstuhner :  subprocax  Lipsius  :  suspicax  ALj: 

"  Cf.  Catullus,  xxii.  20  sq. : 

suns  ciiique  attributus  est  error : 
sed  non  videmus  manticae  quod  in  tergo  est.. 

228 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xxvni.  8-xxix.  3 

that  of  his  slaves.  The  vices  of  others  we  keep 
before  our  eyes,  our  own  behind  our  back'' ;  hence  it 
happens  "that  a  father  who  is  even  worse  than  his 
son  rebukes  his  son's  untimely  revels,  that  a  man 
does  not  pardon  another's  excesses  who  sets  no  bound 
to  his  ovm,  that  the  murderer  stirs  a  tyrant's  wrath, 
and  the  temple-robber  punishes  theft.  It  is  not_^ 
^vith  the  sins  but  with  the  sinners  that  rnost  men 
are  angry.  We  shall  become  more  tolerant  from 
self-inspection  if  we  cause  ourselves  to  consider  : 
"  Have  we  ourselves  never  been  guilty  of  such  an 
act  ?  Have  we  never  made  the  same  mistake  ?  Is  it 
expedient  for  us  to  condemn  such  conduct  ?  " 

T^re^est  corrective  of  anger  lies  in  delay.  Beg 
this  concessiorTfrbrn  anger  at  the  first,  not  in  order 
that  it  may  pardon,  but  in  order  that  it  may  judge. 
ItsTitst  as'Sanlts  are  heavy  ;  it  will  leave  off  if  it 
waits.  And  do  not  try  to  destroy  it  all  at  once  ; 
attacked  piecemeal,  it  will  be  completely  con- 
quered. Of  the  things  which  offend  us  some  are 
reported  to  us,  others  we  ourselves  hear  or  see.  As 
to  what  is  told  us,  we  should  not  be  quick  to  beheve  ; 
many  falsify  in  order  that  they  may  deceive  ;  many 
others,  because  they  themselves  are  deceived.  One 
courts  our  favour  by  making  an  accusation  and 
invents  an  injury  in  order  to  show  that  he  regrets 
the  occurrence ;  then  there  is  the  man  who  is  spite- 
ful and  wishes  to  break  up  binding  friendships,  and 
the  one  who  is  sharp-tongued  and,  eager  to  see  the 
sport,  watches  from  a  safe  distance  the  friends  whom 
he  has  brought  to  blows.  If  the  question  of  even  a 
small  payment  should  come  before  you  to  be  judged, 
you  would  require  a  ^^■itness  to  prove  the  claim,  the 
witness  Avould  have  no  weight  except  on  oath,  you 

229 


SENECA 

utrique  parti  dares  actionem,  dares  tempus,  non 
semel  audires ;  magis  enim  Veritas  elucet  quo 
saepius  ad  manum  venit.  Amicum  condemnas  de 
praesentibus  ?  Antequam  audJas,  antequam  inter- 
roges,  antequam  illi  aut  accusatorem  suum  nosse 
liceat    aut     crimen,    irasceris  ?        lam    enim,    iam 

4  utrimque  quid  diceretur  audisti  ?  Hie  ipse,  qui 
ad  te  detulit,  desinet  dicere,  si  probare  debuerit. 
"  Non  est,"  inquit,  "  quod  me  protrahas  ;  ego  pro- 
ductus  negabo  ;  alioqui  nihil  umquam  tibi  dicam 
Eodem  tempore  et  instigat  et  ipse  se  certamini 
pugnaeque  subtrahit.  Qui  dicere  tibi  nisi  clam  non 
vult,  paene  non  dicit.  Quid  est  iniquius  quam 
secreto  credere,  palam  irasci  ? 

1  30.  Quorundam  ipsi  testes  sumus  ;  in  his  naturam 
excutiemus  voluntatemque  facientium.  Puer  est ; 
aetati  donetur,  nescit  an  peccet.  Pater  est ;  aut 
tantum  profuit,  ut  ilU  etiam  iniuriae  ius  sit,  aut 
fortasse  ipsum  hoc  meritum  eius  est  quo  ofFendimur. 
Mulier  est ;  errat.  lussus  est ;  necessitati  quis  nisi 
iniquus  suscenset  ?  Laesus  est ;  non  est  iniuria  pati 
quod  prior  feceris.  ludex  est ;  plus  credas  ilhus 
sententiae  quam  tuae.     Rex  est ;  si  nocentem  punit, 

230 


i 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXIX.  3-xxx.  1 

would  grant  to  both  parties  the  right  of  process, 
you  would  allow  them  time,  you  would  give  more 
than  one  hearing  ;  for  the  oftener  you  come  to 
close  quarters  vnih  truth,  the  more  it  becomes 
manifest.  Do  you  condemn  a  friend  on  the  spot  ? 
Will  you  be  angry  >;\-ith  him  before  you  hear  his  side, 
before  you  question  him,  before  he  has  a  chance  to 
know  either  his  accuser  or  the  charge  ?  What,  have 
you  already  heard  what  is  to  be  said  on  both  sides  ? 
The  man  who  gave  you  the  information  will  of  his 
own  accord  stop  talking  if  he  is  forced  to  prove  what 
he  says.  "  No  need  to  drag  me  forward,"  he  says  ;  "if 
I  am  brought  forward  I  shall  make  denial  ;  other- 
wise, I  shall  never  tell  you  anything."  At  one  and 
the  same  time  he  both  goads  you  on  and  ^\-ithdraws 
himself  from  the  strife  and  the  battle.  The  man 
who  is  un^^ilBng  to  tell  you  anything  except  in 
secret  has,  we  may  almost  say,  nothing  to  tell.  \\'hat 
is  more  unfair  than  to  give  credence  secretly  but  to 
be  a.ngrj  openly  ? 

To  some  offences  we  can  bear  witness  ourselves  ; 
in  such  cases  we  shall  search  into  the  character  and 
the  purpose  of  the  offender.  Does  a  child  offend  ? 
Excuse ^sllbuld  be  made  for  his  age — he  does  not 
know  what  is  A\Tong.  A  father  ?  Either  he  has 
beeir"s?J'goad"to  us  that  he  has  the  right  even  to 
injure  us,  or  mayhap  the  very  act  which  offends  us 
is  really  a  serAice.  A  woman  ?  It  was  a  blunder.  -^ 
Some  one  under  orders  ?  WTiat  fair-minded  person 
chafes  against  the  ine\itable  ?  Some  one  who  has  been 
wronged  ?  There  is  no  injustice  in  your  having  to 
submit  to  that  which  you  were  the  first  to  inflict. 
Is  it  a  judge  ?  You  should  trust  his  opinion  more 
than  your  own.     Is  it  a  king  ?     If  he  punishes  you 


SENECA 

2  cede  iustitiae,  si  innocentem,  cede  fortunae.  Mutum 
animal  est  aut  simile  muto  ;  imitaris  illud,  si  irasceris. 
Morbus  est  aut  calamitas ;  levius  transiliet  sus- 
tinentem.  Deus  est ;  tarn  perdis  operam  cum  illi 
irasceris,  quam  cum  ilium  alteri  precaris  iratum. 
Bonus  vir  est  qui  iniuriam  fecit  ;  noli  credere. 
Malus  ;  noli  mirari ;  dabit  poenas  altei-i  quas  debet 
tibi,  et  iam  sibi  dedit  qui  peccavit. 

1  31.  Duo  sunt,  ut  dixi,  quae  iracundiam  concitent : 
primum,  si  iniuriam  videmur  accepisse — de  hoc  satis 
dictum  est;  deinde,  si  iniqiie  accepisse  —  de  hoc 
dicendum  est.  Iniqua  quaedam  iudicant  homines, 
quia  pati  non  debuerint,  quaedam,  quia  non  spera- 
verint.     Indigna    putamus     quae    inopinata    sunt ; 

2  itaque  maxime  commovent,  quae  contra  spem  ex- 
pectationemque  evenerunt,  nee  aliud  est  quare  in 
domesticis    minima    ofFendant,    in    amicis'    iniuriam 

3  vocemus  neglegentiam.  "  Quomodo  ergo,"  inquit, 
"  inimicorum  nos  iniuriae  movent  ?  "  Quia  non  ex- 
pectavimus  illas  aut  certe  non  tantas.  Hoc  efficit 
amor  nostri  nimius.  Inviolatos  nos  etiam  inimicis 
iudicamus  esse  debere  ;  regis  quisque  intra  se  animum 

4  habet,  ut  hcentiam  sibi  dari  velit,  in  se  nolit.  Itaque 
nos  aut  insolentia  iracundos  facit  aut  ignorantia 
rerum  ;    quid  enim  mirum  est  malos  mala  facinora 

232 


1 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xx\.  2-xxxi.  4 

when  you  are  guilt}',  submit  to  justice,  if  when  you   — 
are-innncent^-  submit  to  fortune.     A  dumb  animal 
perhaps,  or  something  just  as  dumb  ?     You  become 
hke  it  if  you  get  angr}-.     Is  it  a  sickness  or  a  mis- 
fortune ?     It  will  pass  by  more  Ughtly  if  you  bear 
up   under  it.     Is  it   God  ?     You  waste  your  pains 
when  you  become  angry  ^\-ith  him  as  much  as  when  _- 
yoiTpray  himrto  be  angry  with  another.     Is  it  a  good  i 
man~who  hasdone  you  injury  ?     Do  not  beheve  it. 
A  bad  man  ?     Do  not  be  surprised  ;    he  aWII  suffer 
from  another  the  punisliment  which  is  due  from  vou,  _,         ^ 
and  he  who  has  sinned  has  already  punished  himself.  '' 

Thfere  are,  as  I  have  said,  two  conditions  under 
which  anger  is  aroused  :  first,  if  we  think  that  we 
have  received  an  injury — about  this  enough  has  been 
said ;  second,  if  we  think  that  we  have  received  it  )>ivt»ce  t 
unjusth'=^about  this  something  must  now  be  said,  ^•'m  t 
Men  judge  some  happenings  to  be  unjust  because 
they  did  not  deserve  them,  some  merely  because 
they  did  not  expect  them.  \Miat  is  unexpected  we 
count  undesened.  And  so  we  are  mightily  stirred 
by  all  that  happens  contrary  to  hope  and  expectation, 
and  fHIs^is  the  only  reason  why  in  domestic  affairs  we 
are  vexed  i>T  trifles,  why  in  the  case  of  friends  we  call 
neglect  a  wTong.  "  Why,  then,"  you  query,  "  do 
the  ^\Tongs  done  by  our  enemies  stir  us  ?  "  Because 
we  did  not  expect  them,  or  at  any  rate  not  MTongs 
so  serious.  This,  in  turn,  is  due  to  excessive  self- 
love.  We  decide  that  we  ought  not  to  be  harmed 
even  by  our  enemies  ;  each  one  in  his  heart  has 
the  king's  point  of  view,  and  is  -wilhng  to  use  Ucence, 
but  umnlling  to  suffer  from  it.  And  so  it^is  either 
arrogance  or  ignorance  that  makes  us  prone  to 
anger  ;   for  what  is  there  surprising  in  A^icked  men's 

233 


SENECA 

edere  ?  Quid  novi  est,  si  inimicus  nocet,  amicus 
offendit,  filius  labitur,  servus  peccat  ?  Turpissimam 
aiebat  Fabius  imperatori  excusationem  esse  :  "  Non 
putavi,"  ego  turpissimam  homini  puto.  Omnia  puta, 
expecta  ;    etiam  in  bonis  moribus   aliquid  exsistet 

5  asperius.  Fert  humana  natura  insidiosos  animos, 
fert  ingratos,  fert  cupidos,  fert  impios.  Cum  de 
unius  moribus  iudicabis,  de  publicis  cogita. 

Ubi  maxime  gaudebis,  maxime  metues.  Ubi 
tranquilla  tibi  omnia  videntur,  ibi  nocitura  non 
desunt  sed  quiescunt.  Semper  futurum  aliquid 
quod  te  offendat  existima.  Gubernator  numquam 
ita  totos  sinus  securus  explicuit,  ut  non  expedite 

6  ad  contrahendum  armamenta  disponeret.  Illud 
ante  omnia  cogita,  foedam  esse  et  exsecrabilem  vim 
nocendi  et  alienissimam  homini,  cuius  beneficio  etiam 
saeva  mansuescunt.  Aspice  elephantorum  iugo 
colla  summissa  et  taurorum  pueris  pariter  ac  feminis 
persultantibus  terga  impune  calcata  et  repentis  inter 
pocula  sinusque  innoxio  lapsu  dracones  et  intra 
domum  ursorum  leonumque  ora  placida  tractantibus 
adulantisque  dominum  feras ;   pudebit  cum  anima- 

7  libus  permutasse  mores.  Nefas  est  nocere  patriae  ; 
ergo  civi  quoque,  nam  hie  pars  patriae  est — sanctae 
partes  sunt,  si  universum  venerabile  est,  —  ergo  et 
homini,  nam  hie  in  maiore  tibi  urbe  civis  est.     Quid 

<•  Cf.  Pliny,  iVa«.  Hist.  viii.  2.  4 :  "  Romae  iuncti  primum 
subiere  currum  Pompei  Magni  Africano  triumpho." 
"  Gf.  Martial  v.  31.  1-4: 

aspice  quam  placidis  insultet  turba  iuvencis 
et  sua  quam  facilis  pondera  taurus  amet ; 
cornibus  hie  pendet  summis,  vagus  ille  per  armos 
currit  et  in  toto  ventilat  arma  bove. 

«  i.e.,  by  letting  anger  turn  us  into  brutes,  which  are 
naturally  fierce. 
234 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXI.  4-7 

practising  wicked  deeds  ?  WTiy  is  it  strange  if  an 
enemy  injures  us,  a  friend  offends  us,  a  son  errs,  or 
a  servant  blunders  ?  Fabius  used  to  say  that  tlxe 
excuse,  "  I  did  not  think,"  was  the  one  most  shame- 
ful for  a  commander  ;  I  think  it  most  shameful  for 
any  man.  Think  of  everything,  expect  everything  ; 
even  in  good  characters  some  unevenness  will  appear. 
Human  nature  begets  hearts  that  are  deceitful,  that 
are  ungrateful,  that  are  covetous,  that  are  undutiful. 
When  you  are  about  to  pass  judgement  on  one  single 
man's  character,  reflect  upon  the  general  mass. 

WTien  you  are  about  to  rejoice  most,  you  will  have 
most  to  fear.  When  everything  seems  to  you  to  be 
peaceful,  the  forces  that  will  harm  are  not  non- 
existent, but  inactive.  Alwa^:§__belieye  that  there 
will  come  some  blow  to  strike  you.  No  skipper  is 
ever^s"o  reckless  as  to  unfurl  all  his  canvas  without 
having  his  tackle  in  order  for  quickly  shortening  sail. 
AbQX£_^all,  bear  this  in  mind,  that  the  power  of  hijury 
is  \il^an(l  (kt ratable  and  most  unnatural  for  man,  by 
whose  kindness  even  fierce  beasts  are  tamed.  Look 
how~eIepHants  "  submit  their  necks  to  the  yoke,  how 
boys  and  women  alike  leap  upon  bulls  ^  and  tread 
their  backs  unhurt,  how  serpents  crawl  in  harmless 
course  among  our  cups  and  over  our  laps,  how  gentle 
are  the  faces  of  bears  and  lions  when  their  trainers 
are  inside  their  cages,  and  how  wild  beasts  fawn 
upon  their  keeper — we  shall  blush  to  have  ex- 
changed characters  with  the  beasts'^!  To  injure 
one's  country  is  a  crime  ;  consequently,  also,  to  injure 
a  fellow-citizen — ^for  he  is  a  part  of  the  country,  and 
if  we  reverence  the  whole,  the  parts  are  sacred — con- 
sequently to  injure  any  man  is  a  crime,  for  he  is  your 
fellow-citizen  in  the  greater  commonwealth.     \\Tiat 

235 


SENECA 

si  nocere  velint  manus  pedibus,  manibus  oculi  ? 
Ut  omnia  inter  se  membra  consentiunt,  quia  singula 
servari  totius  interest,  ita  homines  singulis  parcent, 
quia  ad  coetum  geniti  sunt,  salva  autem  esse  societas 
8  nisi  custodia  et  amore  partium  non  potest.  Ne 
viperas  quidem  et  natrices,  et  si  qua  morsu  aut  ictu 
nocent,  effligeremus,  si  in  reliquum  mansuefacere 
possemus  aut  efficere,  ne  nobis  aliisve  periculo  essent. 
Ergo  ne  homini  quidem  nocebimus,  quia  peccavit, 
sed  ne  peccet,  nee  umquam  ad  praeteritum,  sed  ad 
futurum  poena  referetur  ;  non  enim  irascitur,  sed 
cavet.  Nam  si  puniendus  est  cuicumque  pravum 
maleficumque  ingenium  est,  poena  neminem  excipiet. 

1  32.  "  At  enim  ira  habet  aliquam  voluptatem  et 
dulce  est  dolorem  reddere."  Minime  ;  non  enim  ut 
in  beneficus  honestum  est  merita  meritis  repensare, 
ita  iniurias  iniuriis.  IlUc  vinci  turpe  est,  hie  vincere. 
Inhumanum  verbum  est  et  quidem  pro  iusto  recep- 
tum  ultio,  et  talio  non  multum  difFert^  nisi  ordine  ; 
qui    dolorem    regerit    tantum    excusatius    peecat. 

2  M.  Catonem  ignorans^  in  balineo  quidam  percussit 
imprudens  ;  quis  enim  illi  sciens  faceret  iniuriam  ? 
Postea  satis  facienti  Cato  :    "  Non  memini,"  inquit, 


^  et  quidem  .  .  .  difFert  AL  :  ultio  et  deleted  by  most 
editors  :  et  vitiose  quidem  pro  iusto  receptum,  talio.  pro- 
posed by  Qertz :  et  quidem  pro  iusta  receptum  ultione 
"  talio."  Non  multum  difFert  nisi  ordine,  qui  dolorem 
regerit :  P.  Thomas, 

^  ignorans  most  editors  consider  a  gloss  on  imprudens. 


"  In  the  code  of  the  XII.  Tables  talio  is  the  Mosaic  "an 
eye  for  an  eje,"  and  ultio  {dolorem  reg.rere),  says  Seneca, 
is  merely  a  more  excusable  form  of  this  savage  law, 

236 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXI.  7-xxxii.  2 

if  the  hands  should  desire  to  harm  the  feet,  or  the 
eyes  the  hands  ?  As  all  the  members  of  the  body 
are  in  harmony  one  \\'ith  another  because  it  is  to  the 
advantage  of  the  whole  that  the  indi\'idual  members 
be  unharmed,  so  mankind  should  spare  the  individual 
man,  because  all  are  bom  for  a  Ufe  of  fellowship,  and 
socielEy  can  be  kept  unharmed  only  by  the  mutual 
protection  and  love  of  its  parts.  We  would  not 
erusK~even  a  \'iper  or  a  water-snake  or  any  other 
creature  that  harms  by  bite  or  sting  if  we  could 
make  them  kindly  in  future,  or  keep  them  from  being 
a  source  of  danger  to  ourselves  and  others.  Neither, 
therefore,  shall  we  injure  a  man  because  he  has  done 
wrong,  but  in  order  to  keep  him  from  doing  \^Tong, 
and  his  punishment  shall  never  look  to  the  past,  but 
always  to  the  future  ;  for  that  course  is  not  anger, 
but  precaution.  For  if  every  one  whose  nature  is  evil 
and^epraved  must  be  punished,  punishment  will 
exempt  no  one. 

"  BuL-of  course,  tkere.  is  .some  pleasure  in  anger," 
you  gay,  "  and  it  is  sweet  to  return  a  smart."  Not  at 
all ;  for  it  is  not  honourable,  as  in  acts  of  kindness  to 
requite  benefits  v\ith  benefits,  so  to  requite  injuries 
with  injuries.  In  the  one  case  it  is  shameful  to  be 
outdone,  in  the  other  not  to  be  outdone.  "  Revenge  " 
is  an  inhuman  word  and  yet  one  accepted  as  legiti- 
mate, and  "  retahation "  is  not  much  different 
except  in  rank ;  the  man  who  returns  a  smart 
commits  merely  the  more  pardonable  sin."  Once 
when  Marcus  Cato  was  in  the  pubhc  bath,  a  certain 
man,  not  knowing  him,  struck  him  unvvittingly  ;  for 
who  would  knovvingly  have  done  injury  to  that 
great  man  ?  Later,  when  the  man  was  making 
apology,  Cato  said,  "  I  do  not  recall  that  I  received 

2.S7 


SENECA 

"  me  percussum."  Melius  putavit  non  agnoscere 
3  quam  vindicare.  "  Nihil,"  inquis,  "  illi  post  tantam 
petulantiam  mali  factum  est  ?  "  Immo  multum 
boni ;  coepit  Catonem  nosse.  Magni  animi  est 
iniurias  despieere  ;  ultionis  contumeliosissimum  genus 
est  non  esse  visum  dignum,  ex  quo  peteretur  ultio. 
Multi  leves  iniurias  altius  sibi  demisere,  dum  vindi- 
cant.  Ille  magnus  et  nobilis,  qui  more  magnae 
ferae  latratus  minutorum  canum  securus  exaudit. 

1  33.  "  Minus,"  inquit,  "  contemnemur,  si  vindi- 
caverimus  iniuriam."  Si  tamquam  ad  remedium 
venimus,  sine  ira  veniamus,  non  quasi  dulce  sit 
vindicari,  sed  quasi  utile  ;  saepe  autem  satius  fuit 
dissimulare  quam  ulcisci.  Potentiorum  iniuriae 
hilari  vultu,  non  patienter  tantum  ferendae  sunt ; 
facient  iterum,  si  se  fecisse  crediderint.  Hoc  habent 
pessimum    animi   magna   fortuna   insolentes :    quos 

2  laeserunt  et  oderunt.  Notissima  vox  est  eius  qui 
in  cultu  regum  consenuerat.  Cum  ilium  quidam 
interrogaret,  quomodo  rarissimam  rem  in  aula  con- 
secutus  esset,  senectutem :  "  Iniurias,"  inquit,  "  ac- 
cipiendo  et  gratias  agendo."  Saepe  adeo  iniuriam 
vindicare  non  expedit,  ut  ne  fateri  quidem  expediat. 

3  C.  Caesar  Pastoris  splendidi  equitis  Romani  filium 
cum  in  custodia  habuisset  munditiis  eius  et  cul- 
238 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXII.  2-xxxiii.  3 

a  blow."  It  was  better,  he  thought,  to  ignore  the 
incident  than  to  resent  it.  "  Then  the  fellow,"  you 
ask,  "got  no  punishment  for  such  an  act  of  rudeness?" 
No,  but  much  good — he  began  to  know  Cato.  Onlv-^ 
a  great  soul  can  be  superior  to  injur}'^ ;  the  most 
hurmliating  kind  of  revenge  is  to  have  it  appear  that 
the  man  was  not  worth  taking  revenge  upon.  Many 
have  taken  slight  injuries  too  deeply  to  heart  in  the 
act  of  revenging  them.  He  is  a  great  and  noble  man 
who  acts  as  does  the  lordly  ■s\'ild  beast  that  Ustens 
unconcernedly  to  the  bajnng  of  tiny  dogs. 

"  iTvce^avenge  an  injury,"  you  say,  "  we  shall  be 
less  ^bjecFTo-fconternpt."  If  we  must  resort  to  a 
reriae3v,  as  if  were,  for  contempt,  let  us  do  so  ^vithout 
anger— ^not  with  the  plea  that  revenge  is  sweet,  but 
that  it  is  expedient  ;  it  is  often,  however,  better  to 
feigtr^gnoranee  of  an  act  than  to  take  vengeance  for 
it.  Injuries  from  the  more  powerful  must  be  borne, 
not  merely  with  submission,  but  even  with  a  cheerful 
countenance  ;  they  will  repeat  the  offence  if  they  are 
con\Tnced  that  they  have  succeeded  once.  Men 
whose  spirit  has  gro>\'n  arrogant  from  the  great 
favour  of  fortune  have  this  most  serious  fault — those 
whom  they  have  injured  they  also  hate.  The  words 
of  the  man  who  had  grown  old  in  doing  homage  to 
kings  are  famihar  to  all.  \Vlien  some  one  asked 
him  how  he  had  attained  what  was  so  rarely  achieved 
at  court;  namely  old  age,  he  replied,  "  By  accepting 
injuries  and  returning  thanks  for  them."  So  far  from 
its  being  expedient  to  avenge  injuries,  it  is  often 
inexpedient  even  to  acknowledge  them.  Gaius 
Caesar,  offended  with  the  son  of  Pastor,  a  dis- 
tinguished Roman  knight,  because  of  his  foppishness 
and  his  too  elaborately  dressed  hair,  sent  him  to 

239 


SENECA 

tioribus  capillis  offensus,  rogante  patre  ut  salutein 
sibi  filii  concederet,  quasi  de  supplicio  admonitus 
duci  protinus  iussit  ;  ne  tamen  omnia  inhumane 
faceret  adversum  patrem,   ad  cenam  ilium   eo   die 

4  invitavit.  Venit  Pastor  vultu  nihil  exprobrante. 
Propinavit  ilh  Caesar  heminam  et  posuit  ilH  custodem; 
perduravit  miser,  non  ahter  quam  si  fih  sanguinem 
biberet.  Unguentum  et  coronas  misit  et  observare 
iussit  an  sumeret ;  sumpsit.  Eo  die,  quo  filium 
extulerat,  immo  quo  non  extulerat,  iacebat  conviva 
centesimus  et  potiones  vix  honestas  natalibus  libe- 
rorum  podagricus  senex  hauriebat,  cum  interim  non 
lacrimam  emisit,  non  dolorem  aliquo  signo  erumpere 
passus  est ;    cenavit  tamquam  pro  fiho  exorasset. 

5  Quaeris,  quare  ?  Habebat  alterum.  Quid  ille 
Priamus  ?  Non  dissimulavit  iram  et  regis  genua 
complexus  est,  funestam  perfusamque  cruore  fiH 
manum  ad  os  suum  retulit,  cenavit  ?  Sed  tamen 
sine  unguento,  sine  coronis,  et  ilium  hostis  saevis- 
simus  multis  solaciis,  ut  cibum  caperet,  hortatus  est, 
non  ut  pocula  ingentia  super  caput  posito  custode 

6  sicearet.  Contempsisses^  Romanum  patrem,  si  sibi 
timuisset ;  nunc  iram  compescuit  pietas.  Dignus 
fuit  cui  permitteretur  a  convivio  ad  ossa  fili  legenda 

^  contempsisses  Hermes,  after  Gertz  :  contempsisset  AL. 


"  Cf.  Iliad,  xxiv.  477-479,  for  the  incident.  Achilles  had 
slain  Hector,  and  P.riam,  a  suppliant  in  the  lodge  of  the 
victor,  now  seeks  to  ransom  the  body  of  his  son. 

240 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXIII.  3-6 

prison  ;  when  the  father  begged  that  his  son's  life 
might  be  spared,  Caesar,  just  as  if  he  had  been 
reminded  to  punish  him,  ordered  him  to  be  executed 
forth^\-ith  ;  yet  in  order  not  to  be  wholly  brutal  to 
the  father,  he  in\-ited  him  to  dine  with  him  that  day. 
Pastor  actually  came  and  showed  no  reproach  in  his 
countenance.  Caesar,  taking  a  cup,  proposed  his 
health  and  set  some  one  to  watch  him  ;  the  poor 
>\Tetch  went  through  ^\ith  it,  although  he  seemed  to 
be  drinking  the  blood  of  his  son.  Caesar  then  sent 
him  perfume  and  garlands  of  flowers  and  gave  orders 
to  watch  whether  he  used  them  :  he  used  them. 
On  the  very  day  on  which  he  had  buried — no,  before 
he  had  yet  buried — his  son,  he  took  his  place  among 
a  hundred  dinner-guests,  and,  old  and  gouty  as  he 
was,  drained  a  draught  of  wine  that  would  scarce  have 
been  a  seemly  potion  even  on  the  birthday  of  one 
of  his  children,  all  the  while  shedding  not  a  single 
tear  nor  by  any  sign  suffering  his  grief  to  be  revealed  ; 
at  ihe  dinner_he.  acted  as  if  he  had  obtained  the 
pardonTie  had  sought  for  lii^  ^on.  Do  you  ask  why  ? 
He^jad"a  sccdncTson .  And  what  did  great  Priam  do  ? 
DioTie  not  disguise  his  anger  and  embrace  the  knees 
of  the  klfig?  Did  he  not  carry  to  his  lips  the  murder- 
ous liaiid  all  stained  with  the  blood  of  his  son?" 
Did  he  not  dine  ?  True,  but  there  was  no  perfume 
for  liim,  no  garlands,  and  his  bloodthirsty  enemy 
with  many  soft  words  pressed  him  to  take  food,  and 
did  not  force  him  to  cbain  huge  beakers  while  some 
one  stood  over  him  to  watch.  The  Roman  father  you 
would  have  despised  if  hi-  fears  had  been  for  himself  ; 
as  it  was.  affection  curbed  his  anger.  He  deserved 
to  be  permitted  to  leave  tl\e  banquet  in  order  that 
he  might  gather  up  the  bones  of  his  son,  but  that 
VOL  I  R  241 


SENECA 

discedere  ;  ne  hoc  quidem  permisit  benignus  interim 
et  comis  adulescens  ;  propinationibiis  senem  crebris, 
ut  cura  leniretur  admonens,  lacessebat ;  contra  ille 
se  laetum  et  oblitum,  quid  eo  actum  esset  die, 
praestitit.  Perierat  alter  filius,  si  carnifici  conviva 
non  placuisset. 

1  34.  Ergo  ira  abstinendum  est,  sive  par  est  qui 
lacessendus  est  sive  superior  sive  inferior.  Cum 
pare  contendere  anceps  est,  cum  superiore  furiosum, 
cum  inferiore  sordidum.  Pusilli  hominis  et  miseri 
est  repetere  mordentem.  Mures  formicaeque,  si 
manum   admoveris,    ora    convertunt ;     imbecillia  se 

2  laedi  putant,  si  tanguntur.  Faciet  nos  mitiores,  si 
cogitaverimus,  quid  aliquando  nobis  profuerit  ille 
cui  irascimur,  et  meritis  offensa  redimetur.  Illud 
quoque  occurrat,  quantum  nobis  commendationis 
allatura   sit   clementiae   fama,   quam   multos   venia 

3  amicos  utiles  fecerit.  Ne  irascamur  inimicorum  et 
hostium  liberis,  inter  SuUanae  crudelitatis  exempla 
est,  quod  ab  re  publica  liberos  proscriptorum  sub- 
movit.     Nihil  est  iniquius  quam  aliquem  heredem 

4  paterni  odii  fieri.  Cogitemus,  quotiens  ad  ignoscen- 
dum  difficiles  erimus,  an  expediat  nobis  omnes 
inexorabiles  esse.  Quam  saepe  veniam  qui  negavit 
petit !  Quam  saepe  eius  pedibus  advolutus  est, 
quem    a  suis  reppulit !     Quid   est  gloriosius   quam 

242 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXIII.  fr-.xxxiv.  4 

stripling  prince,  all  the  while  so  kindly  and  polite, 
did  not  permit  even  this  ;  pledging  the  old  man's 
health  again  and  again,  he  tortured  him  by  m-ging 
him  to  lighten  his  sorrow,  while  on  the  other  hand 
the  father  made  a  show  of  being  happy  and  obh\ious 
of  all  that  had  been  done  that  day.  The  other  . 
son  was  doomed,  had  the  guest  displeased  the  -4 — 
executioner. 

We  must,  therefore,  refrain  from  anger,  whether 
he  I)e~aii  equ»l— of  a  supn4or'-t)T  an~iTifertor  who 
provo^s  its  power.  A  contest  ^^ith  one's  equal  is 
hazardous,  with  a  superior  mad,  with  an  inferior 
degraHing.  It  is  a  petty  and  sorry  person  who  will 
bile  J2ack^\yhen  he  is  bitten.  Mice  and  ants,  if  you 
bring  your  hand  near  them,  do  turn  at  you  ;  feeble 
creatures  think  they  are  hurt  if  they  are  only  touched. 
It  will  make  us  more  kindly  if  we  remember  the 
benefit  we  once  received  from  him  who  now  provokes 
our  anger,  and  let  his  kindnesses  atone  for  his  offence. 
Let  us  jilso  bear  in  mind  how  much  approval  we  shall 
gain  from  a  reputatTon  for  forbearance,  how  many 
have  been  made  useful  friends  through  forgiveness. 
From  the  examples  of  Sulla's  cruelty  comes  the 
less^i  ■  that— we^  should  feel  no  anger  toward  the 
chilclren  of  pergonal  and  political  enemies,  since  he 
remcjved  from  the  state  even  the  children  of  the 
proscribed.  Tliere  is  no  greater  injustice  than  to 
make  a  man  the  inheritor  of  hatred  borne  toward  his 
father.  Whenever  we  are  loth  to  pardon,  let  us 
consider  whether  we  ourselves  should  benefit  if  all 
men  were  inexorable.  How  often  has  he  who  refused 
forgiveness  sought  it  !  How  often  has  he  grovelled 
at  the  feet  of  the  man  whom  he  had  repulsed  from 
his  o\vn  !     WTxat  is  more  splendid  than  to  exchange 

243 


SENECA 

iram  amicitia  mutare  ?  Quos  populus  Romanus 
fideliores  habet  socios  quam  quos  habuit  pertina- 
cissimos  hostes  ?  Quod  hodie  esset  imperium,  nisi 
salubris  providentia  victos  permiscuisset  victoribus  ? 
5  Irascetur  aliquis  ;  tu  contra  beneficiis  provoca. 
Cadit  statim  simultas  ab  altera  parte  deserta  ;  nisi 
paria  non  pugnant.  Sed  utrimque  certabit  ira, 
concurritur,  ille  est  melior  qui  prior  pedem  rettulit  ; 
victus  est  qui  vicit.  Percussit  te,  recede  ;  referiendo 
enim  et  occasionem  saepius  feriendi  dabis  et  ex- 
cusationem  ;   non  poteris  revelli,  cum  voles. 

1  35.  Numquid  velit  quisquam  tarn  graviter  hostem 
ferire,  ut  relinquat  manum  in  vulnere  et  se  ab  ictu 
revocare  non  possit  ?  Atqui  tale  ira  telum  est ; 
vix  retrahitur.  Arma  nobis  expedita  prospicimus, 
gladium  commodum  et  habilem  ;  non  vitabimus 
impetus    animi    istos^   graves    et   onerosos    et  irre- 

2  vocabiles  ?  Ea  demum  velocitas  placet,  quae  ubi 
iussa  est  vestigium  sistit  nee  ultra  destinata  pro- 
currit  flectique  et  a  cursu  ad  gradum  reduci  potest  ; 
aegros  scimus  nervos  esse,  ubi  invitis  nobis  moventur  ; 
senex  aut  infirmi  corporis  est,  qui  cum  ambulare 
vult  currit.  Animi  motus  eos  putemus  sanissimos 
validissimosque,  qui  nostro  arbitrio  ibunt,  non  suo 
ferentur. 

3  Nihil  tamen  aeque  profuerit  quam  primum  intueri 
deformitatem  rei,  deinde  periculum.     Non  est  ullius 

1  istos  Oertz  :  .  .  .  hos  A'^A^. 
244 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXIV.  4-xxx'\-.  3 

anger  for  friendship  ?  What— more  faithful  allies 
doe&^the  Roman  people  possess  than  those  who  were 
once  its  most  stubborn  foes  ?  WTiere  would  the 
empire~l5e  to-day  had  not  a  sound  foresight  united 
tho^victors  "and  the  vanquished  into  one  ?  Does  a 
man  get  angry  ?  Do  you  on  the  contrary  challenge 
hina  with  kindness.  Animosit}^  if  abandoned  by 
one  side,  forthwith  dies  ;  it  takes  two  to  make  a 
fight.  But  if  anger  shall  be  rife  on  both  sides,  if  the 
conflict  comes,  he  is  the  better  man  who  first  with- 
dra\tsj.  the  vanquished  is  the  one  who  \\-ins.  If 
some  one  strike-^  yuu.  step  back  ;  for  by  striking  back 
you^jwtti  gi^G  hiiu  lx>th  the  opportunity  and  the 
excuse  to  repeat  lu<  blow  ;  when  you  later  wish  to 
extalcSltEryDUrself,  it  will  be  impossible. 

WouljJ^any  one  want  to  stab  an  enemy  ^^ith  such 
force  as  to~Teave  hi?  oa^ti  hand  in  the  wound  and  be 
unable  to  recover  himself  from  the  blow  ?  But  such 
a  weapon  is  anger  ;  it  is  hard  to  draw  back.  We 
take  care  to  have  light  arms,  a  handy  and  nimble 
sword  ;  shall  we  not  avoid  those  mental  outbursts 
that  are  clumsy,  unwieldy,  and  beyond  control  ? 
The  only  desirable  speed  is  that  which  ^v^ll  check  its 
pace  when  ordered,  which  will  not  rush  past  the 
appointed  goal,  and  can  be  altered  and  reduced  from 
running  to  a  walk  ;  when  our  muscles  t^\•itch  against 
our  ^^'ill,  we  know  that  they  are  diseased  ;  he  who 
runs  when  he  tries  to  walk  is  either  old  or  broken  in 
body.  In  the  operations  of  the  mind  we  should 
deem  those  to  be  the  sanest  and  the  soundest  which 
will  start  at  our  pleasure,  not  rush  on  at  their  o^vn. 
Nothing,  however,  \vill  prove  as  profitable  as  to  con- 
sider first  the  hideousness  of  the  thing,  and  then  its 
danger.     No  other  emotion  has  an  outward  aspect 

2i5 


SENECA 

adfectus  facies  turbatior  ;  pulcherrima  ora  foedavit, 
torvos  vultus  ex  tranquillissimis  reddit ;  linquit 
decor  omnis  iratos,  et  sive  amictus  illis  compositus 
est  ad  legem,  trahent  vestem  omnemque  curam  sui 
effundent,  sive  capillorum  natura  vel  arte  iacentium 
non  informis  habitus,  cum  animo  inhorrescunt ; 
tumescunt  venae  ;  concutietur  crebro  spiritu  pectus, 
rabida  vocis  eruptio  colla  distendet ;  turn  artus 
trepidi,  inquietae  manus,  totius  corporis  fluctuatio. 

4  Qualem  intus  putas  esse  animum,  cuius  extra  imago 
tam  foeda  est  ?  Quanto  illi  intra  pectus  terribilior 
vultus  est,  acrior  spiritus,  intentior  impetus,  rupturus 

6  se  nisi  eruperit !  Quales  sunt  hostium  vel  ferarum  I 
caede  madentium  aut  ad  caedem  euntium  aspectus, 
qualia  poetae  inferna  monstra  finxerunt  succincta 
serpentibus  et  igneo  flatu,  quales  ad  bella  excitanda 
discordiamque  in  populos  dividendam  pacemque 
lacerandam  teterrimae  inferum  exeunt  :  talem 
nobis  iram  figuremus,  flamma  lumina  ardentia, 
sibilo  mugituque  et  gemitu  et  stridore  et  si  qua  his 
invisior  vox  est  perstrepentem,  tela  manu  utraque 
quatientem  (neque  enim  ilh  se  tegere  curae  est), 
torvam  cruentamque  et  cicatricosam  et  verberibus 
suis  hvidam,  incessus  vaesani,  ofFusam  multa  caligine, 
incursitantem,  vastantem  fugantemque  et  omnium 
odio  laborantem,  sui  maxiine,  si  aliter  nocere  non 
possit,  terras,  maria,  caelum  ruere  cupientem, 
246 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXV.  3-5 

so  disordered:  it-jnakes^  ugly  the  most  beautiful  ^«<]f^'"  <-< 
faces4^  through  it  the  most  peaceful  countenance 
becomes  transformed  and  fierce  ;  from  the  angry  all 
grace  departs  ;  if  they  were  well-kempt  and  modish 
in  their  dress,  they  A\-ill  let  their  clothing  trail  and 
cast  off  all  regard  for  their  person  ;  if  their  hair  was 
disposed  by  nature  or  by  art  in  smooth  and  becoming 
style,  it  bristles  up  in  sympathy  ^^•ith  their  state  of 
mind  ;  the  veins  swell,  the  breast  \\i\\  be  racked 
by  incessant  panting,  the  neck  will  be  distended 
by  the  frantic  outrush  of  the  voice  ;  then  the  limbs 
tremble,  the  hands  are  restless,  the  whole  body  is 
agitated.  What  state  of  mind,  think  you,  lies  within 
when  its  out warxT  manifestation  is  so  horrible  ? 
Within  the  man's  breast  how  much  more  terrible 
must  be  the  expression,  how  much  fiercer  the  breath- 
ing, how  much  more  \iolent  the  strain  of  his  fury, 
that  would  itself  burst  unless  it  found  an  outburst  ! 
As  is  the  aspect  of  an  enemy  or  wild  beasts  wet  with 
the  blood  of  slaughter  or  bent  upon  slaughter  ;  as  are 
the  helHsh  monsters  of  the  poet's  brain,  all  girt  about 
with  snakes  and  breathing  fire ;  as  are  those  most 
hideous  shapes  that  issue  forth  from  hell  to  stir  up 
wars  and  scatter  discord  among  the  peoples  and 
tear  peace  all  to  shreds  ;  as  such  let  us  picture  anger — 
its  eyes  aflame  with  fire,  blustering  with  hiss  and 
roar  and  moan  and  sltriek  and  every  other  noise 
more  hateful  still  if  such  there  be,  brandishing 
weapons  in  both  hands  (for  it  cares  naught  for  self- 
protection  I),  fierce  and  bloody,  scarred,  and  black 
and  blue  from  its  own  blows,  wild  in  gaitl  enveloped 
in  deep  darkness,  madly  charging,  ravaging  and  rout- 
ing, in  travail  with  hatred  of  all  men,  especially  of 
itself,  and  ready  to  overturnearth  and  sea  and  sky 

247 


SENECA 

6  infestam  pariter  invisamque.  Vel,  si  videtur,  sit 
qualis  apud  vates  nostros  est  : 

Sanguineum  quatiens  dextra  Bellona  flagellum, 
aut  scissa  gaudens  vadit  Discordia  palla, 

aut  si  qua  magis  dira  facies  excogitari  diri  adfectus 
potest. 

1  36.  Quibusdam,  ut  ait  Sextius,  iratis  profuit 
aspexisse  speculum  ;  perturbavit  illos  tanta  mutatio 
sui ;  velut  in  rem  praesentem  adducti  non  agnoverunt 
se.     Et  quantulum  ex  vera  deformitate  imago  ilia 

2  speculo  repercussa  reddebat  ?  Animus  si  ostendi 
et  si  in  ulla  materia  perlucere  posset,  intuentis  nos 
confunderet  ater  maculosusque  et  aestuans  et 
distortus  et  tumidus.  Nunc  quoque  tanta  de- 
formitas  eius  est  per  ossa  carnesque  et  tot  impe- 
dimenta  effluentis  ;     quid  si    nudus    ostenderetur  ? 

3  Speculo  quidem  neminem  deterritum  ab  ira  credi- 
deris  :  quid  ergo  est^  ?  Qui  ad  speculum  venerat, 
ut  se  mutaret,  iam  mutaverat  ;  iratis  quidem  nulla 
est  formonsior  effigies  quam  atrox  et  horrida,  quales- 
que  esse  etiam  videri  volunt. 

4  Magis  illud  videndum  est,  quam  multis  ira  per 
se  nocuerit.  Alii  nimio  fervore  rupere  venas  et 
sanguinem    supra    vires    elatus    clamor    egessit    et 

^  est  added  by  Gertz. 

"  An  adaptation  of  Virgil,  Aeneid,  viii.  702  sq.  : 
Et  scissa  gaudens  vadit  Discordia  palla, 
quam  cum  sanguineo  sequitur  Bellona  flagello, 

248 


ON  ANGER,  II.  XXXV.  &-xxx\'i.  4 

if  it^an  find  no  other  May  to  harm,  equally  hating  and 
hated.  Or7rryou"\rill,  let  us  take  the  picture  from 
our  poets  : 

Flaunting  her  bloody  scourge  the  War-dame  strides. 
Or  Discord  glorying  in  her  tattered  robe." 

Or  make  you  any  other  picture  of  this  dread  passion 
that  can  be  devised  still  more  dread. 

As  Sextius  remarks,  it  has  been  good  for  some 
people  to  see  themselves  in  a  mirror  while  they  are 
angry ;  the  great  change  in  themselves  alarmed 
them  ;  brought,  as  it  were,  face  to  face  -sWth  the 
reahty  they  did  not  recognize  themselves.  And  how 
little  of  the  real  ughness  did  that  image  reflected  in 
the  mirror  disclose  !  If  the  soul  could  be  sho\\Ti,  if 
it  were  in  some  substance  through  which  it  might 
shine^~Tts  black^  and  mottled,  inflamed,  distorted 
and  swollen  appearance  would  confound  us  as  we 
gazedjjpon  it.  Even  as  it  is,  though  it  can  only  come 
to  the  surface  through  flesh,  bones,  and  so  many 
obstacles,  its  hideousness  is  thus  great — what  if  it 
could  be  sho\vn  stark  naked  ?  You_  may  perhaps 
think  that  no  one  has  really  been  frightened  out  of 
anger~by  a  min-or.  Well,  what  then  ?  The  man 
who  had  gone  to  the  mirror  in  order  to  effect  a  change 
in  himself  was  already  a  changed  man  ;  while  men 
remain  angrj'  no  image  is  more  beautiful  than  one' 
which  is  fierce  and  savage,  and  such  as  they  are  they 
\\ish  also  to  appear. 

This,  rather,  is  ^^h^t  "w*^  f>"ght  to  r^flhVf^ — how 
many  men  anger  in  and  of  itself  has  injured.  Some 
through  too  much  passion  h4Ve  "blH'St  fReir  veins,  a 
shout  that  strains  our  strength  has  carried  with  it 
blood,  and  too  powerful  a  rush  of  tears  to  the  eyes 

249 


SENECA 

luminum  suffudit  aciem  in  oculos  vehementius  umor 
egestus  et  in  morbos  aegri  reccidere.     Nulla  celerior 

5  ad  insaniam  via  est.  Multi  itaque  continuaverunt 
irae  furorem  nee  quam  expulerant  mentem  umquam 
receperunt.  Aiacem  in  mortem  egit  furor,  in 
furorem  ira.  Mortem  liberis,  egestatem  sibi,  ruinam 
domui  imprecantur  et  irasci  se  negant  non  minus 
quam  insanire  furiosi.  Amicissimis  hostes  vitandique 
carissimis,  legum  nisi  qua  nocent  immemores,  ad 
minima  mobiles,  non  sermone,  non  officio  adiri  faciles, 
per  vim  omnia  gerunt,  gladiis  et  pugnare  parati  et 

6  incumbere.  Maximum  enim  illos  malum  cepit  et 
omnia  exsuperans  vitia.  Alia  paulatim  intrant, 
repentina  et  universa  vis  huius  est.  Omnis  denique 
alios  affeetus  sibi  subicit.  Amorem  ardentissimum 
vincit,  transfoderunt  itaque  amata  corpora  et  in 
eorum  quos  occiderant  iacuere  complexibus ;  avari- 
tiam,  durissimum  malum  minimeque  flexibile,  ira 
calcavit  adactam^  opes  suas  spargere  et  domui 
rebusque  in  unum  conlatis  inicere  ignem.  Quid  ? 
Non  ambitiosus  magno  aestimata  proiecit  insignia 
honoremque  delatum  reppulit  ?  Nullus  affeetus  est, 
in  quem  non  ira  dominetur, 

^  adactam  Michaelis  and  Gertz  :  adacta  A. 
<»  A  reference  to  Ajax's  act  of  self-destruction. 


250 


ON  ANGER,  II.  xxx\'i.  4-6 

has  blurred  tlie  sharpness  of  their  vision,  and  sickly- 
people  have  fallen  back  into  illnesses.  There  is  no 
quicker  road  to  madness.  Many,  therefore,  have 
continued  in  the  frenzy  of  anger,  and  have  never 
recovered  the  reason  that  had  been  unseated.  It  was 
frenzy  that  drove  Ajax  to  his  death  and  anger  drove 
him  into  frenzy.  These  all  call  down  death  upon 
their  cliildren,  poverty  upon  themselves,  destruction 
upon  their  house,  and  they  deny  that  they  are  angry 
just  as  the  frenzied  deny  that  they  are  mad.  They 
becorne  enemies  to  their  closest  friends  and  have  to 
be  shunned  by  those  most  dear ;  regardless  of  all 
law  except  as  a  means  to  injure,  swayed  by  trifles, 
difficult  to  approach  by  either  word  or  kindly  act, 
they  conduct  themselves  always  with  violence  and. 
are  ready  either  to  fight  with  the  sword  or  to 
fall  upon  it.*  For  the  fact  is  that  the  greatest  of  all 
e\"ilS74fce-^ee^that  surpasses  all  others,  has  laid  hold 
upoji,  them.  Other  ills  come  gi-adually,  but  the 
power  of  this  is  sudden  and  complete.  In  short,  it 
brings  into  subjection  all  other  passions.  It  con- 
quers the  most  ardent  love,  and  so  in  anger  men  have 
stabbed  the  bodies  that  they  loved  and  have  lain  in 
the  arms  of-those  whom  they  had  slain  ;  avarice,  the 
most  stubborn  and  unbending  e\il,  has  been  trodden 
under  foot  by  anger  after  being  forced  to  scatter  her 
wealth  and  to  set  fire  to  her  home  and  all  her  col- 
lected treasure.  Tell  me,  has  not  also  the  ambitious 
man  torn  off  the  highly  prized  insignia  of  his  office 
andr  rejected  the  honour  that  had  been  conferred? 
There  is  no  passion  of  any  kind  over  which  anger 
does  not  hold  mastery. 


251 


LIBER  V 

AD  NOVATVM 

DE  IRA 

LIBER   III 

1  1.  Quod  maxime  desiderasti,  Novate,  nunc  facere 
temptabimus,  iram  excidere  animis  aut  certe  re- 
frenare  et  impetus  eius  inhibere.  Id  aliquando 
palam  aperteque  faciendum  est,  ubi  minor  vis  mali 
patitur,  aliquando  ex  occulto,  ubi  nimium  ardet 
omnique  impedimento  exasperatur  et  crescit ;  refert 
quantas  vires  quamque  integras  habeat,  utrum 
reverberanda  et  agenda  retro  sit  an  cedere  ei  de- 
beamus,  dum  tempestas  prima  desaevit,  ne  remedia 
ipsa  secum  ferat. 

2  Consilium  pro  moribus  cuiusque  capiendum  erit ; 
quosdam  enim  preces  vincunt ;  quidam  insultant 
instantque  summissis,  quos  terrendo  placabimus ; 
alios  obiurgatio,  alios  confessio,  alios  pudor  coepto 
deiecit,  alios  mora,  lentum  praecipitis  mali  remedium, 

3  ad  quod  novissime  descendendum  est.  Ceteri  enim 
adfectus  dilationem  recipiunt  et  curari  tardius 
252 


BOOK  V 

TO  NOVATUS 

ON  ANGER 

BOOK    III 

We  shall  now,  Novatus,  attempt  to  do  what  you  have 
especially  desired — we  shall  try  to  banish  anger 
from  the  mind,  or  at  least  to  bridle  and  restrain  its 
fury.  This  must  be  done  sometimes  plainly  and 
openly,  whenever  a  slighter  attack  of  the  malady 
makes  this  possible,  sometimes  secretly,  when  its 
flame  burns  hot  and  every  obstacle  but  intensifies 
and  increases  its  power  ;  it  depends  upon  how  much 
strength  and  \igour  it  has  whether  we  ought  to  beat 
back  its  attack  and  force  a  retreat,  or  should  yield 
before  it  until  the  first  storm  of  its  fury  has  passed, 
in  order  to  keep  it  from  sweeping  along  with  it  the 
very  means  of  relief. 

Each  man's  character  will  have  to  determine  his 
plan-  of  action  :  some  men  yield  to  entreaty  ;  some 
trample  and  stamp  upon  those  who  give  way,  and  we 
shall  quiet  these  by  making  them  fear  ;  some  are 
turned  from  their  course  by  reproof,  others  by  a  4" 
confession  of  guilt,  others  by  slvame,  others  by  pro- 
crastination— a  slow  remedy,  this  last,  for  a  swift 
disorder,  to  be  used  only  as  a  last  resort.  For  while 
the  other  passions  admit  of  postponement  and  may 

"  253 


SENECA 

possunt,  huius  incitata  et  se  ipsa  rapiens  violentia 
non  paulatim  procedit  sed,  dum  incipit,  tota  est  ; 
nee  aliorum  more  vitiorum  sollicitat  animos,  sed 
abducit  et  impotentes  sui  cupidosque  vel  communis 
mali  exagitat,  nee  in  ea  tantum  in  quae  destinavit, 

4  sed  in  occurrentia  obiter^  furit.  Cetera  vitia  im- 
pellunt  animos,  ira  praecipitat.  Etiam  si  resistere 
contra  affectus  suos  non  licet,  at  certe  afFectibus 
ipsis  licet  stare ;  haec  non  secus  quam  fulmina 
procellaeque  et  si  qua  alia  irrevocabilia  sunt,  quia 
non  eunt,   sed  cadunt,  vim   suam  magis  ac  magis 

5  intendit.  Alia  vitia.  a  ratione,  hoc  a  sanitate  de- 
sciscit ;  alia  accessus  lenes  habent  et  incrementa 
fallentia ;  in  iram  delectus  animorum  est.  Nulla 
itaque  res  urget  magis  attonita  et  in  vires  suas  prona 
et,  sive  successit,  superba,  sive  frustratur,  insana  ; 
ne  repulsa  quidem  in  taedium  acta,  ubi  adversarium 
fortuna  subduxit,  in  se  ipsa  morsus  suos  vertit.  Nee 
refert  quantum  sit  ex  quo  surrexerit ;  ex  levissimis 
enim  in  maxima  evadit. 

i  2.  NuUam  transit  aetatem,  nullum  hominum  genus 
excipit.  Quaedam  gentes  beneficio  egestatis  non 
novere  luxuriam  ;  quaedam,  quia  exercitae  et  vagae 
sunt,  efFugere  pigritiam ;  quibus  incultus  mos 
agrestisque  vita  est,  circumscriptio  ignota  est  et 
fraus  et  quodcumque  in  foro  malum  nascitur.  Nulla 
gens  est,  quam  non  ira  instiget,  tam  inter  Graios 

1  obiter  A^ :  ob  iter  C.  F.  W.  Muller. 
254 


ON  ANGER,  III.  I.  3-II.  1 

be  cured  more  leisurely,  this  one  in  hurried  and  self- 
driyeh  vTdtence  does  not  advance  by  slow  degrees, 
but  becomes  full-gro^^Tl  the  moment  it  begins  ;  and, 
unlikeTRe^Tijer  yicjes,  it  does  not  seduce  but  abducts 
the,  mind,  and  it  goads  on  those  that,  lacking  all 
self-control,  desire,  if  need  be,  the  destruction  of 
all,  and  its  fury  falls  not  merely  upon  the  objects 
at  whichTTt  aims,  but  upon  all  that  meet  it  by  the 
way;-— Tha-other  ^"iees  incite  the  mind,  anger  over- 
throwsjtr~E\'en  if  a  man  may  not  resist  his  passions, 
yet  at  least  the  passions  themselves  may  halt ; 
anger  intensifies  its  vehemence  more  and  more,  hke 
the  hghtning's  stroke,  the  hurricane,  and  the  other 
things  that  are  incapable  of  control  for  the  reason 
that  they  not  merely  move,  but  fall.  Other  \-ices 
are  a  revolt  against  intelligence,  this  against  sanity  ; 
the._o£h£rs  approach  gently  and  grow  up  unnoticed, 
but  the  mind  plunges  headlong  into  anger.  There- 
fore no  more  frenzied  state  besets  the  mind,  none 
more  reliant  upon  its  0"\\ti  power,  none  more  arrogant 
if  it  is  successful,  none  more  insane  if  it  is  baffled  ; 
since  it  is  not  reduced  to  weariness  even  by  defeat, 
if  chance  removes  its  foe  it  turns  its  teeth  upon  itself. 
And  the  source  from  which  it  springs  need  not  be 
great  ;  for  rising  from  most  trivial  things  it  mounts 
to  monstrous  size. 

It  _passes  by  no  time  of  hfe,  makes  exception  of 
no_  class  of-iaen.  Some  races  by  the  blessing  of 
poverty  know  nothing  of  luxury  ;  some  because  they 
are  restless  and  wandering  have  escaped  sloth  ;  the 
uncivilized  state  of  some  and  their  rustic  mode  of 
life  keep  them  strangers  to  trickery  and  deception 
and  all  the  evil  that  the  forum  breeds.  But  there 
lives  no  race  that  does  not  feel  the  goad  of  anger, 

255 


SENECA 

quam  inter  barbaros  potens,  non  minus  perniciosa 
leges    metuentibus    quam    quibus    iura    distinguit 

2  modus  virium.  Denique  cetera  singulos  corripiunt, 
hie  unus  adfectus  est,  qui  interdum  publice  con- 
cipitur.  Numquam  populus  universus  feminae  amore 
flagravit,  nee  in  pecuniam  aut  lucrum  tota  civitas 
spem  suam  misit ;   ambitio  viritim  singulos  occupat  ; 

3  impotentia  una  est  malum  publicum.  Saepe  in  iram 
uno  agmine  itum  est ;  viri  feminae,  senes  pueri, 
principes  vulgusque  consensere,  et  tota  multitude 
paucissimis  verbis  concitata  ipsum  concitatorem 
antecessit ;  ad  arma  protinus  ignesque  discursum 
est  et  indicta  finitimis  bella  aut  gesta  cum  civibus  ; 

4  totae  cum  stirpe  omni  crematae  domus  et  modo 
eloquio  favorabili  habitus  in  multo  honore  iram 
suae  contionis  excepit ;  in  imperatorem  suum 
legiones  pila  torserunt ;  dissedit  plebs  tota  cum 
patribus  ;  publicum  consilium  senatus  non  expectatis 
dilectibus  nee  nominato  imperatore  subitos  irae  suae 
duces  legit  ac  per  tecta  urbis  nobiles  consectatus 

5  viros  supplicium  manu  sumpsit  ;  violatae  legationes 
rupto  iure  gentium  rabiesque  infanda  civitatem  tuht, 
nee  datum  tempus,  quo  resideret  tumor  publicus, 
sed  deductae  protinus  classes  et  oneratae  tumul- 
tuario  milite  ;  sine  more,  sine  auspiciis  populus  ductu 
irae  suae  egressus  fortuita  raptaque  pro  armis  gessit, 

256 


ON  ANGER,  III.  11.  1-5 

which  masters  alike  both  Greeks  and  barbarians,  and 
is  no  less  ruinous  to  those  who  respect  the  law  than 
to  those  who  make  might  the  only  measure  of  their 
right.  Lastly,  though  the  other  \'ices  lay  hold  of 
individual  men,  this  is  the  only  passion  that  can  at 
times  possess  a  whole  state.  No  entire  people  has 
ever  burned  with  love  for  a  woman,  no  whole  state 
has  set  its  hope  upon  money  or  gain  ;  ambition  is 
personal  and  seizes  upon  the  individual ;  only  fury 
is  an  affliction  of  a  whole  people.  Often  in  a  single  rr^  • 
mass~tHey^rush  into  anger  ;  men  and  women,  old  men 
and  boys,  the  gentrj^  and  the  rabble,  are  all  in  full 
accord,  and  the  united  body,  inflamed  by  a  very 
few  incendiary  words,  outdoes  the  incendiary  himself; 
they  fly  forthwith  to  fire  and  sword,  and  proclaim 
war  against  their  neighbours  or  wage  it  against  their 
countrymen  ;  whole  houses  are  consumed,  root  and 
branch,  and  the  man  who  but  lately  was  held  in  high 
esteem  and  applauded  for  his  eloquence  receives  now 
the  anger  of  his  foUoA^ing  ;  legions  hurl  their  javelins 
upon  their  o>vn  commanders  ;  all  the  commoners  are 
at  discord  ^\•ith  the  nobles  ;  the  senate,  the  high 
council  of  the  state,  without  waiting  to  levy  troops, 
without  appointing  a  commander,  chooses  impromptu 
agents  of  its  vvrath,  and  hunting  down  its  high-born 
victims  throughout  the  houses  of  the  cit}-,  takes 
punishment  in  its  own  hand  ;  embassies  are  outraged, 
the  law  of  nations  is  broken,  and  unheard  of  madness 
sweeps  the  state,  and  no  time  is  given  for  the  pubhc 
ferment  to  subside,  but  fleets  are  launched  forthvvith 
and  loaded  with  hastily  gathered  troops  ;  without 
training,  without  auspices,  under  the  leadership  of  its 
own  anger,  the  populace  goes  forth,  snatching  up  for 
arms  whatever  chance  has  offered,  and  then  atones 
VOL.  I  s  257 


SENECA 

deinde  magna  clade  temeritatem  audacis  irae  luit. 
6  Hie  barbaris  forte  ruentibus  in  bella  exitus  est  ; 
cum  mobiles  animos  species  iniuriae  perculit,  aguntur 
statim  et  qua  dolor  traxit  ruinae  modo  legionibus 
incidunt  incompositi,  interriti,  incauti,  pericula  ad- 
petentes  sua  ;  gaudent  feriri  et  instare  ferro  et  tela 
corpore  urgere  et  per  suum  vulnus  exire. 

1  3.  "  Non  est,"  inquis,  "  dubium,  quin  magna  ista 
et  pestifera  sit  vis ;  ideo  quemadmodum  sanari 
debeat  monstra."  Atqui,  ut  in  prioribus  libris  dixi, 
Stat  Aristoteles  defensor  irae  et  vetat  illam  nobis 
exsecari ;  calcar  ait  esse  virtutis,  hac  erepta  inermem 
animum  et  ad  conatus  magnos  pigrum  inertemque 

2  fieri.  Necessarium  est  itaque  foeditatem  eius  ac 
feritatem  coarguere  et  ante  oculos  ponere  quantum 
monstri  sit  homo  in  hominem  furens  quantoque 
impetu  ruat  non  sine  pernicie  sua  perniciosus  et  ea 
deprimens,    quae    mergi    nisi    cum    mergente    non 

3  possunt.  Quid  ergo  ?  Sanum  hunc  aliquis  vocat, 
qui  velut  tempestate  correptus  non  it  sed  agitur  et 
furenti  malo  servit,  nee  mandat  ultionem  suam,  sed 
ipse  eius  exactor  animo  simul  ac  manu  saevit  caris- 
simorum   eorumque   quae   mox   amissa  fleturus   est 

4  carnifex  ?     Hunc  aliquis  affectum  virtuti  adiutorem 

°  Cf.  i.  9.  2  ;    17.  1  ;   ii.  13.  1. 
258 


ON  ANGER,  III.  n.  5-ni.  4 

for  the  rash  daring  of  its  anger  by  a  great  disaster. 
Such  is  the  outcome,  when  barbarians  rush  haphazard 
into  war  ;  the  moment  their  excitable  minds  are 
roused  by  the  semblance  of  injury,  they  are  forthwith 
in  action,  and  where  their  resentment  draws  them, 
Uke  an  avalanche  they  fall  upon  our  legions — all 
unorganized,  unfearful,  and  unguarded,  seeking  their 
owTi  destruction ;  with  joy  they  are  struck  down, 
or  press  forward  upon  the  sword,  or  thrust  their 
bodies  upon  the  spear,  or  perish  from  a  self-made 
wound. 

"  Ttiere  can  be  no  doubt,"  you  say,  "  that  such  a 
force  is  powe~rftil~and  pernicious;  show,  therefore, 
how  it  js  to  be  cured."  And  yet,  as  I  said  in  my  earlier 
books,**  Aristotle  stands  forth  as  the  defender  of 
anger,  and  forbids  us  to  cut  it  out ;  it  is,  he  claims, 
a  spur  to  virtue,  and  if  the  mind  is  robbed  of  it,  it 
becomes  defenceless  and  grows  sluggish  and  in- 
different to  high  endeavour.  Therefore  our  first 
necessity  is  to  prove  its  foulness  and  fierceness,  and 
to  set  before  the  eyes  what  an  utter  monster  a  man 
is  Mclien  he  is  enraged  against  a  fellow-man,  >rith 
what  furylTe  rushes  on  working  destruction — destruc- 
tive of  himself  as  well  and  wTCcking  what  cannot  be 
sunk_  unless  he  sinks  with  it.  Tell  me,  then,  will 
any  one  calFthe  man  sane  who,  just  as  if  seized  by 
a  hurricane,  does  not  walk  but  is  driven  along,  and 
is  at  the  mercy  of  a  raging  demon,  who  entrusts  not 
his  revenge  to  another,  but  himself  exacts  it,  and  thus, 
bloodthirst}'  ahke  in  purpose  and  in  deed,  becomes 
the  murderer  of  those  persons  who  are  dearest  and 
the  destroyer  of  those  things  for  which,  when  lost,  he 
is  destined  ere  long  to  weep  ?  Can  any  one  assign 
this  passion  to  \irtue  as  its  supporter  and  consort 

259 


SENECA 

comitemque  dat  consilia,  sine  quibus  virtus  nihil 
gerit,  obturbantem  ?  Caducae  sinistraeque  sunt 
vires  et  in  malum  suum  validae,  in  quas  aegrum 

5  morbus  et  accessio  erexit.  Non  est  ergo  quod  me 
putes  tempus  in  supervacuis  consumere,  quod  iram, 
quasi  dubiae  apud  homines  opinionis  sit,  infamem, 
cum  sit  ahquis  et  quidem  de  illustribus  philosophis, 
qui  illi  indicat  operas  et  tamquam  utilem  ac  spiritus 
subministrantem  in  proelia,  in  actus  rerum,  ad 
omne,    quodcumque    calore    aliquo    gerendum    est? 

6  vocet.  Ne  quem  fallat  tamquam  ahquo  tempore, 
aliquo  loco  profutura,  ostendenda  est  rabies  eius 
efFrenata  et  attonita  apparatusque  illi  reddendus 
est  suus,  eculei  et  fidiculae  et  ergastula  et  cruces 
et  circumdati  defossis  corporibus  ignes  et  cadavera 
quoque  trahens  uncus,  varia  vinculorum  genera, 
varia  poenarum,  lacerationes  membrorum,  inscrip- 
tiones  frontis  et  bestiarum  immanium  caveae — inter 
haec  instrumenta  collocetur  ira  dirum  quiddam 
atque  horridum  stridens,  omnibus  per  quae  furit 
taetrior. 

1  4.  Ut  de  ceteris  dubium  sit,  nulli  certe  adfectui 
peior  est  vultus,  quem  in  prioribus  libris  descrip- 
simus  :  asperum  et  acrem  et  nunc  subducto  re- 
trorsus  sanguine  fugatoque  pallentem,  nunc  in  os 

»  The  course  of  the  thought  is  :  The  question  whether 
anger  is  a  good  or  an  evil  is  not,  as  might  be  thought,  so 
clearly  settled  that  further  discussion  of  it  is  unnecessary ; 
for  so  great  a  philosopher  as  Aristotle  found  anger  commend- 
able for  certain  purposes. 

»  Cf.  i.  1.  3-7. 

260 


ON  ANGER,  III.  HI.  4-iv.  l 

when  it  confounds  the  resolves  without  which  virtue 
accompUshes  nothing  ?  Transient  aiadhftneful,  and 
potent  only  for  its  o^\-n  harm,  is  the  strength  which 
a  sicic  man  acquires"  Itom  the  rising  of  Ixis  fever. 
Therefore  when  I  decry  anger  on  the  assumption  that 
men  are  not  agreed"  in  their  estimate  of  it,  you  are 
not  to  think  that  I  am  wasting  time  on  a  superfluous 
matter  ;  for  there  is  one,  and  he,  too,  a  distinguished 
philosopher,  who  ascribes  to  it  a  function,  and  on 
the  ground  that  it  is  useful  and  conducive  to  energy 
would  evoke  it  for  the  needs  of  battle,  for  the 
business  of  state — for  any  undertaking,  in  fact,  that 
requires  some  fervour  for  its  accomplishment.  To 
the  end  that  no  one  may  be  deceived  into  supposing 
that  at  any  time,  in  any  place,  it  will  be  profitable, 
the  unbridled  and  frenzied  madness  of  anger  must 
be  exposed,  and  there  must  be  restored  to  it  the 
trappings  that  are  its  very  own — the  torture-horse, 
the  cord,  the  jail,  the  cross,  and  fires  encircling  Uving 
bodies  implanted  in  the  ground,  the  drag-hook  that 
seizes  even  corpses,  and  all  the  different  kinds  of 
chains  and  the  different  kinds  of  punishment,  the 
rending  of  limbs,  the  branding  of  foreheads,  the 
dens  of  frightful  beasts — in  the  midst  of  these  her 
implements  let  anger  be  placed,  while  she  hisses 
forth  her  dread  and  hideous  sounds,  a  creature  more 
loathsome  even  than  all  the  instruments  through 
which  she  vents  her  rage. 

Whatever  doubt  there  may  be  concerning  anger 
in  other  respects,  there  is  surely  no  other  passion 
whose  countenance  is  worse — that  countenance 
which  we  have  pictured  in  the  earher  books  ''—now 
harsh  and  fierce,  now  pale  by  reason  of  the  back- 
ward flow  and  dispersing  of  the  blood,  now  flushed 

261 


SENECA 

omni  calore  ac  spiritu  verso  subrubicundum  et 
similem  cruento,  venis  tumentibus,  oculis  nunc 
trepidis  et  exsilientibus,  nunc  in  uno  obtutu  defixis 

2  et  haerentibus  ;  adice  dentium  inter  se  arietatorum 
ut  aliquem  esse  cupientium  non  alium  sonum  quam 
est  apris  tela  sua  adtritu  acuentibus  ;  adice  articu- 
lorum  crepitum,  cum  se  ipsae  manus  frangunt,  et 
pulsatum  saepius  pectus,  anhelitus  crebros  tractosque 
altius  gemitus,  instabile  corpus,  incerta  verba  subitis 
exclamationibus,  trementia  labra  interdumque  com- 

3  pressa  et  dirum  quiddam  exsibilantia.  Ferarum, 
me  hercules,  sive  illas  fames  agitat  sive  infixum 
visceribus  ferrum,  minus  taetra  facies  est,  etiam 
cum  venatorem  suum  semianimes  morsu  ultimo 
petunt,  quam  hominis  ira  flagrantis.  Age,  si  exaudire 
voces    ac    minas    vacet,    qualia    excarnificati    animi 

4  verba  sunt !  Nonne  revocare  se  quisque  ab  ira  volet, 
cum  intellexerit  illam  a  suo  primum  malo  incipere  ? 
Non  vis  ergo  admoneam  eos,  qui  iram  summa  potentia 
exercent  et  argumentum  virium  existimant  et  in 
magnis  magnae  fortunae  bonis  ponunt  paratam 
ultionem,  quam  non  sit  potens,  immo  ne  liber  quidem 

5  dici  possit  irae  suae  captivus  ?  Non  vis  admoneam, 
quo  diligentior  quisque  sit  et  ipse  se  circumspiciat, 
alia  animi  mala  ad  pessimos  quosque  pertinere, 
iracundiam  etiam  eruditis  hominibus  et  in  alia  sanis 
inrepere  ?     Adeo   ut   quidam   simplicitatis  indicium 

262 


ON  ANGER,  III.  IV.  1-5 

and  seemingly  steeped  in  blood  when  all  the  heat 
and  fire  of  the  body  has  been  turned  toward  the  face, 
^\•ith  swollen  veins,  with  eyes  now  restless  and 
darting,  now  fastened  and  motionless  in  one  fixed 
gaze  ;  mark,  too,  the  sound  of  clashing  teeth,  as  if 
their  o^^'ners  were  bent  on  devouring  somebody,  like 
the  noise  the  wild  boar  makes  when  he  sharpens  his 
tusks  by  rubbing  ;  mark  the  crunching  of  the  joints 
as  the  hands  are  \iolently  crushed  together,  the 
constant  beating  of  the  breast,  the  quick  breathing 
and  deep-drawn  sighs,  the  unsteady  body,  the 
broken  speech  and  sudden  outcries,  the  hps  now 
trembhng,  now  tight  and  hissing  out  a  curse.  Wild 
beasts,  I  swear,  whether  tormented  by  hunger  or  by 
the  steel  that  has  pierced  their  vitals — even  when, 
half  dead,  they  rush  upon  their  hunter  for  one  last 
bite — are  less  hideous  in  appearance  than  a  man 
in^amed  by  anger.  If  you  are  free  to  listen  to  his 
cries  and  threats,  hear  what  language  issues  from 
his  tortured  soul !  Will  not  every  one  be  glad  to 
check  any  impulse  to  anger  when  he  realizes  that  it 
begins  by  working  harm,  first  of  all,  to  himself  ?  If 
there  are  those  who  grant  full  sway  to  anger  and 
deem  it  a  proof  of  power,  who  count  the  opportunity 
of  revenge  among  the  great  blessings  of  great  estate, 
would  you  not,  then,  have  me  remind  them  that  a^ 
man  cannot  be  calle4  powerful^— no,  not  even  free^ 
if  he  is  the  captive  of  his  anger  ?  To  the  end  that 
each  one  may  be  more  careful  and  may  set  a  guard 
upon  himself,  would  you  not  have  me  remind  him 
that  while  other  base  passions  affect  only  the  worst 
t}'pe  of  men,  ^\Tath  steals  upon  those  also  Avho  are 
enlightened  and  other^v^se  sane  ?  So  true  is  this, 
that  there  are  some  who  call  wTath  a  sign  of  in- 

263 


SENECA 

iracundiam    dicant     et    vulgo     credatur    facillimus 
quisque  huic  obnoxius. 

1  5.  "  Quorsus,"  inquis,  "  hoc  pertinet  ?  "  Ut  nemo 
se  iudicet  tutum  ab  ilia,  cum  lenes  quoque  natura  et 
placidos  in  saevitiam  ac  violentiam  evocet.  Quemad- 
modum  adversus  pestilentiam  nihil  prodest  firmitas 
corporis  et  diligens  valetudinis  cura — promiscue 
enim  imbecilla  robustaque  invadit— ,  ita  ab  ira  tarn 
inquietis  moribus  periculum  est  quam  compositis  et 
remissis,  quibus  eo  turpior  ac  periculosior  est,  quo 

2  plus  in  illis  mutat.  Sed  cum  primum  sit  non  irasci, 
secundum  desinere,  tertium  alienae  quoque  irae 
mederi,  dicam  primum  quemadmodum  in  iram  non 
incidamus,  deinde  quemadmodum  nos  ab  ilia  libere- 
mus,  novissime  quemadmodum  irascentem  retinea- 
mus  placemusque  et  ad  sanitatem  reducamus. 

3  Ne  irascamur  praestabimus,  si  omnia  vitia  irae 
nobis  subinde  proposuerimus  et  illam  bene  aestima- 
verimus.  Accusanda  est  apud  nos,  damnanda ; 
perscrutanda  eius  mala  et  in  medium  protrahenda 
sunt ;     ut    qualis    sit    appareat,    comparanda    cum 

4  pessimis  est.  Avaritia  adquirit  et  contrahit,  quo 
aliquis  melior  utatur  ;  ira  impendit,  paucis  gratuita 
est.  Iracundus  dominus  quot  in  fugam  servos  egit, 
quot  in  mortem  !  Quanto  plus  irascendo  quam  id 
erat,  propter  quod  irascebatur,  amisit !  Ira  patri 
luctum,  marito  divortium  attulit,  magistratui  odium, 

6  candidato  repulsam.  Peior  est  quam  luxuria,  quoniam 

<•  Cf.  ii.  16.  3. 
264. 


ON  ANGER,  III.  IV.  5-v.  5 

genuousness,"  and  that  it  is  commonly  believed  that 
the  best-natiired  people  are  most  liable  to  it ! 

"  Whaty"  you  say,  "is  the  purpose  of  this?" 
That  no  man  may  consider  himself  safe  from  anger, 
since  it  summons  even  those  who  are  naturally  kind 
and^gentle  into  acts  of  cruelt}'  and  \-iolence.  As 
soiuidness  of  body  and  a  careful  regard  for  health 
avail  nothing  against  the  plague — for  it  attacks  in- 
discriminately the  weak  and  the  strong — so  calm  and 
languid  natures  are  in  no  less  danger  from  anger 
tharT  thelnore  excitable  sort,  and  the  greater  the 
change  it  works  in  these,  the  greater  is  their  disgrace 
and  danger.  But  since  the  first  requirement  is  not  to 
becOTne_angry»  the  second,  to  cease  fronx  anger,  the 
third,  to  cure  also  the  anger  of  others,  I  shall  speak  z  po>nt*. 
first  jaf_haiv_  we  may  avoid  falUng  into  anger,  next  of 
how  Ave  may  free  ourselves  from  it,  and  lastly  of  how 
wejuay  curb  an  angry  man — how  we  may  calm  him 
and  restore  him  to  sanity. 

We  shall  forestall  the  possibiUty  of  anger  if  we 
repeatedly  set  before  ourselves  its  many  faults  and 
shalljightly  appraise  it.  Before  our  o^v■n  hearts  we 
must  arraign  it  and  convict  it ;  we  must  search  out 
its  e\ils  and  drag  them  into  the  open  ;  in  order  that 
it  may  be  shown  as  it  really  is,  it  should  be  com- 
pared with  all  that  is  worst.  Man's  avarice  assembles 
and  gathers  wealth  for  some  one  who  is  better  to 
use  ;  but  anger  is  a  spender — few  indulge  in  it  with- 
out cost.  How  many  slaves  a  master's  anger  has 
driven  to  flight,  how  many  to  death  !  How  much 
more  serious  was  his  loss  from  indulging  in  anger 
than  was  the  incident  which  caused  it  !  Anger 
brings  to  a  father  grief,  to  a  husband  divorce,  to  a 
magistrate  hatred,  to  a  candidate  defeat.     It  is  worse 

265 


SENECA 

ilia  sua  voluptate  fruitur,  haec  alieno  dolore.  Vincit 
malignitatem  et  invidiam  ;  illae  enim  infelicem  fieri 
volunt,  haec  facere  ;  illae  fortuitis  malis  delectantur, 
haec    non    potest    expectare    fortunam — nocere    ei 

6  quern  odit,  non  noceri  vult.  Nihil  est  simultatibus 
gravius,  has  ira  conciliat  ;  nihil  est  bello  funestius, 
in  hoc  potentium  ira  prorumpit ;  ceterum  etiam  ilia 
plebeia  ira  et  privata  inerme  et  sine  viribus  bellum 
est.  Praeterea  ira,  ut  seponamus,  quae  mox  secutura 
sunt,  damna,  insidias,  perpetuam  ex  certaminibus 
mutuis  sollicitudinem,  dat  poenas  dum  exigit  ; 
naturam  hominis  eiurat  :  ilia  in  amorem  hortatur, 
haec  in  odium  ;    ilia  prodesse  iubet,  haec  nocere. 

7  Adice  quod,  cum  indignatio  eius  a  nimio  sui  suspectu 
veniat  et  animosa  videatur,  pusilla  est  et  angusta  ; 
nemo  enim  non  eo,  a  quo  se  contemptum  iudicat, 
minor  est.     At  ille  ingens  animus  et  verus  aestimator 

8  sui  non  vindicat  iniuriam,  quia  non  sentit.  Ut  tela 
a  duro  resiliunt  et  cum  dolore  caedentis  solida  feri- 
untur,  ita  nulla  magnum  animum  iniuria  ad  sensum 
sui  adducit,  fragilior  eo  quod  petit.  Quanto  pul- 
chrius  velut  nulli  penetrabilem  telo  omnis  iniurias 
contumeliasque  respuere  !  Ultio  doloris  confessio 
est  ;   non  est  magnus  animus,  quern  incurvat  iniuria. 

266 


ON  ANGER,  III.  V.  5-8 

than  wantonness,  since  that  finds  satisfaction  in  its 
o\\Ti  enjoyment,  this  in  another's  pain.  It  exceeds 
spite  and  envy  ;  for  they  desire  a  man  to  be  un- 
happy, while  anger  tries  to  make  him  so  ;  they 
dehght  in  the  ills  that  chance  may  bring,  while 
it  cannot  wait  for  chance — to  the  man  it  hates 
itnot  merely  A\ishes  harm  to  come,  but  brings  it. 
There  is  nothing  more  baleful  than  enmity,  yet  it  is 
anger  that  breeds  it  ;  nothing  is  more  deadly  than 
war,  yet  in  that  the  anger  of  the  powerful  finds  its 
vent  ;  none  the  less  anger  in  the  common  folk  or 
private  persons  is  also  war — war  without  arms  and 
without  resources.  Moreover,  leaving  out  of  account 
the~Imme3iate  consequences  that  vdW  come  from 
anger,  such  as  losses  of  money,  plots,  and  the  never- 
ending  anxiety  of  mutual  strife,  anger  pays  for  the 
penalty  it  exacts — itjenounces  human  nature,  which 
incites  to  love,  whereas  if  incites  to  hate  ;  which  bids 
us  help,  whereas  it  bids  us  injure.  And  besides, 
though  its  chafing  originates  in  an  excess  of  self- 
esteem  and  seems  to  be  a  show  of  spirit,  it  is  petty 
and  narrow-minded  ;  for  no  man  can  fail  to  be 
inferior  to  the  one  by  whom  he  regards  himself 
despised.  But  the  really  great  mind,  the  mind  that 
has  taken  the  true  measure  of  itself,  fails  to  revenge  -r 
injury  only  because  it  fails  to  perceive  it.  As  missiles 
rebound  from  a  hard  surface,  and  the  man  who  strikes 
solid  objects  is  hurt  by  the  impact,  so  no  injury 
whatever  can  cause  a  truly  great  mind  to  be  aware 
of  it,  since  the  injury  is  more  fragile  than  that  at 
which  it  is  aimed.  How  much  more  glorious  it  is 
for  the  mind,  impervious,  as  it  were,  to  any  missile, 
to  repel  all  insults  and  injuries!  Revenge  is  the^,^ 
confession  of  a  hurt ;-  no  mind-  is  truly  great  that 

267 


SENECA 

Aut  potentior  te  aut  imbecillior  laesit ;   si  imbecillior, 
parce  illi,  si  potentior,  tibi. 

1  6.  Niillum  est  argumentum  magnitudinis  certius 
quam  nihil  posse  quo  instigeris  accidere.  Pars 
superior  mundi  et  ordinatior  ac  propinqua  sideribus 
nee  in  nubem  cogitur  nee  in  tempestatem  impellitur 
nee  versatur  in  turbinem  ;  omni  tumultu  caret, 
inferiora  fulminantur.  Eodem  modo  sublimis  animus, 
quietus  semper  et  in  statione  tranquilla  conlocatus, 
omnia  infra^  se  premens,  quibus  ira  contrahitur, 
modestus  et  venerabilis  est  et  dispositus  ;    quorum 

2  nihil  invenies  in  irato.  Quis  enim  traditus  dolori  et 
furens  non  primam  reiecit  verecundiam  ?  Quis 
impetu  turbidus  et  in  aliquem  ruens  non  quidquid 
in  se  venerandi  habuit  abiecit  ?  Cui  officiorum 
numerus  aut  ordo  constitit  incitato  ?  Quis  linguae 
temperavit  ?     Quis   uUam   partem   corporis   tenuit  r 

3  Quis  se  regere  potuit  immissum  ?  Proderit  nobis 
illud  Democriti  salutare  praeceptum,  quo  mon- 
stratur  tranquillitas,  si  neque  privatim  neque  publice 
multa  aut  maiora  viribus  nostris  egerimus.  Num- 
quam  tarn  feliciter  in  multa  discurrenti  negotia  dies 
transit,   ut  non   aut   ex   homine   aut   ex   re   ofFensa 

4  nascatur,  quae  animum  in  iras  paret.  Quemad- 
modum  per  frequentia  urbis  loca  properanti  in  multos 
incursitandum  est  et  aliubi  labi  necesse  est,  aliubi 

^  infra  inferior  uss.  :   intra  AL. 


"  The  Stoic  doctrine  of  apathy  {dirddeia) — the  exemption 
from  emotion,  which  was  the  negative  aspect  of  virtue ; 
Horace's  nil  admirari  (Epistles,  i.  6). 

*  Cf.  Diets, Die Fragmente  der  Vorsokratiker, Demokritos,3. 
268 


ON  ANGER,  III.  V.  8-vi.  4 

bends  before  injury.  The  man  who  has  offended 
you  is  eitTxeffstfonger  or  weaker  than  you  :  if  he  is 
weaker,  spare  him  ;  if  he  is  stronger,  spare  yourself. 

There  is  no  surer  proof  of  greatness  than  to  be  in 
a  state  where  nothing  can  possibly  happen  to  disturb 
yqu.  The  higher  region  of  the  universe,  being 
better  ordered  and  near  to  the  stars,  is  condensed ', 
into  no  cloud,  is  lashed  into  no  tempest,  is  churned 
into  no  whirhWnd  ;  it  is  free  from  all  turmoil ;  it  is 
in  the  lower  regions  that  the  lightnings  flash.  In 
the  same  way  the  lofty  mind  is  always  calm,  at  rest, 
in  a  quiet  haven  "  ;  crushing  dovm.  all  that  engenders 
anger,  it  is  restrained,  commands  respect,  and  is 
properly  ordered.^  In  an  angry  man  you  will  find 
nonejjf  these  things.  For  who  that  surrenders  to 
anger  and  rage  does  not  straightway  cast  behind 
him  all  sense  of  shame  ?  Who  that  storms  in  ^vild 
fury  and  assails  another  does  not  cast  aside  what- 
ever he  had  in  him  that  commands  respect  ?  WTio 
that  is  enraged  maintains  the  full  number  or  the 
order  of  his  duties  ?  \Mio  restrains  his  tongue  ? 
Who  controls  any  part  of  his  body  ?  Who  is  able  to 
rule  the  self  that  he  has  set  loose  ?  We  shall  do 
well  to  heed  that  sound  doctrine  of  Democritus  *  in 
which  he  shows  that  tranquillity  is  possible  only  if 
we  avoid  most  of  the  activities  of  both  private  and 
pubhc  hfe,  or  at  least  those  that  are  too  great  for 
our  strength.  The  man  who  engages  in  many 
affairs  is  never  so  fortunate  as  to  pass  a  day  that 
does  not  beget  from  some  person  or  some  circum- 
stance a  vexation  that  fits  the  mind  for  anger.  Just 
as  a  man  hurrying  through  the  crowded  sections  of 
the  city  cannot  help  colliding  with  many  people,  and 
in  one  place  is  sure  to  slip,  in  another  to  be  held  back, 

269 


SENECA 

retineri,  aliubi  respergi,  ita  in  hoc  vitae  actu  dis- 
sipate et  vago  multa  impedimenta,  multae  querellae 
incidunt.  Alius  spem  nostram  fefellit,  alius  dis- 
tulit,  alius  intercepit ;    non  ex  destinato  proposita 

6  fluxerunt.  Nulli  fortuna  tam  dedita  est,  ut  multa 
temptanti  ubique  respondeat.  Sequitur  ergo,  ut 
is,  cui  contra  quam  proposuerat  aliqua  cesserunt, 
impatiens  hominum  rerumque  sit,  ex  levissimis 
causis  irascatur  nunc  personae,  nunc  negotio,  nunc 

6  loco,  nunc  fortunae,  nunc  sibi.  Itaque  ut  quietus 
possit  esse  animus,  non  est  iactandus  nee  multarum, 
ut  dixi,  rerum  actu  fatigandus  nee  magnarum 
supraque  vires  adpetitarum.  Facile  est  levia  aptare 
cervicibus  et  in  banc  aut  ill  am  partem  transferre 
sine  lapsu  ;  at  quae  alienis  in  nos  manibus  imposita 
aegre  sustinemus,  victi  in  proximo  efFundimus. 
Etiam  dum  stamus  sub  sarcina,  impares  oneri  vac- 
cillamus. 

1  7.  Idem  accidere  in  rebus  civilibus  ac  domesticis 
scias.  Negotia  expedita  et  habilia  sequuntur  ac- 
torem  ;  ingentia  et  supra  mensuram  gerentis  nee 
dant  se  facile  et,  si  occupata  sunt,  premunt  atque 
abducunt  administrantem  tenerique  iam  visa  cum 
ipso  cadunt.  Ita  fit,  ut  frequenter  irrita  sit  eius 
voluntas,  qui  non  quae  faciba  sunt  adgreditur,  sed 

2  vult  facilia  esse  quae  adgressus  est.  Quotiens 
270 


ON  ANGER,  III.  VI.  4-vii.  2 

in  another  to  be  splashed,  so  in  this  diverse  and  rest- 
less acti\-it)^  of  life  many  hindrances  befall  us  and 
many  occasions  for  complaint.  Qiir^hopes  one  man 
deceiYes,..aiiother  defers,  another  destroys  ;  our  pro- 
jects do  not  proceed  as  they  were  planned.  To  no  ] 
man  is  Fortune  so  wholly  submissive  that  she  will -I" 
always  respond  if  often  tried.  The  result  is,  con- 
sequently, that  when  a  man  finds  that  some  of  his 
plans  have  turned  out  contrary  to  his  expectations, 
he  becomes  impatient  with  men  and  things,  and  on 
the  slightest  provocation  becomes  angry  now  >vith 
a  person,  now  \nth  his  calling,  now  mth  his  place 
of  abode,  now  with  his  luck,  now  A\-ith  himself.  In 
order,  therefore,  that  the  mind  may  have  peace,  it 
must  not  be  tossed  about,  it  must  not,  as  I  have  i 
said,  be  wearied  by  acti\ity  in  many  or  great  affairs,  "^ 
or  by  attempting  such  as  are  beyond  its  powers.  It 
is  easy  to  fit  the  shoulders  to  light  burdens,  and  to 
shift  the  load  from  this  side  to  that  -vnthout  sUpping  ; 
but  it  is  hard  to  support  what  others'  hands  have 
laid  upon  us,  and  exhausted  we  cast  the  load  upon  a 
neighbour.  Even  while  we  stand  beneath  the  burden, 
we  stagger  if  we  are  too  weak  to  bear  its  weight. 

In  pubhcjynLdJrLprivate-aflEairs,  be  sure,  the  same 
conditioiL-holds.  Light  and  easy  tasks  accept  the 
control  of  the  doer  ;  those  that  are  hea\y  and  beyond 
the  capacity  of  the  performer  are  not  easily  mastered  ; 
and  if  they  are  undertaken,  they  outweigh  his  efforts 
and  run  away  A\'ith  him,  and  just  when  he  thinks  he 
has  them  in  his  grasp,  do^^■Tl  they  crash  and  bring  him 
down  with  them.  So  it  happens  that  the  man  who 
is  unwilhng  to  approach  easy  tasks,  yet  \\ishes  to 
find  easy  the  tasks  he  approaches,  is  often  dis- 
appointed   in    his    desire.    Whenever    you    would 

271 


SENECA 

aliquid  conaberis,  te  simul  et  ea,  quae  paras  quibusque 
pararis  ipse,  metire  ;  faciet  enim  te  asperum  pae- 
nitentia  operis  infecti.  Hoc  interest  utrum  quis 
fervidi  sit  ingenii  an  frigidi  atque  humilis  ;  generoso 
repulsa  iram  exprimet,  languido  inertique  tristitiam. 
Ergo  actiones  nostrae  nee  parvae  sint  nee  audaces  et 
improbae,  in  vicinum  spes  exeat,  nihil  conemur, 
quod  mox  adepti  quoque  successisse  miremur. 

1  8.  Demus  operam,  ne  accipiamus  iniuriam,  quia 
ferre  nescimus.  Cum  placidissimo  et  facillimo  et 
nainime  anxio  morosoque  vivendum  est ;  sumuntur  a 
conversantibus  mores  et  ut  quaedam  in  contactos  cor- 
poris vitia  transiliunt,  ita  animus  mala  sua  proximis 

2  tradit.  Ebriosus  convictores  in  amorem  meri  traxit, 
impudicorum  coetus  fortem  quoque  et,  si  liceat,^ 
virum  emolBit,  avaritia  in  proximos  virus  suum  trans- 
tulit.  Eadem  ex  diverso  ratio  virtutum  est,  ut  omne 
quod  secum  habent  mitigent ;  nee  tarn  valetudini 
profuit  utilis  regio  et  salubrius  caelum  quam  animis 

3  parum  firmis  in  turba  meliore   versari.     Quae  res 

quantum  possit  intelleges,  si  videris  feras  quoque 

convictu  nostro  mansuescere  nullique  etiam  immani 

bestiae  vim  suam  permanere,  si  hominis  contubernium 

diu  passa  est ;  retunditur  omnis  asperitas  paulatim- 

^  si  liceat  mss.  :  ingenious  is  siliceum  Pincianus,  but  in 
usage  the  trans/erred  meaning  is  "  hard-hearted  " :  solidura 
Comelissen  :   si  placet  O&rtz  :  si  lis  erat  Petschenig. 

272 


ON  ANGER,  III.  VII.  2-viii.  3 

attempt  anything,  measure  yourself  and  at  the  same 
time  the  undertaking — both  the  thing  you  intend 
and  the  thing  for  which  you  are  intended  ;  for  the 
regret  that  springs  from  an  unaccomphshed  task  -svill 
make  vou  bitter.  It  makes  some  difference  whether 
a  man  is  of  a  fiery  or  of  a  cold  and  submissive  nature ; 
th£,  man  of  spirit  will  be  driven  b}'  defeat  to  anger,  a 
dullandsluggish^-nature -to  sorrow.  Let  our  acti\'i-' 
ties,  consequently,  be  neither  pett^',  nor  yet  bold 
and  presumptuous  ;  let  us  restrict  the  range  of  hope  ;V 
let  us  attempt  nothing  which  later,  even  after  we  have 
achieved  it,  will  make  us  surprised  that  we  have 
succeeded. 

Since  we  do  not  know  how  to  bear  injury,  let  us  j 
endeavour  not  fo  receive  one.  We  should  hve  ■with 
a  very  calm  and  good-natured  person — one  that  is 
never  worried  or  captious  ;  we  adopt  our  habits  from 
those  A\'ith  whom  we  associate,  and  as  certain  diseases 
of  the  body  spread  to  others  from  contact,  so  the  mind 
transmits  its  faults  to  those  near-by.  The  drunkard 
lures  his  boon  companions  into  love  of  wine  ;  shame- 
less company  corrupts  even  the  strong  man  and,  per- 
chance, the  hero ;  avarice  transfers  its  poison  to  its 
neighbours.  The  same  principle  holds  good  of  the 
\-irtues,  but  with  the  opposite  result— that  they 
ameliorate  whatever  comes  in  contact  with  them  ; 
an  invalid  does  not  benefit  so  much  from  a  suitable 
location  or  a  more  healthful  chmate  as  does  the  mind 
which  lacks  strength  from  association  wth  a  better 
company.  You  will  understand  what  a  powerful 
factor  this  is  if  you  observe  that  even  wild  animals 
grow  tame  from  intercourse  with  us,  and  that  all 
beasts,  no  matter  how  savage,  after  enduring  long 
companionship  with  man  cease  to  be  violent  ;  all 
VOL.  I  T  273 


SENECA 

que  inter  placida  dediscitur.  Accedit  hue,  quod 
non  tantum  exemplo  melior  fit  qui  cum  quietis 
hominibus  vivit,  sed  quod  causas  irascendi  non 
invenit  nee  vitium  suum  exercet.  Fugere  itaque 
debebit    omnis    quos    irritaturos    iracundiam    sciet. 

4  "  Qui  sunt,"  inquis,  "  isti  ?  "  Multi  ex  variis  eausis 
idem  facturi  :  offendet  te  superbus  contemptu,  dicax 
contumelia,  petulans  iniuria,  lividus  malignitate, 
pugnax  contentione,  ventosus  et  mendax  vanitate  > 
non  feres  a  suspieioso  timeri,  a  pertinaee  vinci,  a 

5  delieato  fastidiri.  Elige  simpliees,  faeiles,  moderatos, 
qui  iram  tuam  nee  evoeent  et  ferant.  Magis  adhuc 
proderunt  summissi  et  humani  et  dulces,  non  tamen 
usque  in  adulationem,  nam  iracundos  nimia  assentatio 

6  ofFendit.  Erat  certe  amicus  noster  vir  bonus,  sed 
irae  paratioris,  eui  non  magis  tutum  erat  blandiri 
quam  male  dieere. 

Caelium  oratorem  fuisse  iracundissimum  constat. 
Cum  quo,  ut  aiunt,  cenabat  in  eubieulo  lectae 
patientiae  cliens,  sed  difficile  erat  illi  in  copulam 
coniecto  rixam  eius  cum  quo  cohaerebat  effugere  ; 
optimum  iudicavit  quidquid  dixisset  sequi  et  secundas 
agere.  Non  tulit  Caelius  adsentientem  et  exclama- 
vit  :  "  Die  aliquid  contra,  ut  duo  simus  !  "  Sed  ille 
quoque.  quod  non  irasceretur,  iratus  cito  sine  adver- 
274 


ON  ANGER,  III.  vni.  3-6 

their  fierceness  is  blunted  and  gradually  aniid  peace- 
ful conditions  is  forgotten.  Moreover,  the  man  who 
hves  ^^ith  tranquil  people  not  only  becomes  better 
from  their  example,  but  finding  no  occasions  for 
anger  he  does  not  indulge  in  his  weakness.  It  will, 
therefore,  be  a  man's  dutv  to  avoid  all  those  who  he 
knows  aWII  provoke  his  anger.  "  Just  whom  do  you 
mean  ?  "  you  ask.  Tliere  are  many  wlio  from 
various  causes  will  produce  the  same  result.  The 
proud  man  will  offend  you  by  his  scorn,  the  caustic 
man  by  an  insult,  the  forward  man  by  an  affront,  the 
spiteful  man  by  his  mahce,  the  contentious  by  his 
^vranghng,  the  windy  har  by  his  hollowness  ;  you 
^\ill  not  endure  to  be  feared  by  a  suspicious  man,  to 
be  outdone  by  a  stubborn  one,  or  to  be  despised  by 
a  coxcomb.  Choose  frank,  good-natured,  temperate 
people^^ivha  will  not  call  forth  your  anger  and  yet 
willlbfiar  with  it.  Still  more  helpful  will  be  those 
who  are  yielding  and  kindly  and  suave — not,  how- 
ever, to  the  point  of  fa^^Tiing,  for  too  much  cringing 
incenses  hot-tempered  people.  I,  at  any  rate,  had 
a  friend,  a  good  man,  but  too  prone  to  anger,  whom 
it  was  not  less  dangerous  to  wheedle  than  to  curse. 

It  is  well  kno>^-n  that  Caelius,  the  orator,  was  very 
hot-tempered.  A  cUent  of  rare  forbearance  was, 
as  the  story  goes,  once  dining  ^\ith  Caelius  in  his 
chamber,  but  it  was  difficult  for  him,  ha\-ing  got  into 
such  close  quarters,  to  avoid  a  quarrel  vriih  the  com- 
panion at  his  side  ;  so  he  decided  that  it  was  best 
to  agree  with  whatever  Caelius  said  and  to  play  up 
to  him.  Caelius,  however^  could  not  endure  his 
comphant  attitude,  and  cried  out,  "  Contradict  me, 
that  there  may  be  two  of  us  I  '*  But  even  he,  angry 
because  he  was  not  angered,  quickly  subsided  when 

275 


SENECA 

7  sario  desit.  Eligamus  ergo  vel  hos  potius,  si  conscii 
nobis  iracundiae  sumus,  qui  vultum  nostrum  ac 
sermonem  sequantur.  Facient  quidem  nos  delicatos 
et  in  malam  consuetudinem  inducent  nihil  contra 
voluntatem  audiendi,  sed  proderit  vitio  suo  inter- 
vallum  et  quietem  dare.  Difficiles  quoque  et 
indomiti  natura  blandientem  ferent.     Nihil  asperum 

8  territumque  palpanti  est.  Quotiens  disputatio  lon- 
gior  et  pugnacior  erit,  in  prima  resistamus,  antequam 
robur  accipiat.  Alit  se  ipsa  contentio  et  demissos 
altius  tenet.  Facilius  est  se  a  certamine  abstinere 
quani  abducere. 

1  9.  Studia  quoque  graviora  iracundis  omittenda 
sunt  aut  certe  citra  lassitudinem  exercenda,  et 
animus  non  inter  plura^  versandus,  sed  artibus 
amoenis  tradendus.  Lectio  ilium  carminum  obleniat 
et  historia  fabulis  detineat  ;    mollius  delicatiusque 

2  tractetur.  Pythagoras  perturbationes  animi  lyra 
componebat ;  quis  autem  ignorat  lituos  et  tubas 
concitamenta  esse,  sicut  quosdam  cantus  blandi- 
menta,  quibus  mens  resolvatur  ?  Confusis  oculis 
prosunt  virentia  et  quibusdam  coloribus  infirma 
acies  adquiescit,  quorundam  splendore  praestringitur  ; 

3  sic  mentes  aegras  studia  laeta  permulcent.  Forum, 
advocationes,  iudicia  fugere  debemus  et  omnia  quae 
exulcerant  vitium,  aeque  cavere  lassitudinem  corpo- 

^  inter  plura  A  :   inter  dura  Gertz. 

276 


ON  ANGER,  III.  VIII.  7-ix.  3 

he  had  no  antagonist.  Consequently,  if  we  are 
conscious  of  being  hot-tempered,  let  us  rather  pick 
out  those  who  ^vill  be  guided  by  our  looks  and  by 
our  words.  Such  men,  it  is  true,  will  pamper  us  and 
lead  us  into  the  harmful  habit  of  hearing  nothing 
that  we  do  not  hke,  but  there  ^^■ill  be  the  advantage 
of  gi\ing  our  weakness  a  period  of  respite.  Even 
those  who  are  churlish  and  intractable  by  nature 
will  endure  caressing  ;  no  creature  is  savage  and 
frightened  if  you  stroke  it.  Whenever  a  discussion 
tends  to  be  too  long  or  too  quarrelsome,  let  us  check 
it  at  the  start  before  it  gains  strength.  Controversy 
grows  of  itself  and  holds  fast  those  that  have  plunged 
in  too  deeply.  It  is  easier  to  refrain  than  to  retreat 
from  a  struggle. 

Hot-tempered  people  should  also  abstain  from  the 
morejburdensome  pursuits,  or  at  least  should  not  ply 
these  to  the  point  of  exhaustion,  and  the  mind  should 
not  be  engaged  by  too  many  interests,  but  should 
surrender  itself  to  such  arts  as  are  pleasurable.  Let 
it  be  soothed  by  the  reading  of  poetry  and  gripped 
by  the  tales  of  history-  ;  it  should  be  much  coddled 
and  pampered.  Pythagoras  used  to  calm  his  troubled 
spirit  with  the  l}Te  ;  and  who  does  not  know  that  the 
clarion  and  the  trumpet  act  as  incitements  to  the 
mind,  and  that,  similarly,  certain  songs  are  a  soothing 
balm  that  brings  it  relaxation  ?  Green  things  are 
good  for  disordered  eyes,  and  certain  colours  are 
restful  to  weak  \ision,  while  by  the  brightness  of 
others  it  is  bUnded.  So  pleasant  pursuits  soothe  the 
troubled  mind.  We  should  shun  the  courts,  court-' 
appearances,  and  trials,  and  everything  that  aggra- 
vates our  weakness,  and  we  should  equally  guard 
against  physical  exhaustion  ;  for  this  destroys  what- 

277 


SENECA 

ris  ;  consumit  enim  quidquid  in  nobis  mite  placidum- 

4  que  est  et  acria  coneitat.  Ideo  quibus  stomachus 
suspectus  est,  processuri  ad  res  agendas  maioris 
negotii  bilem  cibo  temperant,  quam  maxime  movet 
fatigatio,  sive  quia  calorem  in  media  compellit  et 
nocet  sanguini  eursumque  eius  venis  laborantibus 
sistit,  sive  quia  corpus  attenuatum  et  inflrmum 
incumbit  animo  ;  certe  ob  eandem  causam  ira- 
cundiores  sunt  valetudine  aut  aetate  fessi.  Fames 
quoque  et  sitis  ex  isdem  causis  vitanda  est ;  exasperat 

5  et  incendit  animos.  Vetus  dictum  est  a  lasso  rixam 
quaeri  ;  aeque  autem  et  ab  esuriente  et  a  sitiente 
et  ab  omni  homine  quern  aliqua  res  urit.  Nam  ut 
ulcera  ad  levem  tactum,  deinde  etiam  ad  suspicionem 
tactus  condolescunt,  ita  animus  adfectus  minimis 
ofFenditur,  adeo  ut  quosdam  salutatio  et  epistula 
et  oratio  et  interrogatio  in  litem  evocent.  Numquam 
sine  querella  aegra  tanguntur. 

1  10.  Optimum  est  itaque  ad  primuni  mali  sensum 
mederi  sibi,  tum  verbis  quoque  suis  minimum  liber- 

2  tatis  dare  et  inhibere  impetum.  Facile  est  autem 
adfectus  suos,  cum  primum  oriuntur,  deprehendere  ; 
morborum  signa  praecurrunt.  Quemadmodum  tem- 
pestatis  ac  pluviae  ante  ipsas  notae  veniunt,  ita  irae, 
amoris    omniumque    istarum    procellarum     animos 

3  vexantium  sunt  quaedam  praenuntia.  Qui  comitiali 
vitio  solent  corripi,  iam  adventare  valetudinem 
intellegunt,   si   calor   summa   deseruit   et   incertum 

278 


ON  ANGER,  III.  IX.  3-x.  3 

ever  gentleness  and  mildness  we  have  and  engenders 
sharpness.  Those,  therefore,  who  distrust  their 
digestion,  before  they  proceed  to  the  performance 
of  tasks  of  unusual  difficulty,  allay  their  bile  with 
food  ;  for  fatigue  especially  arouses  the  bile,  possibly 
because  it  drives  the  body's  heat  toward  the  centre, 
\-itiates  the  blood,  and  stops  its  circulation  by  clog- 
ging the  veins,  or  because  the  body  when  it  is  worn 
and  feeble  weighs  down  the  mind.  For  the  same 
reason,  undoubtedly,  those  who  are  broken  bv  ill- 
health.  and  age  are  more  irascible  than  others. 
Hunger  and  thirst  also,  for  the  same  reasons,  must 
be  avoided  ;  they  exasperate  and  irritate  the  mind. 
There  is  an  old  proverb  that  "  the  tired  man  seeks  a 
quarrel,"  but  it  apphes  just  as  well  to  the  hungry  and 
thirsty  man,  and  to  any  man  who  chafes  under  some- 
thing. For  just  as  a  bodily  sore  hurts  under  the 
slightest  touch,  afterwards  even  at  the  suggestion 
of  a  touch,  so  the  disordered  mind  takes  offence  at  the 
merest  trifles,  so  that  even,  in  the  case  of  some  people, 
a  greeting,  a  letter,  a  speech,  or  a  question  provokes 
a  dispute.  There  will  always  be  a  protest  if  you 
touch  a  sore  spot. 

It  is  best,  therefore,  to  treat  the  malady  as  soon 
as  it  is  discovered ;  then,  too,  to  allow  oneself  the 
least  possible  hberty  of  speech,  and  to  check  im- 
pulsiveness. It  is  easy,  moreover,  to  detect  one's 
passion  as  soon  as  it  is  born  ;  sickness  is  preceded 
by  symptoms.  Just  as  the  signs  of  storm  and  rain 
appear  before  the  storms  themselves,  so  there  are 
certain  forerunners  of  anger,  of  love,  and  of  all  those 
tempests  that  shake  the  soul.  Those  who  are  subject 
to  fits  of  epilepsy  know  that  the  attack  is  coming  on 
if  heat  leaves  their  extremities,  if  their  sight  wavers, 

279 


SENECA 

lumen  nervorumque  trepidatio  est,  si  memoria 
sublabitur  caputque  versatur  ;  solitis  itaque  remediis 
incipientem  causam  occupant,  et  odore  gustuque 
quidquid  est  quod  alienat  animos  repellitur,  aut 
fomentis  contra  frigus  rigoremque  pugnatur  ;  aut 
si^  parum  medicina  profecit,  vitaverunt  turbam   et 

4  sine  teste  ceciderunt.  Prodest  morbum  suum  nosse 
et  vires  eius  antequam  spatientur  opprimere.  Videa- 
mus  quid  sit,  quod  nos  maxime  concitet.  Alium 
verborum,  alium  rerum  contumeliae  movent ;  hie 
vult  nobilitati,  hie  formae  suae  parci  ;  hie  elegantis- 
simus  haberi  cupit,  ille  doctissimus  ;  hie  superbiae 
impatiens  est,  hie  contumaciae  ;  ille  servos  non  putat 
dignos  quibus  irascatur,  hie  intra  domum  saevus  est, 
foris  mitis  ;  ille  rogari  invidiam  iudicat,  hie  non  rogari 
contumeliam,  Non  omnes  ab  eadem  parte  feriun- 
tur ;  scire  itaque  oportet,  quid  in  te  imbecillum  sit, 
ut  id  maxime  protegas. 

1  11.  Non  expedit  omnia  videre,  omnia  audire. 
Multae  nos  iniuriae  transeant,  ex  quibus  plerasque 
non  accipit  qui  nescit.  Non  vis  esse  iracundus  ? 
Ne  fueris  curiosus.  Qui  inquirit  quid  in  se  dictum 
sit,  qui  malignos  sermones,  etiam  si  secreto  habiti 
sunt,  eruit,  se  ipse  inquietat.  Quaedam  inter- 
pretatio  eo  perducit,  ut  videantur  iniuriae  ;  itaque 
alia  differenda  sunt,  alia  deridenda,  alia  donanda. 

^  aut  si  A  :  [aut]  si  Hermes. 
280 


ON  ANGER,  III.  X.  3-xt.  1 

if  there  is  a  t\\-itching  of  the  muscles,  or  if  memory 
forsakes  them  and  the  head  swims  ;  therefore  by 
customary  remedies  they  try  to  forestall  the  disease 
in  its  incipiency,  and  they  ward  off  whatever  it  is 
that  causes  unconsciousness  by  smelhng  or  tasting 
something,  or  they  battle  against  cold  and  stiffness 
with  hot  apphcations  ;  or  if  the  remedy  is  of  no 
avail,  they  escape  from  the  crowd  and  fall  where  no 
one  may  see.  It  is  well  to  understand  one's  malady 
and  to  break  its  power  before  it  spreads.  Let  us 
discern  what  it  is  that  especially  irritates  us.  One 
man  is  stirred  by  insulting  words,  another  by  insulting 
actions  ;  this  man  craves  respect  for  his  rank,  this 
one  for  his  person  ;  this  one  ^vishes  to  be  considered 
a  fine  gentleman,  that  one  a  fine  scholar  ;  this  one 
cannot  brook  arrogance,  this  one  obstinacy'  ;  that 
one  does  not  think  his  slaves  worthy  of  his  \vrath, 
this  one  is  x-iolent  inside  his  house  and  mild  outside  ; 
that  man  considers  it  a  disgrace  to  be  put  up  for 
office,  this  one  an  insult  not  to  be  put  up.  We  are 
not  all  wounded  at  the  same  spot  ;  therefore  you 
ought  to  know  what  your  weak  spot  is  in  order  that 
you^may^specially  protect  it. 

It  is  well  not  to  see  everything,  not  to  hear  every- 
thing. Many  affronts  may  pass  by  us  ;  in  most 
cases  the  man  who  is  unconscious  of  them  escapes 
them.  Would  you  avoid  being  provoked  ?  Then 
do  not  be  inquisitive.  He  who  tries  to  discover  what 
has  been  said  against  him,  who  unearths  mahcious 
gossip  even  if  it  was  privately  indulged  in,  is  respon- 
sible for  his  own  disquietude.  There  are  words 
which  the  construction  put  upon  them  can  make 
appear  an  insult ;  some,  therefore,  ought  to  be  put 
aside,  others  derided,  others  condoned.     In  various 

281 


SENECA 

2  Circumscribenda  multis  modis  ira  est ;  pleraque 
in  lusum  iocumque  vertantur.  Socraten  aiunt 
colapho  percussum  nihil  amplius  dixisse  quam 
molestum    esse,    quod    nescirent    homines,    quando 

3  cum  galea  prodire  deberent.  Non  quemadmodum 
facta  sit  iniuria  refert,  sed  quemadmodum  lata  ; 
nee  video  quare  difficilis  sit  moderatio,  cum  sciam 
tyrannorum  quoque  tumida   et  fortuna   et  licentia 

4  ingenia  familiarem  sibi  saevitiam  repressisse.  Pisi- 
stratum  certe,  Atheniensium  tyrannum,  memoriae 
proditur,  cum  multa  in  crudelitatem  eius  ebrius 
conviva  dixisset  nee  deessent  qui  vellent  manus  ei 
commodare,  et  alius  hinc  alius  illinc  faces  subderent, 
placido  animo  tulisse  et  hoc  irritantibus  respondisse, 
non  magis  illi  se  suscensere  quam  si  quis  obligatis 
oculis  in  se  incurrisset. 

1  12.  Magna  pars  querellas  manu  fecit  aut  falsa 
suspicando  aut  levia  adgravando.  Saepe  ad  nos  ira 
venit,  saepius  nos  ad  illam.     Quae  numquam  arces- 

2  senda  est ;  etiam  cum  incidit,  reiciatur.  Nemo  dicit 
sibi  :  "  Hoc  propter  quod  irascor  aut  feci  aut  fecisse 
potui  "  ;  nemo  animum  facientis,  sed  ipsum  aestimat 
factum.  Atqui  ille  intuendus  est,  voluerit  an  in- 
ciderit,  coactus  sit  an  deceptus,  odium  secutus  sit 

282 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XI.  2-xii.  2 

ways  anger  must  be  circumvented  ;  most  offences  > 
may  be  turned  into  farce  and  jest.  Socrates,  it  is 
said,  when  once  he  received  a  box  on  the  ear,  merely 
declared  that  it  was  too  bad  that  a  man  could  not 
tell  when  he  ought  to  wear  a  helmet  while  taking 
a  walk.  Not  how  an  affront  is  offered,  but  how  it  is 
borne  is  oiu:  concern  ;  and  I  do  not  see  why  it  is 
difficult  to  practise  restraint,  since  I  know  that  even 
desjxjtSj^  though  their  hearts  were  puffed  up  with 
success  and  pri\'ilege,  have  nevertheless  repressed 
the  cruelt}^  that  was  habitual  to  them.  At  any  rate, 
there  is  the  story  handed  down  about  Pisistratus,  the 
Athenian  despot — that  once  when  a  tipsy  table- 
guest  had  declaimed  at  length  about  his  cruelty, 
and  there  was  no  lack  of  those  who  would  gladly 
place  their  swords  at  the  ser\'ice  of  their  master,  and 
one  from  this  side  and  another  from  that  supphed 
fuel  to  the  flame,  the  tyrant,  none  the  less,  bore  the 
incident  calmly,  and  rephed  to  those  who  were  goad-  ^ 
ing  him  on  that  he  was  no  more  angry  at  the  man 
than  he  would  be  if  some  one  ran  against  him  bUnd- 
fold. 

A  great  many  manufacture  grievances  either  by 
suspecting  the  imtrue  or  by  exaggerating  the  tri\ial. 
Anger  often  comes  to  us,  but  more  often  we  go  to  it. 
It  should  never  be  united  ;  even  when  it  falls  upon 
us,  it  should  be  repulsed.  No  man  ever  says  to 
himself,  "  I  myself  have  done,  or  at  least  might  have 
done,  this  very  thing  that  now  makes  me  angry  "  ; 
nQ_  one  considers  the  intention  of  the  doer,  but 
merely  the  deed.  Yet  it  is  to  the  doer  that  we  1. 
should  give  thought — whether  he  did  it  intentionally  »^ 
or  by  accident,  whether  under  compulsion  or  by 
mistake,  whether  he  was  led  on  by  hatred  or  by  the    • 

283 


SENECA 

an  praemium,  sibi  morem  gesserit  an  manum  alteri 
commodaverit.  Aliquid  aetas  peccantis  facit,  aliquid 
fortuna,  ut  ferre   aut  pati^    aut    humanum    sit  aut 

3  humile.2  Eo  nos  loco  constituamus,  quo  ille  est  cui 
irascimur  ;  nunc  facit  nos  iracundos  iniqua  nostri 
aestimatio   et   quae   facere  vellemus  pati   nolumus. 

4  Nemo  se  differt  ;  atqui  maximum  remedium  irae 
dilatio  est,  ut  primus  eius  fervor  relanguescat  et 
caligo  quae  premit  mentem  aut  residat  aut  minus 
densa  sit.  Quaedam  ex  his,  quae  te  praecipitem 
ferebant,  hora,  non  tantum  dies  molliet,  quaedam 
ex  toto  evanescent  ;  si  nihil  egerit  petita  advocatio, 
apparebit  iam  indicium  esse,  non  iram.  Quidquid 
voles  quale  sit  scire,  tempori  trade  ;   nihil  diligenter 

6  in  fluctu  cernitur,  Non  potuit  impetrare  a  se  Plato 
tempus,  cum  servo  suo  irasceretur,  sed  ponere  ilium 
statim  tunicam  et  praebere  scapulas  verberibus 
iussit  sua  manu  ipse  caesurus  ;  postquam  intellexit 
irasci  se,  sicut  sustulerat  manum  suspensam  detinebat 
et  stabat  percussuro  similis  ;  interrogatus  deinde 
ab  amico,  qui  forte  intervenerat,  quid  ageret  : 
"  Exigo,"    inquit,    "  poenas    ab   homine   iracundo." 

6  Velut  stupens  gestum  ilium  saevituri  deformem 
sapienti  viro  servabat,  oblitus  iam  servi,  quia  alium 
quem  potius  castigaret  invenerat.     Itaque  abstulit 


^  aut  pati  A  :   ac  pati  Hermes,  after  Lipsius. 
^  humile  A  :   non  humile  Hermes,  after  Madvig. 


284 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XII.  2-6 

hope  of  reward,  whether  he  was  pleasing  himself  or 
lending  aid  to  another.  The  age  of  the  offender 
counts  for  something,  his  station  for  something,  so 
that  to  tolerate  or  to  submit  becomes  merely  in- 
dulgence or  deference.  Let_us  put  ourselves  in  the 
place  of  the  man  with  whom  we^re~angrT ;  as  it  is, 
an~ unwarranted  opinion  of  self  makes  us  prone  to 
anger,  and  we  are  unwilling  to  bear  what  we  ourselves 
would  have  been  willing  to  inflict.  No  one  makes 
himself  wait  :  yet  the  best  cure  for  anger  is  waiting, 
to  allow  the  first  ardour  to  abate  and  to  let  the  dark- 
ness that  clouds  the  reason  either  subside  or  be  less 
dense.  Of  the  offences  which  were  dri\ing  you  head- 
long, some  an  hour  will  abate,  to  say  nothing  of  a 
day,  some  will  vanish  altogether  ;  though  the  post- 
ponement sought  shall  accomphsh  nothing  else,  yet 
it  will  be  e\ident  that  judgement  now  rules  instead  of 
anger.  If  ever  you  want  to  find  out  what  a  thing 
really^  is,  entrust  it  to  time  ;  you  can  see  nothing 
clearly  in  the  midst  of  the  billows.  Plato  once, 
when  he  was  angry  with  his  slave,  was  unable  to 
impose  delay  upon  himself,  and,  bent  upon  flogging 
him  with  his  own  hand,  ordered  him  forthwith  to 
take  off  his  shirt  and  bare  his  shoulders  for  the  blows  ; 
but  afterwards  reahzing  that  he  was  angr}^  he  stayed 
his  uphfted  hand,  and  just  as  he  was  stood  with  his 
hand  in  the  air  hke  one  in  the  act  of  striking.  Later, 
when  a  friend  who  happened  to  come  in  asked  him 
what  he  was  doing,  he  said,  "  I  am  exacting  punish- 
ment from  an  angrj-  man."  As  if  sturmed  he  main- 
tained that  attitude,  unbecoming  to  a  philosopher, 
of  a  man  in  the  act  of  venting  his  passion,  forgetful 
now  of  the  slave  since  he  had  found  another  whom 
he  was  more  anxious  to  punish.     He  therefore  denied 

285 


SENECA 

sibi  in  suos  potestatem  et  ob  peccatum  quoddam 
commotior  :  "  Tu,"  inquit,  "  Speusippe,  servulum 
7  istum  verberibus  obiurga  ;  nam  ego  irascor."  Ob 
hoc  non  cecidit,  propter  quod  alius  cecidisset, 
"  Irascor,"  inquit ;  "  plus  faciam  quam  oportet, 
libentius  faciam  ;  non  sit  iste  servus  in  eius  potestate 
qui  in  sua  non  est."  Aliquis  vult  irato  committi 
ultionem,  cum  Plato  sibi  ipse  imperium  abrogaverit  ? 
Nihil  tibi  liceat,  dum  irasceris.  Quare  ?  Quia  vis 
omnia  hcere. 

1  13.  Pugna  tecum  ipse !  Si  vis-"^  vincere  iram, 
non  potest  te  ilia.  Incipis  vincere,  si  absconditur, 
si  illi  exitus  non  datur.  Signa  eius  obruamus  et  illam 
quantum  fieri  potest  occultam  secretamque  teneamus . 

2  Cum  magna  id  nostra  molestia  fiet,  cupit  enim  exilire 
et  incendere  oculos  et  mutare  faciem  ;  sed  si  eminere 
ilH  extra  nos  hcuit,  supra  nos  est.  In  imo  pectoris 
secessu  recondatur  feraturque,  non  ferat ;  immo  in 
contrarium  omnia  eius  indicia  flectamus.  Vultus 
remittatur,  vox  lenior  sit,  gradus  lentior  ;   paulatim 

3  cum  exterioribus  interiora  formantur.  In  Socrate 
Irae  signum  erat  vocem  summittere,  loqui  parcius. 
Apparebat  tunc  ilium  sibi  obstare.  Deprendebatur 
itaque  a  familiaribus  et  coarguebatur,  nee  erat  illi 
exprobratio  latitantis  irae  ingrata.     Quidni  gauderet, 

^  vis  added  by  Hermes,  after  Madvig. 
286 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XII.  6-xiii.  3 

himself  all  power  over  his  own  household,  and  once, 
when  he  was  deeply  provoked  at  some  fault,  he  said, 
"  Do  you,  Speusippus,  punish  this  dog  of  a  slave 
A\-ith  a  whip,  for  I  am  angry."  His  reason  for  not 
striking  was  the  very  reason  that  would  have  caused 
another  to  strike.  "  I  am  angry,"  said  he  ;  "  I 
should  do  more  than  I  ought,  and  with  too  much 
satisfaction  ;  this  slave  ^ould  not  be  in  the  power 
of  a  master  who  is  not  master  of  himself."  Can  any 
one  wish  Jto  entrust  punishment  to  an  angry  man 
w^hen  even  Plato  denied  himself  this  authority  ? 
Let  nothing  be  lawful  to  you  while  you  are  angry. 
Do  you  ask  why  ?  Because  then  you  wish  every- 
thing to  be  lawful. 

^ight^against__yauxS£l£-J- If  you  will  to  conquer 

angerj  it  cannot  conquer  you.  If  it  is  kept  out  of 
sight,  if  it  is  given~no'  outlet,  you  begin  to  conquer. 
Let  us  conceal  its  signs,  and  so  far  as  it  is  possible 
let  us  keep  it  hidden  and  secret.  We  shall  have 
great  trouble  in  doing  this,  for  it  is  eager  to  leap 
forth  and  fire  the  eyes  and  transform  the  countenance; 
but  if  we  allow  it  to  show  itself  outside  of  us,  at  once 
it  is  on  top  of  us.  It  should  be  kept  hidden  in  the 
deepest  depths  of  the  heart  and  it  should  not  drive, 
but  be  driven  ;  and  more,  all  symptoms  of  it  let  us 
change  into  just  the  opposite.  Let  the  countenance 
be  unruffled,  let  the  voice  be  very  gentle,  tlie  step 
very  slow  ;  gradually  the  inner  man  conforms  itself 
to  the  outer.  In  the  case  of  SocrafesVit  was  a  sign  of 
anger  if  he  lowered  his  voice  and  became  sparing  of 
speech.  It  was  e\ident  then  that  he  was  struggling 
against  liimself.  And  so  his  intimate  friends  Mould 
find  him  out  and  accuse  him,  yet  he  was  not  dis- 
pleased by  the  charge  of  concealing  his  anger.    Why 

287 


SENECA 

quod  iram  suam  multi  intellegerent,  nemo  sentiret  ? 
Sensissent    autem,    nisi    ius    amicis    obiurgandi    se 

4  dedisset,  sicut  ipse  sibi  in  amicos  sumpserat.  Quanto 
magis  hoc  nobis  faciendum  est !  Rogemus  amicissi- 
mum  quemque,  ut  tunc  maxime  libertate  adversus 
nos  utatur,  cum  minime  illam  pati  poterimus,  nee 
adsentiatur  irae  nostrae  ;  contra  potens  malum  et 
apud   nos   gratiosum,  dum   consipimus,   dum   nostri 

5  sumus,  advocemus.  Qui  vinum  male  ferunt  et 
ebrietatis  suae  temeritatem  ac  petulantiam  metuunt, 
mandant  suis,  ut  e  convivio  auferantur  ;  intem- 
perantiam  in  morbo   suam   experti  parere  ipsis  in 

6  adversa  valetudine  vetant.  Optimum  est  notis 
vitiis  impedimenta  prospicere  et  ante  omnia  ita 
componere  animum,  ut  etiam  gravissimis  rebus 
subitisque  concussus  iram  aut  non  sentiat  aut  magni- 
tudine  inopinatae  iniuriae  exortam  in  altum  retrahat 

7  nee  dolorem  suum  profiteatur.  Id  fieri  posse 
apparebit,  si  pauca  ex  turba  ingenti  exempla  pro- 
tulero,  ex  quibus  utrumque  discere  licet,  quantum 
mali  habeat  ira,  ubi  hominum  praepotentium  po- 
testate  tota  utitur,  quantum  sibi  imperare  possit, 
ubi  metu  maiore  compressa  est. 

1  14.  Cambysen  regem  nimis  deditum  vino  Prae- 
xaspes  unus  ex  carissimis  monebat,  ut  parcius 
biberet,  turpem  esse  dicens  ebrietatem  in  rege, 
quern  omnium  oculi  auresque  sequerentur.     Ad  haec 

288 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xin.  3-xiv.  l 

should  he  not  have  been  happy  that  many  perceived 
his  anger,  yet  no  man  felt  it  ?  But  they  would  have 
felt  it,  had  his  friends  not  been  granted  the  same  right 
to  criticize  him  which  he  himself  claimed  over  them. 
How  much  more  ought  we  to  do  this  !  Let  us  beg  all 
our  best  friends  to  use  to  the  utmost  such  liberty 
toward  us,  especially  when  we  are  least  able  to  bear 
it,  and  let  there  be  no  approval  of  our  anger.  While 
we  are  sane, -while  we  are  ourselves,  let  us  ask  help 
against  an  e\-il  that  is  powerful  and  oft  indulged  by 
us.  Those  who  cannot  carry  their  ^^^ne  discreetly 
and  fear  that  they  ^^•ill  be  rash  and  insolent  in  their 
cups,  instruct  their  friends  to  remove  them  from 
the  feast  ;  those  who  have  learned  that  they  are 
unreasonable  when  they  are  sick,  give  orders  that  in 
times  of  illness  they  are  not  to  be  obeyed.  It  is 
best  to  pro\'ide  obstacles  for  recognized  weaknesses, 
and  above  all  so  to  order  the  mind  that  even  when 
shaken  by  most  serious  and  sudden  happenings  it 
either  shall  not  feel  anger,  or  shall  bury  deep  any 
anger  that  may  arise  from  the  magnitude  of  the 
unexpected  affront  and  shall  not  acknowledge  its 
hurt.  That  this  can  be  done  will  become  clear  if 
from  a  great  an-ay  of  instances  I  shall  cite  a  few 
examples  ;  from  these  you  may  learn  two  things — 
how  great  e\il  there  is  in  anger  when  it  wields  the 
complete  power  of  supremely  powerful  men,  and 
how  great  control  it  can  impose  upon  itself  when 
restrained  by  the  stronger  influence  of  fear.  x/ 

Since  Cambyses  was  too  much  addicted  to  ^^•ine,^K. 
Praexaspes,  one  of  his  dearest  friends,  urged  him  to    ^ 
drink  more  sparingly,  declaring  that  drunkenness  is 
disgraceful  for  a  king,  towards  whom  all  eyes  and 
ears  are  turned.     To  this  Cambyses  repHed  :    "To 
VOL.  I  u  289 


SENECA 

ille  :   "  Ut  scias,"  inquit,  "  quemadmodum  numquam 
excidam  mihi,  adprobabo  iam  et  oculos  post  vinuxn 

2  in  officio  esse  et  manus."  Bibit  deinde  liberalius 
quam  alias  capacioribus  scyphis  et  iam  gravis  ac 
vinolentus  obiurgatoris  sui  filium  procedere  ultra 
limen  iubet  adlevataque  super  caput  sinistra  manu 
stare.  Tunc  intendit  arcum  et  ipsum  cor  adule- 
scentis,  id  enim  petere  se  dixerat,  figit  rescissoque 
pectore  haerens  in  ipso  corde  spiculum  ostendit  ac 
respiciens  patrem  interrogavit,  satisne  certam  haberet 
manum.    At  ille  negavit  Apollinem  potuisse  certius 

3  mittere.  Dii  ilium  male  perdant  animo  magis  quam 
condicione  mancipium !  Eius  rei  laudator  fuit, 
cuius  nimis  erat  spectatorem  fuisse.  Occasionem 
blanditiarum  putavit  pectus  filii  in  duas  partes 
diductum  et  cor  sub  vulnere  palpitans.  Contro- 
versiam  illi  facere  de  gloria  debuit  et  revocare  iactum, 
ut    regi    liberet    in    ipso    patre    certiorem    manu] 

4  ostendere  !  O  regem  cruentum  !  O  dignum  in' 
quem  omnium  suorum  arcus  verterentur !  Cum 
exsecrati  fuerimus  ilium  convivia  suppliciis  funeri- 
busque  solventem,  tamen  sceleratius  telum  illud 
laudatum  est  quam  missum.  Videbimus  quomodo 
se  pater  gerere  debuerit  stans  super  cadaver  fili  sui 
caedemque  illam,  cuius  et  testis  fuerat  et  causa. 
Id  de  quo  nunc  agitur  apparet,  iram  supprimi  posse. 

290 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XIV.  1-4         r 

convince  you  that  I  never  lose  command  of  myself, 
I  shall  proceed  to  prove  to  you  that  my  eyes  and 
my  hands  perform  their  duty  in  spite  of  wine." 
Thereupon  taking  larger  cups  he  drank  more  reck- 
lessly than  ever,  and  when  at  length  he  was  heavy 
and  besotted  \\-ith  ^\•ine,  he  ordered  the  son  of  his 
critic  to  proceed  beyond  the  threshold  and  stand 
there  with  his  left  hand  lifted  above  his  head.  Then 
he  drew  his  bow  and  shot  the  youth  through  the  very 
heart — he  had  mentioned  this  as  his  mark — and 
cutting  open  the  breast  of  the  victim  he  showed 
the  arrow-head  sticking  in  the  heart  itself,  and  then 
turning  toward  the  father  he  inquired  whether  he 
had  a  sufficiently  steady  hand.  But  he  replied  that 
Apollo  himself  could  not  have  made  a  more  unerring 
shot.  Heaven  curse  such  a  man,  a  bondslave  in 
spirit  even  more  than  in  station  I  He  praised  a  deed, 
which  it  were  too  much  even  to  have  mtnessed. 
The  breast  of  his  son  that  had  been  torn  asunder,  his 
heart  quivering  from  its  wound,  he  counted  a  fitting 
pretext  for  flattery.  He  ought  to  have  provoked  a 
dispute  -v^ith  him  about  his  boast  and  called  for 
another  shot,  that  the  king  might  have  the  pleasure 
of  displaying  upon  the  person  of  the  father  himself 
an  even  steadier  hand  I  What  a  bloodthirsty  king  ! 
What  a  worthy  mark  for  the  bows  of  all  his  followers  !  >^ 
Though  we  may  execrate  him  for  terminating  a 
banquet  "vvith  punishment  and  death,  yet  it  was  more 
accursed  to  praise  that  shot  than  to  make  it.  We 
shall  see  later  how  the  father  should  have  borne 
himself  as  he  stood  over  the  corpse  of  his  son,  vie^ving 
that  murder  of  which  he  was  both  the  witness  and 
the  cause.  The  point  now  under  discussion  is  clear,  n^ 
namely,  that  it  is  possible  to  suppress  anger.     He 

^  291 


SENECA 

5  Non  male  dixit  regi,  nullum  emisit  ne  calamitosi 
quidem  verbum,  cum  aeque  cor  suum  quam  fili  trans- 
fixum  videret.  Potest  dici  merito  devorasse  verba  ; 
nam  si  quid  tamquam  iratus  dixisset,  nihil  tamquam 

6  pater  facere  potuisset.  Potest,  inquam,  videri 
sapientius  se  in  illo  casu  gessisse,  quam  cum  de 
potandi  modo  praeciperet  ei,  quem  satius  erat  vinum 
quam  sanguinem  bibere,  cuius  manus  poculis  occu- 
pari  pax  erat.  Accessit  itaque  ad  numerum  eorum, 
qui  magnis  cladibus  ostenderunt,  quanti  constarent 
regum  amicis  bona  consiUa. 

1  15.  Non  dubito  quin  Harpagus  quoque  tale  aliquid 
regi  suo  Persarumque  suaserit,  quo  offensus  liberos 
illi  epulandos  adposuit  et  subinde  quaesiit,  an 
placeret  conditura  ;  deinde  ut  satis  ilium  plenum 
malis  suis  vidit,  adferri  capita  illorum  iussit  et  quo- 
modo  esset  acceptus  interrogavit.  Non  defuerunt 
misero   verba,    non   os   concurrit :    "  Apud   regem," 

2  inquit,  "  omnis  cena  iucunda  est."  Quid  hac 
adulatione  profecit  ?  Ne  ad  reliquias  invitaretur. 
Non  veto  patrem  damnare  regis  sui  factum,  non  veto 
quaerere  dignam  tam  truci  portento  poenam,  sed 
hoc  interim  colligo,  posse  etiam  ex  ingentibus  malis 
nascentem  iram  abscondi  et  ad  verba  contraria  sibi 

3  cogi.  Necessaria  ista  est  doloris  refrenatio,  utique 
292 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XIV.  5-xv.  3 

did  not  curse  the  king,  he  let  shp  no  word  even  of 
anguish,  though  he  saw  his  o\^ti  heart  pierced  as 
well  as  his  son's.  It  may  be  said  that  he  was  right 
to  choke  back  words  ;  for  even  if  he  had  spoken  as 
an  angry  man,  he  could  have  accomplished  nothing 
as  a  father.  He  may,  I  say,  be  thought  to  have 
acted^more_wisely  in  that  raisfortune  than  he  had 
done  in  recommending  moderation  in  drinking  to  a 
man  who  would  have  much  better  drunk  wine  than 
blood,  viith  whom  peace  meant  that  his  hands  were 
bilSy  with  the  wine-cup.  He,  therefore,  added  one 
more  to  the  number  of  those  who  have  sho%\'n  by 
bitter  misfortune  the  price  a  king's  friends  pay  for 
giving  good  ad\ice. 

I~donbt  not  that  Harpagus  also  gave  some  such 
ad\ice  to  his  king,  the  king  of  the  Persians,  who, 
taking  offence  thereat,  caused  the  flesh  of  Harpagus's 
oym  children  to  be  set  before  him  as  a  course  in  the 
banquet,  and  kept  inquiring  whether  he  hked  the 
cooking  ;  then  when  he  saw  him  sated  >^ith  his  ovm 
ills,  he  ordered  the  heads  of  the  children  to  be  brought 
in,  and  inquired  what  he  thought  of  his  entertain- 
ment. The  poor  ^^Tetch  did  not  lack  words,  his  hps 
were  not  sealed.  "  At  the  king's  board,"  he  said, 
"  any  kiruLof  food  is  delightful."  And  what  did  he 
gain  by  this  flattery  ?  He  escaped  an  invitation  to 
eat  what  was  left.  I  do  not  say  that  a  father  must 
not  condemn  an  act  of  his  king,  I  do  not  say  that  he 
should  not  seek  to  give  so  atrocious  a  monster  the 
punishment  he  deserves,  but  for  the  moment  I  am 
drawing  this  conclusion — that  it  is  possible  for  a  man 
to  conceal  the  anger  that  arises  even  from  a  monstrous 
outrage  and  to  force  himself  to  words  that  belie  it. 
Such  restraint  of  distress  is  necessary,  particularly  for 

293 


SENECA 

hoc  sortitis  vitae  genus  et  ad  regiam  adhibitis  mensam. 
Sic  estur  apud  illos,  sic  bibitur,  sic  respondetur, 
funeribus  suis  adridendum  est.  An  tanti  sit  vita 
videbimus  ;  alia  ista  quaestio  est.  Non  consolabimur 
tarn  triste  ergastulum,  non  adhortabimur  ferre 
imperia  carnificum  ;  ostendemus  in  omni  servitute 
apertam  libertati  viam.    Si  aeger  animus  et  suo  vitio 

4  miser  est,  huic  miserias  finire  secum  licet.  Dicam 
et  illi,  qui  in  regem  incidit  sagittis  pectora  amicorum 
petentem,  et  illi,  cuius  dominus  liberorum  visceri- 
bus  patres  saturat  :  "Quid  gemis,  demens  ?  Quid 
expectas,  ut  te  aut  hostis  aliquis  per  exitium  gentis 
tuae  vindicet  aut  rex  a  longinquo  potens  advolet  ? 
Quocumque  respexeris,  ibi  malorum  finis  est.  Vides 
ilium  praecipitem  locum  ?  Iliac  ad  libertatem 
descenditur.  Vides  illud  mare,  illud  flumen,  ilium 
puteum  ?  Libertas  illic  in  imo  sedet.  Vides  illam 
arborem  brevem,  retorridam,  infelicem  ?  Pendet 
inde  libertas.  Vides  iugulum  tuum,  guttur  tuum, 
cor  tuum  ?  EfFugia  servitutis  sunt.  Nimis  tibi 
operosos  exitus  monstro  et  multum  animi  ac  roboris 
exigentes  ?  Quaeris  quod  sit  ad  libertatem  iter  ? 
Quaelibet  in  corpore  tuo  vena  !  " 

1  16.  Quam  diu  quidem  nihil  tarn  intolerabile  nobis 
videtur,  ut  nos  expellat  e  vita,  iram,  in  quocumque 
294 


ON  ANGER,  III.  x\'.  3-xvi.  i 

those  whose  lot  is  cast  in  this  sort  of  life  and  who  are 
invited  to  the  board  of  kings.  So  must  they  eat  in 
that  company,  so  must  they  drink,  so  must  they 
answer,  so  must  they  mock  at  the  death  of  their 
dear  ones.  Whether  the  hfe  is  worth  the  price  we 
shall  see  ;  that  is  another  question.  We  shall  not 
condole  with  such  a  chain-gang  of  prisoners  so 
wretched,  we  shall  not  urge  them  to  submit  to  the 
commands  of  their  butchers  ;  we  shall  show  that  in 
any  kind  of  ser\'itude  the  way  lies  open  to  libert}'. 
If  the  soul  is  sick  and  because  of  its  o\\ti  imperfection 
unhappy,  a  man  may  end  its  sorrows  and  at  the  same 
time  himself.  To  him  to  whom  chance  has  given  a 
king  that  aims  his  shafts  at  the  breasts  of  his  friends, 
to  him  who  has  a  master  that  gorges  fathers  with 
the  flesh  of  their  cliildren,  I  would  say  :  "  Madman, 
why  do  you  moan  ?  Why  do  you  wait  for  some 
enemy  to  avenge  you  by  the  destruction  of  your 
nation,  or  for  a  mighty  king  from  afar  to  fly  to  your 
rescue  ?  In  whatever  direction  you  may  turn  your 
eyes,  there  lies  the  means  to  end  your  woes.  See  you 
that  precipice  ?  Down  that  is  the  way  to  liberty. 
See  you  that  sea,  that  river,  that  well  ?  There  sits 
liberty — at  the  bottom.  See  you  that  tree,  stunted, 
bUghted,  and  barren  ?  Yet  from  its  branches  hangs 
liberty.  See  you  that  throat  of  yours,  your  gullet, 
your  heart  ?  They  are  ways  of  escape  from  servitude. 
Are  the  ways  of  egress  I  show  you  too  toilsome,  do 
they  require  too  much  courage  and  strength  ?  Do 
you  ask  what  is  the  highway  to  libertv'  ?  Any  veiiT 
in  your  body  !  " 

So  long  indeed  as  there  shall  be  no  hardship  so 
intolerable  in  our  opinion  as  to  force  us  to  abandon 
life,  let  us,  no  matter  what  our  station  in  hfe  may 

295 


SENECA 

erimus  statu,  removeamus.  Perniciosa  est  ser- 
vientibus.  Omnis  enim  indignatio  in  tormentum 
suum  proficit  et  imperia  graviora  sentit  quo  con- 
tumacius  patitur.  Sic  laqueos  fera,  dum  iactat, 
adstringit ;  sic  aves  viscum,  dum  trepidantes  ex- 
cutiunt,  plumis  omnibus  inlinunt.  Nullum  tam 
artum  est  iugum,  quod  non  minus  laedat  ducentem 
quam  repugnantem.  Unum  est  levamentum  malo- 
rum  ingentium,  pati  et  necessitatibus  suis  obsequi. 

2  Sed  cum  utilis  sit  servientibus  adfectuum  suorum 
et  huius  praecipue  rabidi  atque  efFreni  continentia, 
utilior  est  regibus.  Perierunt  omnia,  ubi  quantum 
ira  suadet  fortuna  permittit,  nee  diu  potest  quae 
multorum  malo  exercetur  potentia  stare  ;  peri- 
clitatur  enim,  ubi  eos,  qui  separatim  gemunt,  com- 
munis metus  iunxit.  Plerosque  itaque  modo  singuli 
mactaverunt,  modo  universi,  cum  illos  conferre  in 

3  unum  iras  publicus  dolor  coegisset.  Atqui  plerique 
sic  iram  quasi  insigne  regium  exercuerunt,  sicut 
Dareus,  qui  primus  post  ablatum  Mago  imperium 
Persas  et  magnam  partem  orientis  obtinuit.  Nam 
cum  bellum  Scythis  indixisset  orientem  cingentibus, 
rogatus  ab  Oeobazo  nobili  sene,  ut  ex  tribus  liberis 
unum  in  solacium  patri  relinqueret,  duorum  opera 
uteretur,  plus  quam  rogabatur  pollicitus  omnis  se 
illi  dixit  remissurum  et  occisos  in  conspectu  parentis 

4  abiecit,  crudelis  futurus,  si  omnis  abduxisset.     At 


"  The  false  Smerdis,  dethroned  521  b.c.     Cf.  Herodotus, 
iii.  70  if. 

*  The  true  founder  of  the  Persian  empire,  Darius  extended 
his  supremacy  as  far  as  the  Indus. 
296 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XVI.  1-4 

be,  keep  ourselves  from  anger.  It  is  harmful  for  all 
who  serve.  For  any  sort  of  chafing  grows  to  self- 
torture,  and  the  more  rebelhous  we  are  under 
authority,  the  more  oppressive  we  feel  it  to  be.  So  a 
wild  beast  by  struggling  but  tightens  its  noose  ;  so 
birds  by  trying  in  their  alarm  to  get  free  from  bird- 
lime, smear  all  their  plumage  with  it.  No  yoke  is 
so  tight  but  that  it  hurts  less  to  carry  it  than  to 
struggle  against  it.  The  only  rehef  for  great  mis- 
fortunes is  to  bear  them  and  submit  to  their  coercion. 
But  though  it  is  expedient  for  subjects  to  control 
their  passions,  especially  this  mad  and  unbridled  one, 
it  is  even  more  expedient  for  kings.  When  his 
position  permits  a  man  to  do  all  that  anger  prompts, 
general  destruction  is  let  loose,  nor  can  any  power 
long  endure  which  is  %\'ielded  for  the  injurj'  of  many  ; 
for  it  becomes  imperilled  when  those  who  separately 
moan  in  anguish  are  united  by  a  conmaon  fear.  Con- 
sequently, many  kings  have  been  the  \ictims  now  of 
individual,  now  of  concerted,  violence,  at  times  when 
a  general  animosity  had  forced  men  to  gather  together 
their  separate  angers  into  one.  Yet  many  kings 
have  employed  anger  as  if  it  were  the  badge  of  regal 
power  ;  for  example  Darius,  who  after  the  dethrone- 
ment of  the  Magian  "  became  the  first  ruler  of  the 
Persians  and  of  a  great  part  of  the  East.^  For  after 
he  had  declared  war  on  the  Scythians  who  were  on  his 
eastern  border,  Oeobazus,  an  aged  noble,  besought 
him  to  use  the  ser\ices  of  two  of  his  sons,  but  to 
leave  one  out  of  the  three  as  a  comfort  to  his  father. 
Promising  more  than  was  asked,  and  saying  that 
he  would  exempt  all  three,  Darius  flung  their  dead 
bodies  before  their  father's  eyes — for  it  would  have 
been    cruelty  if  he  had  taken  them  all  with  him  ! 

297 


SENECA 

quanto  Xerses  facilior  !  Qui  Pythio  quinque  filiorum 
patri  unius  vacationem  petenti,  quem  vellet  eligere 
permisit,  deinde  quem  elegerat  in  partes  duas 
distractum  ab  utroque  viae  latere  posuit  et  hac 
victima  lustravit  exercitum.  Habuit  itaque  quem 
debuit  exitum  ;  victus  et  late  longeque  fusus  ac 
stratam  ubique  ruinam  suam  cernens  medius  inter 
suorum  cadavera  incessit. 

1  17.  Haec  barbaris  regibus  feritas  in  ira  fuit,  quos 
nulla  eruditio,  nullus  litterarum  cultus  imbuerat. 
Dabo  tibi  ex  Aristotelis  sinu  regem  Alexandrum.  qui 
Clitum  carissimum  sibi  et  una  educatum  inter  epulas 
transfodit  manu  quidem  sua,  parum  adulantem  et 
pigre  ex  Macedone  ac  libero  in  Persicam  servitutem 

2  transeuntem.     Nam  Lysimachum  aeque  familiarem  li 
sibi   leoni   obiecit.     Numquid  ergo   hie  Lysimaehus 
felicitate  quadam  dentibus  leonis   elapsus  ob  hoc, 

fj  cum  ipse  regnaret,  mitior  fuit  ?  Nam  Telesphorum 
Rhodium  amicum  suum  undique  decurtatum,  cum 
aures  illi  nasumque  abscidisset,  in  cavea  velut  novum 
aliquod  animal  et  invisitatum  diu  pavit,  cum  oris 
detruncati  mutilatique  deformitas  humanam  faciem 
perdidisset  ;    accedebat  fames  et  squalor  et  inluvies 

4  corporis   in   stercore   suo   destituti ;    callosis   super 

298 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xvi.  4-xvii.  4  ^ 

But  how  much  kinder  was  Xerxes  I  For  he,  when 
Pythius,  the  father  of  five  sons,  begged  for  the 
exemption  of  one,  permitted  him  to  choose  the  one 
he  ^^ished  ;  then  he  tore  into  halves  the  son  who 
had  been  chosen,  and  placing  a  half  on  each  side  of  the 
road  offered  the  body  as  an  expiatory-  sacrifice  for  the 
success  of  the  army.  And  so  the  army  met  the  fate 
it  deser\-ed.  Defeated,  routed  far  and  wide,  and 
seeing  its  o^vn  destruction  spread  on  every  side, 
between  two  lines  of  the  dead  bodies  of  its  comrades 
it  trudged  along. 

Such  was  the  ferocity  of  barbarian  kings  when 
in  anger — men  who  had  had  no  contact  with  learning 
or  the  culture  of  letters.  But  I  shall  now  show  you 
a  king  from  the  very  bosom  of  Aristotle,  even 
Alexander,  who  in  the  midst  of  a  feast  with  his 
own  hand  stabbed  Clitus,  his  dearest  friend,  ^\"ith 
whom  he  had  gro\\'n  up,  because  he  ^\^thheld  his 
flattery  and  was  reluctant  to  transform  himself  from 
a  Macedonian  and  a  free  man  into  a  Persian  slave. 
Lysimachus,  likewise  a  familiar  friend,  he  threw  to  a 
lion.  Though  Lysimachus  escaped  by  some  good 
luck  from  the  lion's  teeth,  was  he  therefore,  in  view 
of  this  experience,  a  whit  more  kind  when  he  himself 
became  king  ?  Not  so,  for  Telesphorus  the  Rhodian, 
his  own  friend,  he  completely  mutilated,  and  when 
he  had  cut  off  his  ears  and  nose,  he  shut  him  up  in  a 
cage  as  if  he  were  some  strange  and  unknown  animal 
and  for  a  long  time  Hved  in  terror  of  him,  since  the 
hideousness  of  his  hacked  and  mutilated  face  had 
destroyed  every  appearance  of  a  human  being  ;  to 
this  were  added  starvation  and  squalor  and  the  filth 
of  a  body  left  to  wallow  in  its  ovvti  dung  ;  further 
more,  his  hands  and  knees  becoming  all  calloused — 

299 


.  i  SENECA 

haec'genibus  manibusque,  quas  in  usum  pedum 
angustiae  loci  cogebant,  lateribus  vero  adtritu  ex- 
ulceratis  non  minus  foeda  quam  terribilis  erat  forma 
eius  visentibus,  factusque  poena  sua  monstrum 
misericordiam  quoque  amiserat.  Tamen,  cum  dis- 
simillimus  esset  homini  qui  illi  patiebatur,  dis- 
similior  erat  qui  faciebat. 

1  18.  Utinam  ista  saevitia  intra  peregrina  exempla 
mansisset  nee  in  Romanos  mores  cum  aliis  adven- 
ticiis  vitiis  etiam  suppliciorum  irarumque  barbaria 
transisset !  M.  Mario,  cui  vicatim  populus  statuas 
posuerat,  cui  ture  ac  vino  supplicabat,  L.  Sulla  prae- 
fringi  crura,  erui  oculos,  amputari  linguam,  manus 
iussit  et,  quasi  totiens  occideret  quotiens  vulnerabat, 

2paulatim  et  per  singulos  artus  laceravit.  Quis  erat 
huius  imperii  minister  ?  Quis  nisi  Catilina  iam  in 
omne  facinus  manus  exercens  ?  Is  ilium  ante 
bustum  Quinti  Catuli  carpebat  gravissimus  mitissimi 
viri  cineribus,  supra  quos  vir  mali  exempli,  popularis 
tamen  et  non  tam  immerito  quam  nimis  amatus  per 
stillicidia  sanguinem  dabat.  Dignus  erat  Marius 
qui  ilia  pateretur,  Sulla  qui  iuberet,  Catilina  qui 
faceret,  sed  indigna  res  publica  quae  in  corpus  suum 
pariter   et  hostium   et  vindicum   gladios   reciperet. 

3  Quid  antiqua  perscrutor  ?  Modo  C.  Caesar  Sex. 
300 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XVII.  4-xvin.  3 

for  by  the  narrowness  of  his  quarters  he  was  forced 
to  use  these  instead  of  feet — his  sides,  too,  a  mass  of 
sores  from  rubbing,  to  those  who  beheld  him  his 
appearance  was  no  less  disgusting  than  terrible,  and 
ha%ing  been  turned  by  his  punishment  into  a  monster 
he  had  forfeited  even  pity.  Yet,  while  he  who 
suffered  these  things  was  utterly  unlike  a  human 
being,  he  who  inflicted  them  was  still  less  like  one. 

Would  to  heaven  that  the  examples  of  such  cruelty 
had  been  confined  to  foreigners,  and  that  along  with 
other  vices  from  abroad  the  barbarity  of  torture  and 
such  venting  of  anger  had  not  been  imported  into  the 
practices  of  Romans  !  Marcus  Marius,  to  whom  the 
people  erected  statues  in  every  street,  whom  they 
worshipped  \Wth  offerings  of  frankincense  and  ^^'ine — 
this  man  by  the  command  of  Lucius  Sulla  had  his 
ankles  broken,  his  eyes  gouged  out,  his  tongue  and 
his  hands  cut  off,  and  little  by  little  and  limb  by  limb 
Sulla  tore  him  to  pieces,  just  as  if  he  could  make 
him  die  as  many  times  as  he  could  maim  him.  And 
who  was  it  who  executed  tliis  command  ?  Who  but 
Catiline,  abeady  training  his  hands  to  every  sort  of 
crime  ?  He  hacked  him  to  pieces  before  the  tomb 
of  Quintus  Catulus,  doing  violence  to  the  ashes  of 
that  gentlest  of  men,  above  which  a  hero — of  evil 
influence,  no  doubt,  yet  popular  and  loved  not  so 
much  undeservedly  as  to  excess — shed  his  blood 
3brop  by  drop.  It  was  meet  that  a  Marius  should 
mffer  these  things,  that  a  Sulla  should  give  the 
orders,  and  that  a  Catihne  should  execute  them,  but 

was  not  meet  that  the  state  should  receive  in  her 
breast  the  swords  of  her  enemies  and  her  protectors 
ilike.  But  why  do  I  search  out  ancient  crimes  ? 
Duly  recently  Gains  Caesar  slashed  with  the  scourge 

301 


SENECA 

Papinium,  cui  pater  erat  consularis,  Betilienum 
Bassum  quaestorem  suum,  procuratoris  sui  filium, 
aliosque  et  senatores  et  equites  Romanos  uno  die 
flagellis  cecidit,  torsit,  non  quaestionis  sed  animi 
4  causa ;  deinde  adeo  impatiens  fuit  difFerendae 
voluptatis,  quam  ingentem  crudelitas  eius  sine 
dilatione  poscebat,  ut  in  xysto  maternorum  hortorum, 
qui  porticum  a  ripa  separat,  inambulans  quosdam 
ex  illis  cum  matronis  atque  aliis  senatoribus  ad 
lucernam  decollaret.  Quid  instabat  ?  Quod  peri- 
culum  aut  privatum  aut  publicum  una  nox  minabatur  ? 
Quantulum  fuit  lucem  expectare  denique,  ne 
senatores  populi  Romani  soleatus  occideret  ! 

1  19.  Quam  superba  fuerit  crudelitas  eius  ad  rem 
pertinet  scire,  quamquam  aberrare  alicui  possimus 
videri  et  in  devium  exire  ;  sed  hoc  ipsum  pars 
erit  irae  super  solita  saevientis.  Ceciderat  flagellis 
senatores ;  ipse  efFecit,  ut  dici  posset  "  solet  fieri." 
Torserat  per  omnia,  quae  in  rerum  natura  tristissima 
sunt,    fidiculis,    talaribus,    eculeo,    igne,    vultu    suo. 

2  Et  hoc  loco  respondebitur  :  "  Magnam  rem  !  si  tres 
senatores  quasi  nequam  mancipia  inter  verbera  et 
flammas  di visit  homo,  qui  de  toto  senatu  trucidando 
cogitabat,  qui  optabat,  ut  populus  Romanus  unam 
cervicem  haberet,  ut  scelera  sua  tot  locis  ac  tem- 
poribus  diducta  in  unum  ictum  et  unum  diem 
cogeret."     Quid   tam   inauditum   quam   nocturnum 

«  Literally  "sandals,"  a  conventional  detail  of  Roman 
dinner-dress. 
302 


ON  ANGER,  III.  x\in.  3-xix.  2 

and  tortured  Sextus  Papinius,  whose  father  had  been 
consul,  and  Betihenus  Bassus,  his  own  quaestor  and 
the  son  of  his  procurator,  and  others,  both  Roman 
senators  and  knights,  all  in  one  day — and  not  to 
extract  information  but  for  amusement.  Then  so 
impatient  was  he  of  postponing  his  pleasure — a 
pleasure  so  great  that  his  cruelty  demanded  it  >\ith- 
out  delay — that  he  decapitated  some  of  his  victims 
by  lamplight,  as  he  was  strolling  \viih  some  ladies 
and  senators  on  the  terrace  of  his  mother's  gardens, 
which  runs  between  the  colonnade  and  the  bank  of 
the  river.  But  what  was  the  pressing  need  ?  What 
public  or  private  danger  was  threatened  by  a  single 
night's  delay  ?  How  small  a  matter  it  would  have 
been  if  he  had  waited  just  till  davvTi,  so  as  not  to 
kill  the  senators  of  the  Roman  people  in  his  pumps  <* ! 
It  is  relevant, too, to  note  the  insolence  of  his  cruelty, 
though  some  one  may  consider  that  we  are  straying 
from  the  subject  and  embarking  upon  a  digression  ; 
but  such  insolence  will  be  an  element  in  cruelty 
when  it  is  extravagant  in  its  fury.  He  had  scourged 
senators,  but  he  himself  made  it  possible  to  say,  "  An 
ordinary  event."  He  had  tortured  them  by  every 
unhappy  device  in  existence — by  the  cord,  by  knotted 
bones,  by  the  rack,  by  fire,  by  his  own  countenance. 
But  here  also  will  come  the  answer :  "  A  great 
matter,  truly !  Because  three  senators,  as  if  no 
better  than  worthless  slaves,  were  mangled  by  whip 
and  flame  at  the  behest  of  a  man  who  contemplated 
murdering  the  whole  senate,  a  man  who  used  to  wish 
that  the  Roman  people  had  only  one  neck  in  order 
that  he  might  concentrate  into  one  day  and  one 
stroke  all  his  crimes,  now  spread  over  so  many  places 
and  times."     What  was  ever  so  unheard  of  as  an 

303 


SENECA 

supplicium  ?      Cum    latrocinia     tenebris     abscond! 
soleant,    animadversiones,    quo   notiores    sunt,   plus 

3  in  exemplum  emendationemque  proficiant.  Et  hoc 
loco  respondebitur  mihi :  "  Quod  tanto  opere  ad- 
miraris,  isti  beluae  cotidianum  est ;  ad  hoc  vivit, 
ad  hoc  vigilat,  ad  hoc  lucubrat."  Nemo  certe 
invenietur  alius,  qui  imperaverit  omnibus  iis,  in  quos 
animadverti  iubebat,  os  inserta  spongea  includi,  ne 
vocis  emittendae  haberent  facultatem.  Cui  umquam 
morituro  non  est  relictum  qua  gemeret  ?  Timuit, 
ne  quam  liberiorem  vocem  extremus  dolor  mitteret, 
ne  quid  quod  noUet  audiret ;  sciebat  autem  in- 
numerabilia  esse,  quae  obicere  illi  nemo  nisi  periturus 

4  auderet.     Cum    spongeae   non   invenirentur,    scindi  j 
vestiraenta  miserorum   et  in  os  farciri  pannos  im- 
peravit.     Quae  ista  saevitia  est  ?     Liceat  ultimum 
spiritum  trahere,  da  exiturae  animae  locum,  liceat 

5  illam  non  per  vulnus  emittere  !  Adicere  his  longum 
est,  quod  patres  quoque  occisorum  eadem  nocte 
dimissis  per  domos  centurionibus  confecit,  id  est, 
homo  misericors  luctu  liberavit  !  Non  enim  Gai 
saevitiam,  sed  irae,  propositum  est  describere,  quae 
non  tantum  viritim  furit  sed  gentes  totas  lancinat, 
sed  urbes  et  flumina  et  tuta  ab  omni  sensu  doloris: 
converberat. 

1      20.  Sic  rex  Persarum  totius  populi  nares  recidit 

"  See  the  story  of  Cyrus  and  the  river  Gyndes,  De  Ira,  ill. 
21;   of  Xerxes'  rage  against  the  Hellespont,  Herodotus,  vii. 
35. 
304 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XIX.  2-xx.  l 

execution  by  night  ?  Though  robberies  are  generally 
curtained  by  darkness,  the  more  publicity'  punish- 
ments have,  the  more  may  they  avail  as  an  admonition 
and  warning.  But  here  also  I  shall  hear  the  answer  : 
"  That  which  surprises  you  so  much  is  the  daily  habit  of 
that  beast ;  for  this  he  lives,  for  this  he  loses  sleep,  for 
this  he  burns  the  midnight  oil."  But  surely  you  ^^^ll 
find  no  other  man  who  has  bidden  that  the  mouths  of 
all  those  who  were  to  be  executed  by  his  orders  should 
be  gagged  by  inserting  a  sponge,  in  order  that  they 
might  not  even  have  the  power  to  utter  a  cry.  WTiat 
doomed  man  was  ever  before  deprived  of  the  breath 
>vith  which  to  moan  ?  Caesar  feared  lest  the  man's 
last  agony  should  give  utterance  to  some  speech  too 
frank,  lest  he  might  hear  something  that  he  would 
rather  not.  He  was  well  aware,  too,  that  there  were 
countless  crimes,  ^vith  which  none  but  a  dpng  man 
would  dare  reproach  him.  If  no  sponges  were  to  be 
found,  he  ordered  the  garments  of  the  poor  \vretches 
to  be  torn  up,  and  their  mouths  to  be  stuffed  with 
the  strips.  \Miat  savagery  is  this  ?  Let  a  man 
draw  his  last  breath,  leave  a  passage  for  his  depart- 
ing soul,  let  it  have  some  other  course  of  exit  than 
a  wound  !  It  would  be  tedious  to  add  more — how  he 
sent  officers  to  the  homes  of  his  ^"ictims,  and  on  that 
same  night  made  away  with  their  fathers  too — that 
is,  out  of  human  pity  he  freed  the  fathers  from  their 
sorrow  !  And,  indeed,  tny  purpose  is  not  to  picture 
the  cruelty  of  Gaius,  but  the  erueltj^of  anger,  which 
not  only  vents  its  fury  on  a  man  here  and  there,  but 
rends  in  pieces  whole  nations,  which  lashes  cities  and 
rivers  **  and  lifeless  things  that  are  immune  to  all 
feeling  of  pain. 

Thus,  the  king  of  the  Persians  cut  off  the  noses  of 
VOL.  I  X  305 


SENECA 

in  Syria,  unde  Rhinocolura  loco  nomen  est.     Peper- 
cisse  ilium  iudicas,  quod  non  tota  capita  praecidit  ? 

2  Novo  genere  poenae  delectatus  est.  Tale  aliquid 
passi  forent  et  Aethiopes,  qui  ob  longissimum  vitae 
spatium  Macrobioe  appellantur  ;  in  hos  enim,  quia 
non  supinis  manibus  exceperant  servitutem  missisque 
legatis  libera  responsa  dederant,  quae  contumeliosa 
reges  vocant,  Cambyses  fremebat  et  non  provisis 
commeatibus,  non  exploratis  itineribus,  per  invia, 
per  arentia  trahebat  omnem  bello  utilem  turbam. 
Cui  intra  primum  iter  deerant  necessaria,  nee  quic- 
quam  subministrabat  sterilis  et  inculta  humanoque 

3  ignota  vestigio  regio.  Sustinebant  famem  primo 
tenerrima  frondium  et  cacumina  arborum,  turn  coria 
igne  mollita  et  quidquid  necessitas  cibum  fecerat ; 
postquam  inter  harenas  radices  quoque  et  herbae 
defecerant  apparuitque  inops  etiam  animalium 
solitudo,  decimum  quemque  sortiti  alimentum  ha- 

4  buerunt  fame  saevius.  Agebat  adhue  regem  ira 
praecipitem,  cum  partem  exercitus  amisisset,  partem 
comedisset,  donee  timuit,  ne  et  ipse  vocaretur  ad 
sortem.  Turn  demum  signum  receptui  dedit.  Serva- 
bantur  interim  generosae  illi  aves  et  instrumenta 
epularum  camelis  vehebantur,  cum  sortirentur 
milites  eius,  quis  male  periret,  quis  peius  viveret. 
306 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XX.  1-4 

a  whole  population  in  Syria,  whence  it  gets  its  name 
of  "  Land-of-the-stump-nosed."  Think  you  he  was 
merciful  because  he  did  not  cut  off  their  entire  heads  ? 
No,  he  got  some  pleasure  from  a  new  kind  of  punish- 
ment. And  the  Ethiopians,  who  on  account  of  the 
prodigiously  long  time  they  live  are  kno\vn  as  the 
"  Longevals,"  might  also  have  suffered  some  such  fate. 
For  Cambyses  became  enraged  against  them  because, 
instead  of  embracing  servitude  with  outstretched 
arms,  they  sent  envoys  and  made  reply  in  the  in- 
dependent words  which  kings  call  insults ;  where- 
fore, without  pro\dding  supphes,  Avithout  investigating 
the  roads,  through  a  trackless  and  desert  region  he 
hurried  against  them  his  whole  host  of  fighting  men. 
During  the  first  day's  march  his  food  supplies  began 
to  fail,  and  the  country  itself,  barren  and  uncultivated 
and  untrodden  by  the  foot  of  man,  furnished  them 
nothing.  At  first  the  tenderest  parts  of  leaves  and 
shoots  of  trees  satisfied  their  hunger,  then  skins 
softened  by  fire  and  whatever  necessity  forced  them 
to  use  as  food.  After,  amid  the  desert  sands,  even 
roots  and  herbage  failed  them,  and  they  viewed  a 
wilderness  destitute  also  of  animal  life,  choosing 
very  tenth  man  by  lot,  they  secured  the  nutriment 
hat  was  more  cruel  than  hunger.  And  still  the 
was  driven  headlong  onwards  by  his  anger, 
til  having  lost  one  part  of  his  army  and  having 
.evoured  another  part,  he  began  to  fear  that  he  too 
ght  be  summoned  to  the  choice  by  lot.  Only  then 
id  he  give  the  signal  for  retreat.  And  all  the  while 
owls  of  choice  breed  were  being  kept  for  him,  and 
;amels  carried  supplies  for  his  feasts,  while  his 
oldiers  drew^lots  to  discover  who  should  miserably 
>erish,  who  should  more  miserably^ve^^ 

307 


SENECA 

1  21.  Hie  iratus  fuit  genti  et  ignotae  et  immeritae, 
sensurae  tamen  ;  Cyrus  flumini.  Nam  cum  Baby- 
lona  oppugnaturus  festinaret  ad  bellum,  cuius 
maxima  momenta  in  occasionibus  sunt,  Gynden  late 
fusum  amnem  vado  transire  temptavit,  quod  vix 
tutum  est,  etiam  cum  sensit  aestatem  et  ad  minimum 

2  deductus  est.  Ibi  unus  ex  iis  equis,  qui  trahere 
regium  currum  albi  solebant,  abreptus  vehementer 
commovit  regem  ;  iuravit  itaque  se  amnem  ilium 
regis    comitatus     auferentem    eo    redacturum,     ut^ 

3  transiri  calcarique  etiam  a  feminis  posset.  Hoc 
deinde  omnem  transtulit  belli  apparatum  et  tarn 
diu  adsedit  operi,  donee  centum  et  octoginta  cuni- 
culis  divisum  alveum  in  trecentos  et  sexaginta  rivos 
dispergeret,  siccum  relinqueret  in  diversum  fluentibus 

4  aquis.  Periit  itaque  et  tempus,  magna  in  magnis 
rebus  iactura,  et  militum  ardor,  quem  inutilis  labor 
fregit,    et  occasio   adgrediendi   imparatos,  dum   ille 

6  bellum  indictum  hosti  cum  flumine  gerit.  Hie  furor 
— quid  enim  aliud  voces  ? — Romanos  quoque  con- 
tigit.  C.  enim  Caesar  villam  in  Herculanensi  pul- 
cherrimam,  quia  mater  sua  aliquando  in  ilia  custodita 
erat,  diruit  fecitque  eius  per  hoc  notabilem  for- 
tunam  ;  stantem  enim  praenavigabamus,  nunc 
causa  dirutae  quaeritur. 
308 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXI.  1-5 

This  man  raged  against  a  people  unknown  and 
inoffensive,  yet  able  to  feel  his  anger  :  Cyrus,  how- 
ever, raged  against  a  river.  For  when,  with  the 
purpose  of  taking  Babylon,  he  was  hastening  to  war 
— in  which  the  favourable  opportunity  is  of  the 
utmost  importance — he  attempted  to  ford  the  river 
Gyndes,  then  in  full  flood,  though  such  an  under- 
taking is  scarcely  safe  even  after  the  river  has  felt 
the  heat  of  siunmer  and  is  reduced  to  its  smallest 
volume.  There,  when  one  of  the  white  horses 
which  regularly  drew  the  royal  chariot  was  swept 
away,  the  king  became  mightily  stirred.  And  so 
he  swore  that  he  would  reduce  that  river,  which  was 
carrying  away  the  retinue  of  the  king,  to  such  pro- 
portions that  even  women  could  cross  it  and  trample 
it  under  foot.  To  this  task,  then,  he  transferred  all 
his  preparations  for  war,  and  ha\ang  lingered  thereat 
long  enough  to  cut  one  hundred  and  eighty  run- 
ways across  the  channel  of  the  river,  he  distributed  its 
water  into  three  hundred  and  sixty  runnels,  which 
flowing  in  different  directions  left  the  channel  dr^'. 
And  so  he  sacrificed  time,  a  serious  loss  in  important 
operations,  the  enthusiasm  of  his  soldiers,  which 
was  crushed  by  the  useless  toil,  and  the  opportunity 
of  attacking  the  enemy  unprepared,  while  he  waged 
against  a  river  the  war  he  had  declared  against 
a  foe.  Such  madness — for  what  else  can  you  call 
it  ? — has  befallen  Romans  also.  For  Gaius  Caesar 
destroyed  a  very  beautiful  villa  near  Herculaneum 
because  his  mother  had  once  been  imprisoned  in  it, 
and  by  his  very  act  gave  publicity  to  her  mis- 
fortune ;  for  while  the  villa  stood,  we  used  to  sail 
by  unconcerned,  but  now  people  ask  why  it  was 
destroyed. 

309 


SENECA 

1  22.  Et  haec  cogitanda  sunt  exempla,  quae  vites, 
et  ilia  ex  contrario,  quae  sequaris,  moderata,  lenia, 
quibus  nee  ad  irascendum  causa  defuit  nee  ad  ulci- 

2  scendum  potestas.  Quid  enim  facilius  fuit  Antigono 
quam  duos  manipulares  duci  iubere,  qui  incumbentes 
regis  tabernaculo  faciebant,  quod  homines  et  perieu- 
losissime  et  libentissime  faciunt,  de  rege  suo  male 
existimabant  ?  Audierat  omnia  Antigonus,  utpote 
cum  inter  dicentes  et  audientem  palla  interesset ; 
quam  ille  leviter  commovit  et :    "  Longius,"  inquit, 

3  "  discedite,  ne  vos  rex  audiat."  Idem  quadam  nocte, 
cum  quosdam  ex  militibus  suis  exaudisset  omnia 
mala  imprecantis  regi,  qui  ipsos  in  illud  iter  et  in- 
extricabile  lutum  deduxisset,  accessit  ad  eos,  qui 
maxime  laborabant,  et  cum  ignorantis  a  quo  adiu- 
varentur  explicuisset  :  "  Nunc,"  inquit,  "  male  dicite 
Antigono,  cuius  vitio  in  has  miserias  incidistis  ;  ei 
autem  bene  optate,  qui  vos  ex  hac  voragine  eduxit." 

4  Idem  tarn  miti  animo  hostium  suorum  male  dicta 
quam  civium  tulit.  Itaque  cum  in  parvulo  quodam 
castello  Graeci  obsiderentur  et  fiducia  loci  con- 
temnentes  hostem  multa  in  deformitatem  Antigoni 
iocarentur  et  nunc  staturam  humilem,  nunc  collisum 
nasum  deriderent :    "  Gaudeo,"  inquit,  "  et  aliquid 

5  boni  spero,  si  in  castris  meis  Silenum  habeo."  Cum 
hos  dicaces  fame  domuisset,  captis  sic  usus  est,  ut 
eos  qui  militiae  utiles  erant  in  cohortes  discriberet, 
ceteros  praeconi  subiceret,  idque  se  negavit  facturum 

310 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXII.  1-5 

These  should  be  regarded  as  examples  to  be 
avoided  ;  the  following,  on  the  other  hand,  are  to 
be  imitated,  being  instances  of  restrained  and  gentle 
men,  who  lacked  neither  the  provocation  to  anger 
nor  the  power  of  requital.  What  indeed  would  have 
been  easier  than  for  Antigonus  to  order  the  execution 
of  the  two  common  soldiers,  who,  while  they  leaned 
against  the  royal  tent,  expressed — as  men  will  do 
with  equally  great  danger  and  delight — their  ill 
opinion  of  their  king  ?  Antigonus  heard  ever\'thing, 
only  a  canvas  intervening  between  the  speakers  and 
the  listener  ;  this  he  gently  shook  and  said,  "  Move 
a  little  farther  off,  for  the  king  might  hear  you." 
Again,  one  night,  when  he  overheard  some  of  his 
soldiers  invoking  all  kinds  of  curses  upon  the  king 
for  having  led  them  into  such  a  road  and  inextricable 
mud,  he  went  up  to  those  w^ho  were  struggling  most, 
and  when  he  had  got  them  out,  without  reveal- 
ing who  their  helper  was,  he  said,  "  Now  curse 
Antigonus,  by  whose  fault  you  have  fallen  upon  this 
mishap,  but  bless  him  who  has  led  you  out  of  this 
swamp."  He  also  bore  the  abuse  of  his  enemies 
as  calmly  as  that  of  his  countrymen.  And  so,  when 
he  was  besieging  some  Greeks  in  a  small  fort,  and 
they,  confident  in  their  position,  showed  open 
contempt  for  the  enemy,  and  cracking  many  jokes 
upon  the  ugliness  of  Antigonus  scoffed  now  at  his 
diminutive  stature,  now  at  his  flattened  nose,  he 
merely  said,  "  If  I  have  a  Silenus  in  my  camp,  I  am 
fortunate  and  hope  for  good  luck."  When  he  had 
subdued  these  wags  by  hunger,  he  disposed  of  his 
captives  as  follows  :  those  who  were  fit  for  military 
ser\-ice  he  assigned  to  regiments  ;  the  rest  he  put 
up  at  auction,  saying  that  he  would  not  have  done 

311 


SENECA 

fuisse,  nisi  expediret  iis  dominum  habere,  qui  tam 
malam  haberent  linguam. 

1  23.  Huius  nepos  fuit  Alexander,  qui  lanceam  in 
convivas  suos  torquebat,  qui  ex  duobus  amicis,  quos 
paulo  ante  rettuli,  alterum  ferae  obiecit,  alterum 
sibi.     Ex  his  duobus  tamen  qui  leoni  obiectus  est 

2  vixit.  Non  habuit  hoc  avitum  ille  vitium,  ne  pater- 
num  quidem  ;  nam  si  qua  aha  in  Phihppo  virtus,  fuit 
et  contumeliarum  patientia,  ingens  instrumentum 
ad  tutelam  regni.  Demoehares  ad  ilium  Parrhesi- 
astes  ob  nimiam  et  procacem  linguam  appellatus 
inter  alios  Atheniensium  legatos  venerat.  Audita 
benigne  legatione  Philippus :  "  Dicite,"  inquit, 
"  niihi,  facere  quid  possim,  quod  sit  Atheniensibus 
gratum."     Excepit  Demoehares  et :    "  Te,"  inquit, 

3  "  suspender e."     Indignatio  circumstantium  ad  tam 
^  inhumanum  responsum  exorta  erat  ;   quos  Philippus 

conticiscere  iussit  et  Thersitam  ilium  salvum  in- 
columemque  dimittere.  "  At  vos,"  inquit,  "  ceteri 
legati,  nuntiate  Atheniensibus  multo  superbiores 
esse,  qui  ista  dicunt,  quam  qui  impune  dicta  audiunt." 

4  Multa  et  divus  Augustus  digna  memoria  fecit 
dixitque,  ex  quibus  appareat  iram  illi  non  imperasse. 
Timagenes  historiarum  scriptor  quaedam  in  ipsum, 
quaedam  in  uxorem  eius  et  in  totam  domum  dixerat 
nee  perdiderat  dicta  ;    magis  enim  circumfertur  et 

5  in  ore  hominum  est  temeraria  urbanitas.  Saepe 
ilium  Caesar  monuit,  moderatius  lingua  uteretur  ; 


"  A  mistake.     Alexander  was  the  grandson  of  Amyntas  ; 
Antigonus  (Movi^^aX/ios)  was  one  of  Alexander's  generals. 

'  i.e.,  "the  Outspoken  "  (Uapprja-LaffTTjs). 

"  A  Greek  in  the  camp  before  Troy,  noted  for  his  bold 
and  impudent  tongue. 
312 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXII.  5-.xxiii.  5 

so  had  it  not  seemed  good  for  men  who  had  such  an 
e\il  tongue  to  find  a  master. 

The  grandson  of  this  man  was  Alexander,"  who 
used  to  hurl  his  spear  at  his  dinner-guests,  who,  of  the 
two  friends  mentioned  above,  exposed  one  to  the 
fury  of  a  wild  beast,  the  other  to  his  own.  Of  these 
two,  however,  the  one  who  was  thro%^"n  to  a  Hon  hved, 
Alexander  did  not  get  this  weakness  from  his  grand- 
father, nor  from  his  father  either  ;  for  if  PhiUp 
possessed  any  \'irtues  at  all,  among  them  was  the 
abiUty  to  endure  insults — a  great  help  in  the  main- 
tenance of  a  throne.  Demochares,  sumamed  Par- 
rhesiastes^  on  account  of  his  bold  and  impudent 
tongue,  came  to  him  once  in  company  with  other 
envoys  from  the  Athenians.  Having  granted  the 
delegation  a  friendly  hearing,  Pliihp  said,  "  Tell 
me  what  I  can  do  that  ^\i\\  please  the  Athenians." 
Demochares  took  him  at  his  word  and  replied, 
"  Hang  yovu-self."  All  the  bystanders  flared  up  in 
indignation  at  such  brutal  words,  but  Philip  bade 
them  keep  quiet  and  let  that  Thersites*^  \sithdraw 
safe  and  unharmed.  "  But  you,"  he  said,  "  you 
other  envoys,  go  tell  the  Athenians  that  those  who 
speak  such  words  show  far  more  arrogance  than 
those  who  listen  to  them  \\ithout  retaliation." 

The  deified  Augustus  also  did  and  said  many 
things  that  are  memorable,  which  prove  that  he 
was  not  ruled  by  anger.  Timagenes,  a  writer  of 
history,  made  some  unfriendly  remarks  about  the 
emperor  himself,  his  wife,  and  all  his  family,  and 
they  had  not  been  lost ;  for  reckless  wit  gets  bandied 
about  more  freely  and  is  on  everybody's  bps.  Often 
did  Caesar  warn  him  that  he  must  have  a  more 
prudent   tongue  ;    when   he   persisted,   he   forbade 

313 


SENECA 

perseveranti  domo  sua  interdixit.  Postea  Timagenes 
in  contubernio  Pollionis  Asinii  consenuit  ac  tota 
civitate  direptus   est.     Nullum  illi  limen  praeclusa 

6  Caesaris  domus  abstulit.  Historias,  quas  postea 
scripserat,  recitavit  et  libros  acta  Caesaris  Augusti 
continentis  in  igne  posuit  et  combussit  ;  inimicitias 
gessit  cum  Caesare  ;  nemo  amicitiam  eius  extimuit, 
nemo  quasi  fulguritum  refugit,  fuit  qui  praeberet 

7  tam  alte  cadenti  sinum.  Tulit  hoc,  ut  dixi,  Caesar 
patienter,  ne  eo  quidem  motus,  quod  laudibus  suis 
rebusque   gestis   manus   attulerat  ;    numquam   cum 

8  hospite  inimici  sui  questus  est.  Hoc  dumtaxat 
Pollioni  Asinio  dixit  :  drjpLOTpoffteis  ;  paranti  deinde 
excusationem  obstitit  et  "  Fruere,"  inquit,  "  mi 
Pollio,  fruere  !  "  et  cum  PoUio  diceret :  "  Si  iubes, 
Caesar,  statim  illi  domo  mea  interdicam,"  "  Hoc 
me,"  inquit,  "  putas  facturum,  cum  ego  vos  in 
gratiam  reduxerim  ?  "  Fuerat  enim  aliquando  Tima- 
geni  Pollio  iratus  nee  ullam  aliam  habuerat  causam 
desinendi,  quam  quod  Caesar  coeperat. 

1  24.  Dicat  itaque  sibi  quisque,  quotiens  lacessitur  : 
"  Numquid  potentior  sum  Philippo  ?  Illi  tamen 
impune  male  dictum  est.  Numquid  in  domo  mea 
plus  possum  quam  toto  orbe  terrarum  divus  Augustus 
potuit  ?     Ille   tamen   contentus   fuit  a  conviciatore 

2  suo  secedere."  Quid  est  quare  ego  servi  mei  clarius 
responsum    et   contumaciorem  voltum    et   non  per- 


"  There  is  greater  wit  in  the  Greek,  which  permits  also 

the  interpretation  "  You  keep    a   menagerie  " — a  common 
amusement  of  rich  men. 
314 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xxiii.  5-xxiv.  2 

him  the  palace.  After  this,  Timagenes  Hved  to  old 
age  in  the  house  of  Asinius  Pollio,  and  was  honized 
by  the  whole  city.  Though  Caesar  had  excluded 
lum  from  the  palace,  he  was  debarred  from  no 
other  door.  He  gave  readings  of  the  history'  which 
he  had  written  after  the  incident,  and  the  books 
which  contained  the  doings  of  Augustus  Caesar  he 
put  in  the  fire  and  burned.  He  maintained  hostility 
against  Caesar,  yet  no  one  feared  to  be  his  friend, 
no  one  shrank  from  him  as  a  blasted  man  ;  though 
he  fell  from  such  a  height,  he  found  some  one  ready 
to  take  him  to  his  bosom.  As  I  have  said,  Caesar 
bore  all  of  this  patiently,  not  even  moved  by  the 
fact  that  his  renown  and  his  achievements  had  been 
assailed  ;  he  made  no  complaint  against  the  host 
of  his  enemy.  To  Asinius  PolUo  he  merely  said, 
"  You're  keeping  a  wld  beast."  "  Then,  when  the 
other  was  trj-ing  to  offer  some  excuse,  he  stopped 
liim  and  said,  "  Enjoy  yourself,  my  dear  Polho,  enjoy 
yourself !  "  and  when  Pollio  declared,  "  If  you  bid 
me,  Caesar,  I  shall  forth>\'ith  deny  him  the  house," 
he  replied,  "  Do  you  think  that  I  would  do  this, 
when  it  was  I  who  restored  the  friendship  between 
you  ?  "  For  the  fact  is,  Polho  had  once  had  a 
quarrel  ^^ith  Timagenes,  and  his  only  reason  for 
ending  it  was  that  Caesar  had  now  begun  one. 

Whenever  a  man  is  provoked,  therefore,  let  him 
say  to  himself,  "  Am  I  more  mighty  than  PhiUp  ? 
Yet  he  was  cursed  and  did  not  retaliate.  Have  I 
more  authority  over  my  house  than  the  deified 
Augustus  had  over  all  the  world  ?  Yet  he  was 
content  merely  to  keep  away  from  his  maligner." 
What  right  have  I  to  make  my  slave  atone  by  stripes 
and  manacles  for  too  loud  a  reply,  too  rebelhous  a 

315 


SENECA 

venientem  usque  ad  me  murmurationem  flagellis 
et  compedibus  expiem  ?  Quis  sum,  cuius  aures 
laedi  nefas  sit  ?  Ignoverunt  multi  hostibus  ;  ego 
non     ignoscam     pigris,     neglegentibus,     garrulis  ? 

3  Puerum  aetas  excuset,  feminam  sexus,  extraneum 
libertas,  domesticum  familiaritas.  Nunc  primum 
offendit,  cogitemus  quam  diu  placuerit ;  saepe  et 
alias  offendit,  feramus  quod  diu  tulimus.  Amicus 
est,  fecit  quod  noluit  ;    inimicus,  fecit  quod  debuit. 

4  Prudentiori  credamus,  stultiori  remittamus.  Pro 
quocumque  illud  nobis  respondeamus,  sapientis- 
simos  quoque  viros  multa  delinquere,  neminem  esse 
tam  circumspectum,  cuius  non  diligentia  aliquando 
sibi  ipsa  excidat,  neminem  tam  maturum,  cuius  non 
gravitatem  in  aliquod  fervidius  factum  casus  impingat, 
neminem  tam  timidum  offensarum,  qui  non  in  illas, 
dum  vitat,  incidat. 

1  25.  Quomodo  homini  pusillo  solacium  in  malis 
fuit  etiam  magnorum  virorum  titubare  fortunam, 
et  aequiore  animo  filium  in  angulo  flevit,  qui  vidit 
acerba  funera  etiam  ex  regia  duci,  sic  animo  aequiore 
fert  ab  aliquo  laedi,  ab  aliquo  contemni,  cuicumque 
venit  in  mentem  nullam   esse   tantam  potentiam, 

2  in  quam  non  occurrat  iniuria.  Quod  si  etiam  pru- 
dentissimi  peccant,  cuius  non  error  bonam  causam 
habet  ?  Respiciamus  quotiens  adulescentia  nostra 
in  officio  parum  diligens  fuerit,  in  sermone  parum 
modesta,  in  vino  parum  temperans.  Si  iratus  est, 
demus  illi  spatium,  quo  dispicere  quid  fecerit  possit ; 

316 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXIV.  2-xxv.  2 

look,  a  muttering  of  something  that  I  do  not  quite 
hear  ?  \\Tio  am  I  that  it  should  be  a  crime  to 
offend  my  ears  ?  Many  have  pardoned  their  enemies  ; 
shall  I  not  pardon  the  lazy,  the  careless,  and  the 
babbler  ?  Let  -a.-_^hild  be  excused  by  his  age,  a 
woman  by  her  sex,  a  stranger  by  his  independence, 
a  servant  by  the  bond  of  intercourse.  Does  some  one 
offend  for  the  first  time  ?  Let  us  reflect  how  long 
he  has  pleased  us.  At  other  times  and  often  has 
he  given  offence  ?  Let  us  bear  longer  what  we  have 
long  borne.  Is  he  a  friend  ?  He  has  done  what 
he  did  not  mean  to  do.  Is  he  an  enemy  ?  He  did 
what  he  had  a  right  to  do.  One  that  is  sensible 
let  us  believe,  one  that  is  foolish  let  us  forgive,  \yho- 
everit  may  be,  let  us  say  to  ourselves  on  his  behalf 
that  even  the  wisest  men  have  many  faults,  that  no 
man  is  so  guarded  that  he  does  not  sometimes  let  his 
dihgence  lapse,  none  so  seasoned  that  accident  does 
not  drive  his  composure  into  some  hot-headed  action, 
none  so  fearful  of  giving  offence  that  he  does  not 
stumble  into  it  while  seeking  to  avoid  it. 

As  to  the  humble  man,  it  brings  comfort  in  trouble 
that  great  men's  fortune  also  totters,  and  as  he 
who  weeps  for  his  son  in  a  hovel  is  more  content  if 
he  has  seen  the  piteous  procession  move  from  the 
palace  also,  so  a  man  is  more  content  to  be  injured 
by  one,  to  be  scorned  by  another,  if  he  takes  thought 
that  no  power  is  so  great  as  to  be  beyond  the  reach 
of  harm.  But  if  even  the  wisest  do  wTong,  whose 
siri"^ll  not  have  good  excuse  ?  Let  us  look  back 
upon  our  youth  and  recall  how  often  we  were  too 
careless  about  duty,  too  indiscreet  in  speech,  too 
intemperate  in  wine.  If  a  man  gets  angry,  let  us 
give  him  enough  time  to  discover  what  he  has  done  ; 

317 


SENECA 

ipse  se  castigabit.     Denique  debeat  poenas  ;    non 

3  est  quod  cum  illo  paria  faciamus.  Illud  non  veniet 
in  dubium,  quin  se  exemerit  turbae  et  altius  steterit 
quisquis  despexit  lacessentis.  Proprium  est  magni- 
tudinis  verae  non  sentire  percussum.  Sic  immanis 
fera  ad  latratum  canum  lenta  respexit,  sic  irritus 
ingenti  scopulo  fluctus  adsultat.  Qui  non  irascitur, 
inconcussus    iniuria    perstitit,    qui    irascitur,    motus 

4  est.  At  ille,  queni  modo  altiorem  omni  incommodo  1 
posui,  tenet  amplexu  quodam  summurn  bonum,  nee 
ho  mini  tantum,  sed  ipsi  fortunae  respondet :  "  Omnia 
licet  facias,  minor  es,  quam  ut  serenitatem  meam 
obducas.  Vetat  hoc  ratio,  cui  vitam  regendam  dedi. 
Plus  mihi  nocitura  est  ira  quam  iniuria.  Quidni 
plus  ?  Illius  modus  certus  est,  ista  quo  usque  me 
latura  sit  dubium  est." 

1  26.  "  Non  possum,"  inquis,  "  pati ;  grave  est  in- 
iuriam  sustinere."  Mentiris  ;  quis  enim  iniuriam 
non  potest  ferre,  qui  potest  iram  ?  Adice  nunc  quod 
id  agis,  ut  et  iram  feras  et  iniuriam.  Quare  fers  aegri 
rabiem  et  phrenetici  verba,  puerorum  protervas 
manus  ?  Nempe  quia  videntur  nescire  quid  faciant. 
Quid   interest,   quo   quisque  vitio    fiat  imprudens  ? 

2  Imprudentia  par  in  omnibus  patrocinium  est.    "  Quid    ■ 
ergo  ?  "  inquis,  "  impune  illi  erit  ?  "     Puta  velle  te, 
318 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXV.  2-xxvi.  2 

he,  will  chastise  himself.  Suppose  in  the  end  he 
deserves  punishment ;  then  there  is  no  reason  why 
we  should  match  his  misdeeds.  There  will  be  no 
doubt  about  this — that  whoever  scorns  his  tormentors 
removes  himself  from  the  common  herd  and  towers 
above  them.  The  mark  of  true  greatness  is  not  to 
notice  that  you  have  received  a  blow.  So  does  the 
huge  wild  beast  calmly  turn  and  gaze  at  barking 
dogs,  so  does  the  wave  dash  in  vain  against  a  mighty 
cliff.  The  man  who  does  not  get  angrj'  stands 
firm,  unshaken  by  injur}-  ;  he  who  gets  angrj-  is  over- 
thrown. But  he  whom  I  have  just  set  above  the 
reach  of  all  harm  holds,  as  it  were,  in  his  arms  the 
highest  good,  and  not  only  to  a  man,  but  to  Fortune 
herself,  he  will  say :  "  Do  what  you  \vill,  you  are  too 
puny  to  disturb  my  serenit}'.  Reason,  to  whom  I 
have  committed  the  guidance  of  my  life,  forbids  it.  . 
My  anger  is  Ukely  to  do  me  more  harm  than  youi-l — 
■wTong.  And  why  not  more  ?  The  hmit  of  the 
injury  is  fixed,  but  how  far  the  anger  \\-ill  sweep  me 
no  man  knows." 

"  I  cannot,"  you  say,  "  be  forbearing ;  it  is 
difficult  to  submit  to  a  vrrong."  That  is  not  true  ; 
for  who  that  can  tolerate  anger  will  yet  be  unable 
to  tolerate  ^\Tong  ?  Besides,  what  you  now  propose 
is  to  tolerate  both  anger  and  ^^Tong.  Why  do  you 
tolerate  the  delirium  of  a  sick  man,  the  ra\'ings  of  a 
lunatic,  or  the  wanton  blows  of  children  ?  Because, 
of  course,  they  seem  not  to  know  what  they  are  doing. 
What  difference  does  it  make  what  weakness  it  is 
that  makes  a  person  irresponsible  ?  The  plea  of 
irresponsibility  holds  equally  good  for  all.  "  ^^^lat 
then  ?  "  you  say  ;  "  shall  the  man  go  unpunished  ?  " 
Grant  that  you  wish  it  so,  nevertheless  it  will  not  be 

319 


SENECA 

tamen  non  erit ;    maxima  est  enim  factae  iniuriae 
poena  fecisse,  nee  quisquam  gravius  adficitur  quam 

3  qui  ad  supplicium  paenitentiae  traditur.  Deinde 
ad  condicionem  rerum  humanarum  respiciendum 
est,  ut  omnium  accidentium  aequi  indices  simus  : 
iniquus  autem  est,  qui  commune  vitium  singulis 
obiecit.  Non  est  Aethiopis  inter  suos  insignitus 
color,  nee  rufus  crinis  et  coactus  in  nodum  apud 
Germanos  virum  dedecet.  Nihil  in  uno  iudicabis 
notabile  aut  foedum,  quod  genti  suae  publicum  est  ; 
et  ista,  quae  rettuli,  unius  regionis  atque  anguli 
consuetude  defendit.  Vide  nunc,  quanto  in  iis 
iustior  venia  sit,  quae  per  totum  genus  humanum 

4  vulgata  sunt.  Omnes  inconsulti  et  improvidi  sumus, 
omnes  incerti,  queruli,  ambitiosi, — quid  lenioribus 
verbis  ulcus  publicum  abscondo  ? — omnes  mail 
sumus.  Quidquid  itaque  in  alio  reprenditur,  id 
unusquisque  in  sinu  suo  inveniet.  Quid  illius 
pallorem,  illius  maciem  notas  ?  Pestilentia  est. 
Placidiores  itaque  invicem  simus  ;  mali  inter  male- 
vivimus.     Una  nos  res  facere  quietos  potest,  mutuaj 

5  facilitatis  conventio,  "  lUe  lam  mihi  nocuit,  ego 
illi  nondum."  Sed  iam  aliquem  fortasse  laesisti, 
sed  laedes.  Noli  aestumare  banc  horam  aut  hunc 
diem,  totum  inspice  mentis  tuae  habitum  ;  etiam  si 
nihil  mali  fecisti,  potes  facere. 

1      27.  Quanto     satius     est    sanare    iniuriam    quam   ' 
320 


I 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXVI.  2-xxvii.  l 

so,;  for  the  greatest  punishment  of  wTong-doing  is  -<^ 
the  ha\-ing  done  it,  and  no  man  is  more  heavily 
punished  than  he  who  is  consigned  to  the  torture  of 
remorse.  Again,  we  must  consider  the  hmitations 
of~6uT  human  lot  if  we  are  to  be  just  judges  of  all 
that  happens  ;  he,  however,  is  unjust  who  blames 
the  individual  for  a  fault  that  is  universal.  Amongst 
his  own  people  the  colour  of  the  Ethiopian  is  not 
notable,  and  amongst  the  Germans  red  hair  gathered 
into  a  knot  is  not  unseemly  for  a  man.  You  are  to 
count  nothing  odd  or  disgraceful  for  an  individual 
which  is  a  general  characteristic  of  his  nation  ;  even 
those  examples  that  I  have  cited  can  plead  in  defence 
the  practice  of  some  one  section  and  corner  of  the 
world.  Consider  now  how  much  more  justly  excuse 
may  be  made  for  those  qualities  that  are  common  to 
the  whole  human  race.  We  are  all  inconsiderate  and 
unthinking,  we  are  all  untrustworthy,  discontented, 
ambitious — why  should  I  hide  the  universal  sore  by 
softer  words  ? — we  are  all  wicked.  And  so  each 
man  will  find  in  his  own  breast  the  fault  which  he 
censures  in  another.  Wliy  do  you  notice  the  pallor 
of  A,  the  gauntness  of  B  ?  These  quahties  are 
epidemic  !  And  so  let  us  be  more  kindly  toward  _i 
one  another ;  we  being  wicked  hve  among  then^ 
wicked.  Only  one  thing  can  bring  us  peace — the 
compact  of  mutual  indulgence.  You  say,  perhaps, 
"  That  man  has  already  injured  me,  but  I  have  not 
yet  injured  him."  But  perhaps  you  have  already 
harmed,  perhaps  you  will  some  day  harm,  some  man. 
Do  not  count  only  this  hour  or  this  day  ;  consider 
the  whole  character  of  your  mind — even  if  you  have 
done  no  wrong,  you  are  capable  of  doing  it. 

How  much  better  it  is  to  heal  than  to  avenge  an  -f- 
voL.  I  V  321 


SENECA 

ulcisci !  Multum  temporis  ultio  absumit,  multis 
se  iniuriis  obicit,  dum  una  dolet  ;  diutius  irascimur 
omnes  quam  laedimur.  Quanto  melius  est  abire 
in  diversum  nee  vitia  vitiis  opponere  !  Numquis 
satis  constare  sibi  videatur,  si  mulam  calcibus  repetat 

2  et  canem  morsu  ?  "  Ista,"  inquis,  "  peccare  se 
nesciunt."  Primum  quam  iniquus  est,  apud  quem 
hominem  esse  ad  impetrandam  veniam  nocet  ! 
Deinde,  si  cetera  animalia  hoe  irae  tuae  subducit, 
quod  consilio  carent,  eodem  loco  tibi  sit  quisquis 
consilio  caret  ;  quid  enim  refert  an  alia  mutis  dis- 
similia  habeat,  si  hoc,  quod  in  omni  peccato  muta 

3  defendit,  simile  habet,  caliginem  mentis  ?  Peccavit ; 
hoc  enim  primum  ?  Hoc  enim  extremum  ?  Non 
est  quod  illi  credas,  etiam  si  dixerit :  "  Iterum  non 
faciam."  Et  iste  peccabit  et  in  istum  ahus  et  tota 
vita  inter   errores    volutabitur.     Mansuete    imman- 

4  sueta  tractanda  sunt.  Quod  in  luctu  dici  solet 
efficacissime,  et  in  ira  dicetur  :  utrum  aliquando 
desines  an  numquam  ?  Si  aliquando,  quanto  satius 
est  iram  relinquere  quam  ab  ira  relinqui !  An 
semper  haec  concitatio  permanebit  ?  Vides  quam 
impacatam  tibi  denunties  vitam  ?     Quahs  enim  erit 

6  semper  tumentis  ?  Adice  nunc  quod,  cum  bene  te 
ipse  succenderis  et  subinde  causas,  quibus  stimuleris, 
322 


I 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xxvii.  1-5 

injury  !  Vengeance  consumes  much  time,  and  it  -i- 
exposes  the  doer  to  many  injuries  while  he  smarts  i 
from  one  ;  our  anger  always  lasts  longer  than  the 
hurt.  How  much  better  it  is  to  take  the  opposite 
course  and  not  to  match  fault  with  fault.  Would 
any  one  think  that  he  was  well  balanced  if  he  repaid 
a  mule  with  kicks  and  a  dog  with  biting  ?  But  you 
say,  "  Those  creatures  do  not  know  that  they  are 
doing  wrong."  In  the  first  place,  how  unjust  is  he 
in  whose  eyes  being  a  man  is  fatal  to  obtaining 
pardon  !  In  the  second  place,  if  other  creatures 
escape  your  anger  for  the  verj'  reason  that  they 
are  lacking  in  understanding,  every  man  who  lacks 
understanding  should  hold  in  your  eyes  a  like 
position.  For  what  difference  does  it  make  that  his 
other  qualities  are  unlike  those  of  dumb  animals  if  he 
resembles  them  in  the  one  quality  that  excuses  dumb 
animals  for  every  misdeed — a  mind  that  is  aU  dark- 
ness ?  "  He  did  wrong,"  you  say.  Well,  was  this 
the  first  time  ?  Will  it  be  the  last  time  ?  You  need 
not  beUeve  him  even  if  he  should  say,  "  I  will  never 
do  it  again."  He  will  go  on  sinning  and  some  one 
else  will  sin  against  him,  and  the  whole  of  life  will 
be  a  tossing  about  amid  errors.  Unkindness  mustL*- 
be  treated  with  kindness.  The  words  so  often  ' 
addressed  to  one  in  grief  will  prove  most  effective 
also  for  a  man  in  anger  :  "  Will  you  ever  desist — or 
never  ?  "  If  ever,  how  much  better  it  is  to  forsake 
anger  than  to  wait  for  anger  to  forsake  you  !  Or 
shall  this  turmoil  continue  for  ever  ?  Do  you  see  to 
what  life-long  unrest  you  are  dooming  yourself  ?  For 
what  will  be  the  life  of  one  who  is  always  swollen 
with  rage  ?  Besides,  when  you  have  successfully 
inflamed  yourself  with  passion,  and  have  repeatedly 

323 


SENECA 

renovaveris,  sua  sponte  ira  discedet  et  vires  illi  dies 
subtrahet.  Quanto  satius  est  a  te  illam  vinci  quam 
a  se  ! 

1  28.  Huic  irasceris,  deinde  illi  ;  servis,  deinde 
libertis  ;  parentibus,  deinde  liberis  ;  notis,  deinde  ! 
ignotis  ;  ubique  enim  causae  supersunt,  nisi  de- 
precator  animus  accessit.  Hinc  te  illo  furor  rapiet, 
illinc  alio,  et  novis  subinde  irritamentis  orientibus 
continuabitur  rabies.  Age,  infelix,  ecquando  ama- 
bis  ?     O  quam  bonum  tempus  in  re  mala  perdis  ! 

2  Quanto  nunc  erat  satius  amicos  parare,  inimicos 
mitigare,  rem  publicam  administrare,  transferre  in 
res  domesticas  operam,  quam  circumspicere,  quid 
alicui  facere  possis  mali,  quod  aut  dignitati  eius  aut 
patrimonio  aut  corpori  vulnus  infligas,  cum  id  tibi 
contingere   sine   certamine   ac  periculo   non  possit, 

3  etiam  si  cum  inferiore  concurses  !  Vinctum  licet 
accipias  et  ad  arbitrium  tuum  omni  patientiae 
expositum  ;  saepe  nimia  vis  caedentis  aut  articulum 
loco  movit  aut  nervum  in  his  quos  fregerat  dentibus 
fixit.  Multos  iracundia  mancos,  multos  debiles 
fecit,  etiam  ubi  patientem  est^  nancta  materiam. 
Adice  nunc  quod  nihil  tam  imbecille  natum  est,  ut 
sine   elidentis  periculo  pereat ;    imbecillos  valentis- 

4  simis  alias  dolor,  alias  casus  exaequat.  Quid,  quod 
pleraque  eorum,  propter  quae  irascimur,  offendunt 
nos  magis  quam  laedunt  ?     Multum  autem  interest, 

^  est  added  by  Petschenig. 
324 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXVII.  5-xxvin.  4 

renewed  the  causes  that  spur  you  on,  yowF-  anger 
will  leave  you  of  its  own  accord,  and  lapse  of  time 
will  reduce  its  power.  How  much  better  it  is  that 
it  should  be  vanquished  by  you  than  by  itself  I 

You  will  be  angr}-  first  >vith  this  man,  then  with 
that  one  ;  first  with  slaves,  then  with  freedmen  ; 
first  with  parents,  then  ^^ith  children  ;  first  with 
acquaintances,  then  with  strangers  ;  for  there  are 
causes  enough  everywhere  unless  the  mind  enters 
to  intercede.  Rage  Avill  sweep  you  hither  and  yon, 
this  way  and  that,  and  your  madness  will  be  pro- 
longed by  new  provocations  that  constantly  arise. 
Tell  me,  unhappy  man,  will  you  ever  find  time  to 
love  ?  ^Vhat  precious  time  you  are  wasting  upon 
an  evil  thing  !  How  much  better  would  it  be  at  this  j 
present  moment  to  be  gaining  friends,  reconciling! 
enemies,  ser\'ing  the  state,  devoting  effort  to  private 
affairs,  than  to  be  casting  about  to  see  what  evil  you 
can  do  to  some  man,  what  wound  you  may  deal  to 
his  position,  his  estate,  or  his  person,  although  you 
cannot  attain  this  mthout  struggle  and  danger  even 
if  your  adversary  be  an  inferior  !  You  may  take 
him  in  chains  and  at  your  pleasure  expose  him  to 
every  test  of  endurance  ;  but  too  great  violence  in 
the  striker  has  often  dislocated  a  joint,  or  left  a  sinew 
fastened  in  the  very  teeth  it  had  broken.  Anger  has 
left  many  a  man  crippled,  many  disabled,  even  when 
it  has  found  its  victim  submissive.  Besides,  there 
lives  no  creature  so  weak  that  it  will  die  without 
trying  to  harm  its  destroyer  ;  sometimes  pain,  some- 
times a  mishap,  makes  the  weak  a  match  for  the 
strongest.  And  is  it  not  true  that  most  of  the  things 
that  make  us  angry  offend  us  more  than  they  harm 
,ns  ?     But  it  makes  a  great  difference  whether  a  man 

325 


SENECA 

utrum  aliquis  voluntati  meae  obstet  an  desit,  eripiat 
an  non  det.  Atqui  in  aequo  ponimus,  utrum  aliquis 
auferat  an  neget,  utrum  spem  nostram  praecidat 
an  difFerat,  utrum  contra  nos  faciat  an  pro  se,  amore 

5  alterius  an  odio  nostri.  Quidam  vero  non  tantum 
iustas  causas  standi  contra  nos,  sed  etiam  honestas 
habent.  Alius  patrem  tuetur,  alius  fratrem,  alius 
patriam,  alius  amicum  ;  his  tamen  non  ignoscimus 
id  facientibus,  quod  nisi  facerent  improbaremus, 
immo,   quod   est   incredibile,   saepe   de   facto   bene 

6  existimamus,   de   faciente   male.     At   me   hercules 
vir    magnus    ac    iustus    fortissimum    quemque    ei 
hostibus  suis  et  pro  libertate  ac  salute  patriae  per- 
tinacissimum   suspicit   et   talem   sibi   civem,   talemt 
militem  contingere  optat. 

1  29.  Turpe  est  odisse  quem  laudes  ;  quanto  vero 
turpius  ob  id  aliquem  odisse,  propter  quod  miseri- 
cordia  dignus  est.  Si  captivus  in  servitutem  subito 
depressus  reliquias  libertatis  tenet  nee  ad  sordida 
ac  laboriosa  ministeria  agilis  occurrit,  si  ex  otio  piger 
equum  vehiculumque  domini  cursu  non  exaequat, 
si  inter  cottidiana  pervigiBa  fessum  somnus  op- 
pressit,  si  rusticum  laborem  recusat  aut  non  fortiter 
obiit   a   servitute    urbana   et   feriata   translatus   ad 

2  durum  opus,  distinguamus,  utrum  aliquis  non  possit 
an  nolit.  Multos  absolvemus,  si  coeperimus  ante 
iudicare  quam  irasci.  Nunc  autem  primum  impetum 
326 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xxviii.  4-xxix.  2 

thwarts  my  msh  or  fails  to  further  it,  whether  he  robs 
me  or  merely  fails  to  give.  And  yet  we  attach  the 
same  value  to  both — whether  a  man  deprives  us  of 
something  or  merely  withholds  it,  whether  he  shatters 
our  hope  or  defers  it,  whether  he  acts  against  us  or 
in  his  o^^■n  interest,  whether  from  love  of  another  or 
from  hatred  of  us.  Some  men,  indeed,  have  not  only 
just,  but  even  honourable,  reasons  for  opposing  us. 
One  is  protecting  his  father,  another  his  brother, 
another  his  country,  another  his  friend.  Neverthe- 
less, we  do  not  excuse  these  for  doing  the  very  thing 
which  we  should  blame  them  for  not  doing ;  nav, 
more,  though  it  is  quite  unbeUevable,  we  often  think 
w6tt-of  an  act,  but  ill  of  its  doer.  But,  in  very  truth, 
a  great  and  just  man  honours  those  of  his  foes  who 
are  bravest  and  are  most  stubborn  in  the  defence 
of  the  hberty  and  the  safet}-  of  their  country;  and 
prays  that  fortune  may  grant  him  such  men  as  fellow- 
citizens,  such  as  fellow-soldiers. 

It  is  base  to  hate  a  man  who  commands  your  praise, 
but  how  much  baser  to  hate  any  one  for  the  very 
reason  that  he  deserv'^es  your  pity.  If  a  captive, 
suddenly  reduced  to  servitude,  still  retains  some 
traces  of  his  freedom  and  does  not  run  nimbly  to 
mean  and  toilsome  tasks,  if  sluggish  from  inaction 
he  does  not  keep  pace  with  the  speed  of  his  master's 
horse  and  carriage,  if  worn  out  by  his  daily  vigils  he 
yields  to  sleep,  if  when  transferred  to  hard  labour  from 
service  in  the  city  with  its  many  holidays  he  either 
refuses  the  toil  of  the  farm  or  does  not  enter  into  it 
with  energy — in  such  cases  let  us  discriminate,  asking 
whether  he  cannot  or  will  not  serve.  We  shall 
acquit  many  if  we  begin  Avith  discernment  instead  of 
Mithanger.  But  as  it  is,  we  obey  our  first  impulse;  then, 

327 


SENECA 

sequimur,  deinde,  quamvis  vana  nos  concitaverint, 
perseveramus,  ne  videamur  coepisse  sine  causa,  et, 
quod  iniquissimum  est,  pertinaciores  nos  facit 
iniquitas  irae  ;  retinemus  enim  illam  et  augemus, 
quasi  argumentum  sit  iuste  irascentis  graviter 
irasci. 

1  30.  Quanto  melius  est  initia  ipsa  perspicere  quam 
levia  sint,  quam  innoxia !  Quod  accidere  vides 
animalibus  mutis,  idem  in  homine  deprendes  ; 
frivolis  turbamur  et  inanibus.  Taurum  color  rubi- 
cundus  excitat,  ad  umbram  aspis  exsurgit,  ursos 
leonesque  mappa  proritat  ;   omnia,  quae  natura  fera 

2  ac  rabida  sunt,  consternantur  ad  vana.  Idem  in- 
quietis  et  stolidis  ingeniis  evenit.  Rerum  suspicione 
feriuntur,  adeo  quidem,  ut  interdum  iniurias  vocent 
modica  beneficia,  in  quibus  frequentissima,  certe 
acerbissima  iracundiae  materia  est.  Carissimis  enim 
irascimur,  quod  minora  nobis  praestiterint  quam 
mente    conceperimus    quamque    alii    tulerint,    cum 

3  utriusque  rei  paratum  remedium  sit.  Magis  alteri 
indulsit  ;  nostra  nos  sine  comparatione  delectent. 
Numquam  erit  felix,  quem  torquebit  felicior.  Minus 
habeo  quam  speravi  ;  sed  fortasse  plus  speravi  quar 
debui.  Haec  pars  maxime  metuenda  est,  hinc  per-J 
niciosissimae  irae  nascuntur  et  sanctissima  quaeque 
invasurae. 

4  Divum    lulium    plures    amici    confecerunt    quar 
inimici,   quorum  non   expleverat   spes   inexplebiles^ 

328 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXIX.  2-xxx,  4 

although  we  have  been  aroused  by  mere  trifleSj  we  con- 
tinue to  be  angry  for  fear  that  we  may  seem  to  have 
had  no  reason  to  be  so  from  the  first,  and — what  is 
most  unjust — the  verj-  injustice  of  our  anger  makes  us 
the  more  obstinate.  P'or  we  hold  on  to  it  and  nurse  it, 
as  if  the  \'iolence  of  our  anger  were  proof  of  its  j  ustice. 

How  much  better  it  is  to  perceive  its  first  be- 
ginnings— how  shght,  how  harmless  they  are  !  You 
Mill  find  that  the  same  thing  happens  with  a  man 
which  you  observe  in  dumb  animals  ;  we  are  ruffled 
by  silly  and  petty  things.  The  bull  is  aroused  by  a- 
red  colour,  the  asp  strikes  at  a  shadow,  bears  and 
lions  are  irritated  by  a  handkerchief ;  all  creatures  by 
nature  wild  and  savage  are  alarmed  by  trifles.  The 
same  is  true  of  men,  whether  they  are  by  nature 
restless  or  inert.  They  are  smitten  with  suspicions, 
so  powerfully, even, that  they  sometimes  call  moderate 
benefits  injuries  ;  these  are  the  most  common, 
certainly  the  most  bitter,  source  of  anger.  For  we 
become  angry  at  oiu"  dearest  friends  because  they 
have  bestowed  less  than  we  anticipated,  and  less 
than  they  conferred  upon  another  ;  and  yet  for  both 
troubles  there  is  a  ready  remedy.  More  favour  has 
been  shown  another ;  then  let  us  without  making 
comparison  be  pleased  ^^•ith  what  we  have.  That 
man  wll  never  be  happy  whom  the  sight  of  a  happier 
man  tortures.  I  may  have  less  than  I  hoped  for  ;  but 
perhaps  I  hoped  for  more  than  I  ought.  It  is  from 
this  direction  that  we  have  most  to  fear  ;  from  this 
springs  the  anger  that  is  most  destructive,  that  will 
assail  all  that  is  most  holy. 

Among  those  who  dispatched  the  di\ine  Julius 
there  were  more  fiiends  than  enemies — friends  whose 
insatiate  hopes  he  had  failed  to  satisfy.     He  wished 

329 


;t 


"SENECA 

Voluit  quidem  ille — ^neque  enim  quisquam  liberalius 
victoria  usus  est,  ex  qua  nihil  sibi  vindicavit  nisi 
dispensandi  potestatem,  —  sed  quemadmodum  suf- 
ficere  tam  improbis  desideriis  posset,  cum  tantum 
omnes  concupiscerent,  quantum  unus  poterat  ? 
6  Vidit  itaque  strictis  circa  sellam  suam  gladiis  com- 
militones  suos,  Cimbrum  Tillium,  acerrimum  paulo 
ante  partium  defensorem,  aliosque  post  Pompeium 
demum  Pompeianos.  Haec  res  sua  in  reges  arma 
convertit  fidissimosque  eo  compulit,  ut  de  morte 
eorum  cogitarent,  pro  quibus  et  ante  quos  mori 
votum  habuerant. 

1  31.  Nulli  ad  aliena  respicienti  sua  placent.  Inde 
diis  quoque  irascimur,  quod  aliquis  nos  antecedat, 
obliti  quantum  hominum  retro  sit,  et  paucis  inviden- 
tem  quantum  sequatur  a  tergo  ingentis  invidiae. 
Tanta  tamen  importunitas  hominum  est,  ut,  quamvis 
multum   acceperint,  iniuriae  loco  sit  plus   accipere 

2  potuisse.  "  Dedit  mihi  praeturam,  sed  consulatum 
speraveram  ;  dedit  duodecim  fasces,  sed  non  fecit 
ordinarium  consulem  ;  a  me  numerari  voluit  annum, 
sed  deest  mihi  ad  sacerdotium  ;  cooptatus  in  col- 
legium sum,  sed  cur  in  unum  ?  Consummavit 
dignitatem  meam,  sed  patrimonio  nihil  contulit ; 
ea  dedit  mihi,  quae  debebat  alicui  dare,  de  suo  nihil 

3  protuht."  Age  potius  gratias  pro  his,  quae  accepisti ; 
reliqua  expecta  et  nondum  plenum  esse  te  gaude  ; 

"  i.e.,  ironically,  open  enemies  of  Caesar. 

*  Under  the  empire  the  term  of  the  consular  office  was] 
shortened,  and  several  pairs  of  consuls  were  nominated  fori 
one  year  ;  those  who  entered  upon  office  at  the  beginning  of] 
the  year  gave  their  names  to  the  year  {consules  ordinarii),i 
and  thus  gained  more  prestige  than  the  others  {consules ! 
suffecti). 
330 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXX.  4-xxxi.  3 

indeed  to  do  so — for  no  man  ever  made  a  more  generous 
use  of  \'ictory,  from  which  he  claimed  nothing  for 
himself  except  the  right  to  give  away — but  how  could 
he  gratify  such  unconscionable  desires,  since  every  one 
of  them  coveted  as  much  as  any  one  could  possibly 
covet  ?  And  so  he  saw  his  fellow-soldiers  around 
his  chair  with  their  swords  drawn — Tillius  Cimber,  a 
httle  while  before  the  boldest  defender  of  his  cause, 
and  others  who,  after  Pompey  was  no  more,  had  at 
length  become  Pompeians."  It  is  this  that  turns 
against  kings  their  o^vn  weapons,  and  drives  their 
most  trusted  followers  to  the  point  of  planning  for 
the  death  of  those  for  whom  and  before  whom  they 
had  vowed  to  die. 

No  man  when  he  views  the  lot  of  others  is  content 
with  his  own!  This  is  why  we  grow  angry  even  at  the 
god§rbecause  some  person  is  ahead  of  us,  forgetting 
how  many  men  there  are  behind  us,  and  how  huge  a 
mass  of  envy  follows  at  the  back  of  him  who  envies  but 
a  few.  Nevertheless  such  is  the  presumptuousness 
of  men  that,  although  they  may  have  received  much, 
they  count  it  an  injury  that  they  might  have  received 
more.  "  He  gave  me  the  praetorship,  but  I  had 
hoped  for  the  consulship  ;  he  gave  me  the  twelve 
fasces,  but  he  did  not  make  me  a  regular  consul ; 
he  was  ^^illing  that  my  name  should  be  attached  to 
the  year,*  but  he  disappointed  me  A\"ith  respect  to 
the  priesthood  ;  I  was  elected  a  member  of  the 
college,  but  why  of  one  only  ?  he  crowned  me  with 
public  honour,  but  he  added  nothing  to  my  patrimony ; 
what  he  gave  me  he  had  to  give  to  somebody — he 
took  nothing  out  of  his  own  pocket."  Express  thanks 
rather  for  what  you  have  received  ;  wait  for  the  rest, 
and  be  glad  that  you  are  not  yet  surfeited.    There  is  a 

331 


SENECA 

inter  voluptates  est  superesse  quod  speres.  Omnes 
vicisti,  primum  esse  te  in  animo  amici  tui  laetare  ; 
multi  te  vincunt,  considera,  quanto  antecedas  plures 
quam  sequaris.  Quod  sit  in  te  vitium  maximum 
quaeris  ?  Falsas  rationes  conficis  ;  data  magno 
aestumas,  accepta  parvo, 

1  32.  Aliud  in  alio  nos  deterreat.  Quibusdam 
timeamus  irasci,  quibusdam  vereamur,  quibusdam 
fastidiamus.  Magnam  rem  sine  dubio  fecerimus, 
si  servulum  infelieem  in  ergastulum  miserimus  ! 
Quid  properamus  verberare  statim,  crura  protinus 

2  frangere  ?  Non  peribit  potestas  ista,  si  difFeretur. 
Sine  id  tempus  veniat,  quo  ipsi  iubeamus  ;  nunc  ex 
imperio  irae  loquemur  ;  cum  ilia  abierit,  tunc  vide- 
bimus,  quanto  ista  lis  aestumanda  sit.  In  hoc  enim 
praecipue  fallimur  ;  ad  ferrum  venimus,  ad  capitalia 
supplicia,  et  vinculis,  carcere,  fame  vindicamus  rem 

3  castigandam  flagris  levioribus.  "  Quomodo,"  inquis, 
"  nos  iubes  intueri,  quam  omnia,  per  quae  laedi 
videamur,  exigua,  misera,  puerilia  sint  ?  "  Ego 
vero  nihil  magis  suaserim  quam  sumere  ingentem 
animum  et  haec,  propter  quae  litigamus,  discurrimus, 
anhelamus,  videre  quam  humilia  et  abiecta  sint, 
nulli  qui  altum  quiddam  aut  magnificum  cogitat 
respicienda. 

1  33.  Circa  pecuniam  plurimum  vociferationis  est. 
Haec  fora  defetigat,  patres  liberosque  committit, 
venena  miscet,  gladios  tam  percussoribus  quam  legio- 

332 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXXI.  3-xxxin.  1 

pleasure  in  having  something  left  to  hope  for.  Have 
you  outstripped  all  others  ?  Rejoice  that  you  are  first 
in  the  regard  of  your  friend.  Are  there  many  who  out- 
strip you  ?  Consider  how  many  more  you  are  ahead 
of  than  behind.  Do  you  ask  me  what  is  your  greatest 
fault  ?  Your  book-keeping  is  WTong  ;  what  you  have 
paid  out  you  rate  high ;  what  you  have  received,  low. 

Different  considerations  should  in  different  cases 
restrain  us.  From  some  let  fear  stay  our  anger,  from 
others  respect,  from  others  pride.  A  fine  thing  we 
shall  have  done,  no  doubt,  if  we  send  a  wTetched  slave 
to  prison  !  Why  are  we  in  such  a  hurry  to  flog  him  at 
once,  to  break  his  legs  forthwith  ?  Such  power,  though 
deferred,  \W11  not  perish.  Wait  for  the  time  when 
the  order  will  be  our  own ;  at  the  moment  we 
shall  speak  under  the  dictation  of  anger  ;  when  that 
has  passed,  then  we  shall  be  able  to  see  at  what 
value  we  should  appraise  the  damage.  For  it  is  in 
this  that  we  are  most  liable  to  be  wrong.  We  resort 
to  the  sword  and  to  capital  punishment,  and  an  act 
that  deserves  the  censure  of  a  very  light  flogging 
we  punish  by  chains,  the  prison,  and  starvation. 
"  In  what  way,"  you  ask,  "  do  you  bid  us  discover 
how  paltry,  how  pitiful,  how  childish  are  all  those 
things  by  which  we  think  we  are  injured  ?  "  I, 
assuredly,  could  suggest  nothing  better  than  that  you 
acquire  a  truly  great  .spirit,  and  that  you  realize  how 
sordid  and  worthless  are  all  these  things  for  the  sake 
of  which  we  wTangle,  rush  to  and  fro,  and  pant ;  these 
do  not  deserve  a  thought  from  the  man  who  has  any 
high  and  noble  purpose 

Most  of  the  outcry  is  about  money.  It  is  this  which 
wearies  the  coiurts,  pits  father  against  son,  brews 
poisons,  and  gives  swords  ahke  to  the  legions  and  to 

333 


SENECA 

nibus  tradit  ;  haec  est  sanguine  nostro  delibuta ; 
propter  hanc  uxorum  maritorumque  noctes  strepunt 
litibus  et  tribunalia  magistratuum  premit  turba, 
reges  saeviunt  rapiuntque  et  civitates  longo  saecu- 
lorum  labor e  constructas  evertunt,  ut  aurum  argen- 

2  tumque  in  cinere  urbium  scrutentur,  Libet  intueri 
fiscos  in  angulo  iacentis.  Hi  sunt  propter  quos  oculi 
clamore  exprimantur,  fremitu  iudiciorum  basilicae 
resonent,   evocati   ex  longinquis  regionibus   iudices 

3  sedeant  iudicaturi,  utrius  iustior  avaritia  sit.  Quid 
si  ne  propter  fiscum  quidem,  sed  pugnum  aeris  aut 
imputatum  a  servo  denarium  senex  sine  herede 
moriturus  stomacho  dirumpitur  ?  Quid  si  propter 
usuram  vel  milensimam  valetudinarius  faenerator 
distortis  pedibus  et  manibus  ad  computandum  non 
relictis  clamat  ac  per  vadimonia  asses  suos  in  ipsis 

4  morbi  accessionibus  vindicat  ?  Si  totam  mihi  ex 
omnibus  metallis,  quae  cum  maxime  deprimimus, 
pecuniam  proferas,  si  in  medium  proicias  quidquid 
thensauri  tegunt,  avaritia  iterum  sub  terras  referente, 
quae  male  egesserat,  omnem  istam  congeriem  non 
putem  dignam  quae  frontem  viri  boni  contrahat. 
Quanto  risu  prosequenda  sunt  quae  nobis  lacrimas 
educunt ! 

1  34.  Cedo  nunc,  persequere  cetera,  cibos,  potiones 
horumque  causa  paratas  in  ambitionem  munditias. 
verba  contumeliosa,  motus  corporum  parum  honori- 
ficos,    contumacia    iumenta    et   pigra    mancipia,    et 

"  Literally,  "interest  of  one  thousandth,"  reckoned  as  a 
monthly  payment.  This  rate  of  one  and  one-fifth  per  cent 
per  annum  was  absurdly  low;  the  usual  rate  was  twelve 
per  cent. 

334 


ON  ANGER,  III.  -xxxiii.  i-xxxiv.  1 

cut-throats  ;  it  is  daubed  Mith  our  blood  ;  because  of 
it  husbands  and  \Wves  make  night  hideous  with  their 
quarrels,  crowds  swarm  to  the  tribunals  of  the  magis- 
trates, kings  rage  and  plunder  and  overthrow  states 
that  have  been  built  by  the  long  labour  of  centuries, 
in  order  that  they  may  search  for  gold  and  silver 
in  the  very  ashes  of  cities.  It  is  a  pleasure,  you  say, 
to  see  money-bags  lying  in  the  corner.  But  these 
are  what  men  shout  for  until  their  eyeballs  t>tart ;  for 
the  sake  of  these  the  law-courts  resound  ^^ith  the 
din  of  trials,  and  jurors  summoned  from  distant  parts 
sit  in  judgement  to  decide  which  man's  greed  has  the 
juster  claim.  But  what  if  it  is  not  even  a  bag  of 
money,  but  only  a  handful  of  copper  or  a  silver  piece, 
reckoned  by  a  slave,  which  causes  an  heirless  old 
man  on  the  verge  of  the  grave  to  spUt  with  rage  ? 
And  what  if  it  is  only  a  paltry  one  per  cent  of 
interest "  that  causes  the  money-lender,  sick  though 
he  be,  with  crippled  feet  and  with  gnarled  hands 
that  no  longer  serve  for  counting  money,  to  shout 
aloud,  and  in  the  very  throes  of  his  malady  to 
require  securities  for  his  pennies  ?  If  you  were  to 
offer  me  all  the  money  from  all  the  mines,  which 
we  are  now  so  busy  in  digging,  if  you  were  to  cast 
before  my  eyes  all  the  money  that  buried  treasures 
hold — for  greed  restores  to  earth  what  it  once  in 
wickedness  drew  forth — I  should  not  count  that 
whole  assembled  hoard  worth  even  a  good  man's 
fro^vn.  With  what  laughter  should  we  attend  the 
things  that  now  draw  tears  from  our  eyes  ! 

Come,  now,  run  through  the  other  causes  of  anger 
— foods,  driiiks,  and  the  refinements  in  regard  to  them 
devised  to  gratify  pride,  insulting  words,  disrespectful 
gestures,  stubborn  beasts  of  burden  and  lazy  slaves, 

335 


SENECA 

suspiciones  et  interpretationes  malignas  vocis  alienae, 
quibus  efficitur,  ut  inter  iniurias  naturae  numeretur 
sermo  homini  datus.  Crede  mihi,  levia  sunt  propter 
quae  non  leviter  excandescimus,  qualia  quae  pueros 

2  in  rixam  et  iurgium  concitant.  Nihil  ex  is,  quae 
tarn  tristes  agimus,  serium  est,  nihil  magnum. 
Inde,  inquam,  vobis  ira  et  insania  est,  quod  exigua 
magno  aestimatis.  Auferre  hie  mihi  hereditatem 
voluit ;  hie  me  diu  in  spem  supremam  captatis 
criminatus    est ;     hie    scortum    meum    concupivit. 

3  Quod  vinculum  amoris  esse  debebat,  seditionis  atque 
odi  causa  est,  idem  velle.  Iter  angustum  rixas 
transeuntium  concitat,  diffusa  et  late  patens  via  ne 
populos  quidem  collidit.  Ista  quae  appetitis,  quia 
exigua  sunt  nee  possunt  ad  alterum  nisi  alteri  erepta 
transferri,  eadem  afFectantibus  pugnas  et  iurgia, 
excitant. 

1  35.  Respondisse  tibi  servum  indignaris  libertui 
que   et   uxorem   et  chentem ;    deinde  idem  de  rl 
publica  libertatem   sublatam   quereris,   quam  dor 
sustulisti.     Rursus,    si    tacuit    interrogatus,    conti 

2  maciam  vocas.  Et  loquatur  et  taceat  et  rideatj 
"  Coram  domino  ?  "  inquis.  Immo  coram  pat 
familiae.  Quid  clamas  ?  Quid  vociferaris  ?  Quic 
flagella  media  cena  petis,  quod  servi  loquuntur,  quod 
non  eodem  loco  turba  contionis  est,  silentium  soli- 


"  Cf.  Sallust,  Catiline,  20.  4:   "nam   idem  velle  atque 
idem  nolle,  ea  demum  firma  amicitia  est." 


I 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXXIV.  l-xxxv.  2 

suspicion  and  the  malicious  misconstruction  of 
another's  words,  the  result  of  which  is  that  the  very 
gift  of  human  speech  is  counted  among  the  injustices 
of  nature.  Believe  me,  these  things  which  incense 
us  not  a  little  are  little  things,  like  the  trifles  that 
drive  children  to  quarrels  and  blows.  Not  one  of 
them,  though  we  take  them  so  tragically,  is  a  serious 
matter,  not  one  is  important.  From  this,  I  say,  from 
the  fact  that  you  attach  great  v^alue  to  petty  things, 
come  your  anger  and  your  madness.  This  man 
wanted  to  rob  me  of  my  inheritance  ;  this  one 
slandered  me  to  people  whom  I  had  long  courted 
in  the  expectation  of  a  legacy  ;  this  one  coveted 
my  mistress.  The  desire  for  the  same  thing,  which 
ought  to  have  been  a  bond  of  love,**  becomes  the 
source  of  discord  and  of  hatred.  A  narrow  path  drives 
passers-by  to  blows  ;  on  a  wide  and  open  road  even 
a  multitude  \^ill  not  jostle.  Because  the  things  you 
strive  for  are  trifles,  and  yet  cannot  be  given  to  one 
without  robbing  another,  they  provoke  those  desiring 
the  same  things  to  struggle  and  strife. 

You  are  indignant  because  your  slave,  your  freed- 
man,  your  ^dfe,  or  your  client  answered  you  back ;  and 
then  you  complain  that  the  state  has  been  deprived 
of  that  liberty-  of  which  you  have  deprived  your  o^vn 
household.  Again,  you  call  it  obstinacy  if  a  man 
'ES'ep's  silent  when  he  is  questioned.  But  let  him 
speak  and  let  him  keep  silent  and  let  him  laugh  ! 
"  In  the  presence  of  his  master  ?  "  you  ask.  Yes, 
even  in  the  presence  of  the  head  of  the  family.  WTiy 
do  you  shout  ?  Why  do  you  rant  ?  Why  do  you  call 
for  the  whip  in  the  midst  of  dinner,  all  because  the 
slaves  are  talking,  because  there  is  not  the  silence 
of  the  desert  in  a  room  that  holds  a  crowd  big  as  a 
VOL.  I  z  337 


SENECA 

3  tudinis  ?  In  hoc  habes  aures,  ut  non  modulata 
tantum  et  mollia  et  ex  dulci  tracta  compositaque 
accipiant  ;  et  risum  audias  oportet  et  fletum,  et 
blanditias  et  lites,  et  prospera  et  tristia,  et  hominum 
voces  et  fremitus  animalium  latratusque.  Quid 
miser  expavescis  ad  clamorem  servi,  ad  tinnitum 
aeris    aut   ianuae    impulsumi  ?     Cum   tam    delicatus 

4  fueris,  tonitrua  audienda  sunt.  Hoc,  quod  de 
auribus  dictum  est,  transfer  ad  oculos,  qui  non  minus 
fastidio  laborant,  si  male  instituti  sunt.  Macula 
ofFenduntur  et  sordibus  et  argento  parum  splendido 

5  et  stagno  non  ad  solum  perlucente.  Hi  nempe  oculi, 
qui  non  ferunt  nisi  varium  ac  recenti  cura  nitens 
marmor,  qui  mensam  nisi  crebris  distinctam  venis, 
qui  nolunt  domi  nisi  auro  pretiosiora  calcari,  aequis- 
simo  animo  foris  et  scabras  lutosasque  semitas 
spectant  et  maiorem  partem  occurrentium  squa- 
lidam,  parietes  insularum  exesos,  rimosos,  inaequales. 
Quid  ergo  aliud  est,  quod  illos  in  publico  non  offendat, 
domi  moveat,  quam  opinio  illic  aequa  et  patiens, 
domi  morosa  et  querula  ? 

1  36,  Omnes  sensus  perducendi  sunt  ad  firmi- 
tatem  ;  natura  patientes  sunt,  si  animus  illos  desit 
corrumpere,  qui  cotidie  ad  rationem  reddendam 
vocandus  est.  Faciebat  hoc  Sextius,  ut  consum- 
mato  die,  cum  se  ad  nocturnam  quietem  recepisset, 

338 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXXV.  3-xxxvi.  1 

mass-meeting  ?  You  do  not  have  ears  only  for  the 
purpose  of  listening  to  melodious  sounds,  soft  and 
sweetly  drawn  and  all  in  harmony  ;  you  should  also 
lend  ear  to  laughter  and  weeping,  to  soft  words  and 
bitter,  to  happiness  and  sorrow,  to  the  voices  of  men 
and  the  roars  and  barking  of  animals.  Poor  fellow  ! 
why  do  you  shudder  at  the  shouting  of  a  slave,  at 
the  rattling  of  bronze,  or  the  banging  of  a  door  ? 
Although  you  are  so  sensitive,  you  have  to  hsten  to 
thunder.  And  all  this  which  I  have  said  about  the 
ears  you  may  apply  as  well  to  the  eyes,  which  if  they 
are  not  well  schooled  suffer  not  less  from  squeamish- 
ness.  They  are  offended  by  a  spot,  by  dirt,  by 
tarnished  silver,  and  by  a  pool  that  is  not  transparent 
to  the  bottom.  These  same  eyes,  forsooth,  that 
cannot  tolerate  marble  unless  it  is  mottled  and 
pohshed  ^vith  recent  rubbing,  that  cannot  tolerate  a 
table  unless  it  is  marked  by  many  a  vein,  that  at 
home  would  see  under  foot  only  pavements  more 
costly  than  gold — these  eyes  when  outside  will 
behold,  all  unmoved,  rough  and  muddy  paths  and 
dirty  peoplej  as  are  most  of  those  they  meet,  and 
tenement  walls  crumbled  and  cracked  and  out  of 
line.  Why  is  it,  then,  that  we  are  not  offended  on 
the  street,  yet  are  annoyed  at  home,  except  that  in 
the  one  case  we  are  in  an  unruffled  and  tolerant  state 
of  mind,  and  in  the  other  are  peevish  and  fault- 
finding ? 

All  our  senses  ought  to  be  trained  to  endurance. 
They  are  naturally  long-suffering,  if  only  the  mind 
desists  from  weakening  them.  This  should  be 
summoned  to  give  an  account  of  itself  every  day. 
Sextius  had  this  habit,  and  when  the  day  was  over 
and  he  had  retired  to  his  nightly  rest,  he  would  put 

339 


SENECA 

interrogaret  animum  suum  :    "  Quefd  hodie  malum 
tuum    sanasti  ?     Cui    vitio    obstitisti  ?     Qua    parte 

2  melior  es  ?  "  Desinet  ira  et  moderatior  erit,  quae 
sciet  sibi  cotidie  ad  iudieem  esse  veniendum.  Quic- 
quam  ergo  pulchrius  hac  consuetudine  excutiendi 
totum  diem  ?  Qualis  ille  somnus  post  recognitionem 
sui  sequitur,  quam  tranquillus,  quam  altus  ac  liber, 
cum  aut  laudatus  est  animus  aut  admonitus  et 
speculator  sui  censorque  secretus  cognovit  de  mori- 

3  bus  suis !  Utor  hac  potestate  et  cotidie  apud  me 
causam  dico.  Cum  sublatum  e  conspectu  lumen , 
est  et  conticuit  uxor  moris  iam  mei  conscia,  totum 
diem  meum  scrutor  factaque  ac  dicta  mea  remetior 
nihil  mihi  ipse  abscondo,  nihil  transeo.  Quare  enim 
quicquam  ex  erroribus  meis  timeam,  cum  possim 
dicere  : 

4  "  Vide  ne  istud  amplius  facias,  nunc  tibi  ignosco. 
In  ilia  disputatione  pugnacius  locutus  es  ;  noli 
postea  congredi  cum  imperitis  ;  nolunt  discere,  qui 
numquam  didicerunt.  Ilium  liberius  admonuisti 
quam  debebas,  itaque  non  emendasti,  sed  offendisti. 
De  cetero  vide,  non  tantum  an  verum  sit  quod  dicis, 
sed  an  ille  cui  dicitur  veri  patiens  sit.  Admoneri 
bonus  gaudet,  pessimus  quisque  rectorem  asperrime 
patitur." 

1  37.  In  convivio  quorundam  te  sales  et  in  dolorem 
tuum  iacta  verba  tetigerunt.     Vitare  volgares  con- 


340 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXXVI.  l-xxxvii.  l 

these  questions  to  his  soul :  "  What  bad  habit  have 
you  cured  to-day  ?  What  fault  have  you  resisted  ? 
In  what  respect  are  you  better  ?  "  Anger  will 
cease  and^become  more  controllable  if  it  finds  that 
it  fnust  appear  before  a  judge  every  day.  Can  any- 
thing be  more  excellent  than  this  practice  of  thor- 
oughly sifting  the  whole  day  ?  And  how  deUghtful  the 
sleep  that  follows  this  self-examination — how  tranquil 
it  is,  how  deep  and  untroubled,  when  the  soul  has 
either  praised  or  admonished  itself,  and  when  this 
secret  examiner  and  critic  of  self  has  given  report  of 
its  own  character  !  I  avail  myself  of  this  pri\ilege, 
and  every  day  I  plead  my  cause  before  the  bar  of 
self.  When  the  light  has  been  removed  from  sight, 
and  my  ^v-ife,  long  aware  of  my  habit,  has  become 
silent,  I  scan  the  whole  of  my  day  and  retrace  all 
my  deeds  and  words.  I  conceal  nothing  from  myself, 
I  omit  nothing.  For  why  should  I  shrink  from  any  of 
my  mistakes,  when  I  may  commune  thus  mth  myself? 

"  See  that  you  never  do  that  again  ;  I  will  pardon 
you  this  time.  In  that  dispute,  you  spoke  too 
offensively  ;  after  this  don't  have  encounters  ^v'ith 
ignorant  people  ;  those  who  have  never  learned  do 
not  want  to  learn.  You  reproved  that  man  more 
frankly  than  you  ought,  and  consequently  you  have 
not  so  much  mended  him  as  offended  him.  In  the 
future,  consider  not  only  the  truth  of  what  you  say, 
but  also  whether  the  man  to  whom  you  are  speaking 
can  endure  the  truth.  A  good  man  accepts  reproof 
gladly  ;  the  worse  a  man  is  the  more  bitterly  he 
resents  it." 

At  a  banquet  the  mt  of  certain  people  and  some 
words  aimed  to  sting  you  reached  their  mark.  But 
remember  to  avoid  the  entertainments  of  the  vulgar  ; 

341 


SENECA 

victus  memento  ;    solutior  est  post  vinum  licentia, 

2  quia  ne  sobris  quidem  pudor  est.  Iratum  vidisti 
amicum  tuum  ostiario  causidici  alieuius  aut  divitis, 
quod  intrantem  summoverat,  et  ipse  pro  illo  iratus 
extremo  mancipio  fuisti.  Irasceris  ergo  catenario 
cani  ?     Et  hie,  cum  multum  latravit,  obiecto  cibo 

3  mansuescit.  Recede  longius  et  ride  !  Nunc  iste 
se  aliquem  putat,  quod  custodit  litigatorum  turba 
limen  obsessum  ;  nunc  ille,  qui  intra  iacet,  felix 
fortunatusque  est  et  beati  hominis  iudieat  ac  potentis 
indicium  difficilem  ianuam.  Nescit  durissimum  esse 
ostium  carceris.  Praesume  animo  multa  tibi  esse 
patienda,  Numquis  se  hieme  algere  miratur  ? 
Numquis  in  mari  nausiare,  in  via  concuti  ?     Fortis 

4  est  animus  ad  quae  praeparatus  venit.  Minus 
honorato  loco  positus  irasci  coepisti  convivatori, 
vocatori,  ipsi  qui  tibi  praeferebatur.  Demens,  quid 
interest,  quam  lecti  premas  partem  ?     Honestiorem 

5  te  aut  turpiorem  potest  facere  pulvinus  ?  Non 
acquis  quendam  oculis  vidisti,  quia  de  ingenio  tuo 
male  locutus  est.  Recipis  hanc  legem  ?  Ergo  te 
Ennius,  quo  non  delectaris,  odisset,  et  Hortensius, 
si  orationes  eius  improbares,^  simultates  tibi  in- 
diceret,     et     Cicero,     si    derideres     carmina     eius, 

^  si  .  .  .  improbares  added  by  Haupt. 
342 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xxxvii.  1-5 

after  drinking  their  licence  becomes  too  lax,  because 
they  want  any  sense  of  propriety  even  when  they  are 
sober.  You  saw  one  of  your  friends  in  a  rage  because 
the  porter  had  thrust  liim  out  when  he  was  trying 
to  enter  the  house  of  some  pettifogger  or  rich  man, 
and  you  yourself  on  your  friend's  account  became 
angry  with  that  lowest  kind  of  a  slave.  Will  you 
then  become  angry  wath  a  chained  watchdog  ?  He, 
too,  after  all  his  barking,  \\ill  become  gentle  if  you 
toss  him  food.  Retire  a  httle  way  and  laugh  !  As 
it  is,  the  fellow  thinks  himself  a  somebody  because  he 
guards  a  threshold  beset  by  a  throng  of  litigants  ;  as 
it  is,  the  gentleman  who  reclines  within  is  bhssful  and 
blest  and  considers  it  the  mark  of  a  successful  and 
powerful  man  to  make  it  difficult  to  darken  his  door. 
He  forgets  that  the  hardest  door  of  all  to  open  is  the 
prison's.  Make  up  your  mind  that  there  are  many 
things  which  you  must  bear.  Is  any  one  surprised 
that  he  is  cold  in  ^vinter  ?  That  he  is  sick  at  sea  ? 
That  he  is  jolted  about  on  the  highroad  ?  The  mind 
will  meet  bravely  everytliing  for  which  it  has  been 
prepared.  Because  you  were  given  a  less  honour- 
able place  at  the  table,  you  began  to  get  angry  at 
your  host,  at  the  A\Titer  of  the  in\itation,  at  the  man 
himself  who  was  preferred  above  you.  Madman  ! 
what  difference  does  it  make  on  what  part  of  the 
couch  you  recline  ?  Can  a  cushion  add  to  either 
your  honour  or  your  disgrace  ?  You  did  not  look 
with  fair  eyes  upon  a  certain  man  because  he  spoke 
ill  of  your  talent.  Do  you  accept  this  as  a  principle  ? 
Then  Ennius,  whose  poetry  you  do  not  like,  would 
hate  you,  and  Hortensius,  if  you  disapproved  of  his 
speeches,  would  proclaim  animosity  to  you,  and 
Cicero,  if  you  made  fun  of  his  poetrj',  would  be  your 

343 


SENECA 

inimicus  esset.    Vis  tu  aequo  animo  pati  candidatus 
sufFragia  ! 

1  38.  Contumeliam  tibi  fecit  aliquis.  Numquid 
maiorera  quam  Diogeni  philosopho  Stoico,  cui  de 
ira  cum  maxime  disserenti  adulescens  protervus 
inspuit  ?  Tulit  hoc  ille  leniter  et  sapient er  :  "  Non 
quidem,"    inquit,    "  irascor,    sed   dubito    tamen    an 

2  oporteat  irasci,"  Quanto  Cato^  noster  melius  ! 
Qui,  cum  agenti  causam  in  frontem  mediam  quantum 
poterat  attracta  pingui  saliva  inspuisset  Lentulus 
ille  patrum  nostrorum  memoria  factiosus  et  impotens, 
abstersit  faciem  et :  "  Adfirmabo,"  inquit,  "  omni- 
bus, Lentule,  falli  eos  qui  te  negant  (^  habere." 

1  39.  Contigit  iam  nobis.  Novate,  bene  componere 
animum  ;  aut  non  sentit  iracundiam  aut  superior 
est.  Videamus  quomodo  ahenam  leniamus ;  nee 
enim  sard  esse  tantum  volumus,  sed  sanare. 

2  Primam  iram  non  audebimus  oratione  mulcere. 
Svu-da  est  et  amens  ;  dabimus  illi  spatium.  Re- 
media  in  remissionibus  prosunt.  Nee  oculos  tumentis 
temptamus  vim  rigentem  movendo  incitaturi,  nee 
cetera  vitia,  dum  fervent.     Initia  morborum  quies 

3  curat.  "  Quantulum,"  inquis,  "  prodest  remedium 
tuum,  si  sua  sponte  desinentem  iram  placat  !  " 
Primum,  ut  citius  desinat,  efficit ;    deinde  custodit, 

^  Cato  added  by  Fickert :   quanto  noster  A. 

<•  To  reproduce  the  pun   in  the   Latin  the   word   must 
suggest  also  its  vulgar  use  in  the  sense  of  "  effrontery." 

344 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XXXVII.  5-xxxix.  3 

enemy.      But  when  you  are  a  candidate,  you  are 
^\•illing  to  put  up  calmly — with  the  votes  ! 

Some  one,  perhaps,  has  offered  you  an  insult ;  was 
it  any  greater  than  the  one  Diogenes,  the  Stoic 
philosopher,  suffered,  who  at  the  very  time  he  was  | 
discoursing  upon  anger  was  spat  upon  by  a  shame- 
less youth  ?  Yet  he  bore  this  calmly  and  wisely. 
"  Really,  I  am  not  angrj,"  he  said,  "  but  nevertheless 
I  am  not  sure  but  that  I  ought  to  be  angry."  Yet 
how  much  better  the  course  of  our  own  Cato  !  For 
when  he  was  pleading  a  case,  Lentulus,  that  factious 
and  unruly  man  who  lingers  in  the  memorj'  of  our 
fathers,  gathering  as  much  thick  sahva  as  he  could, 
spat  it  full  upon  the  middle  of  Cato's  forehead.  But 
he  wiped  it  off  his  face  and  said,  "  To  all  who  affirm 
that  you  have  no  cheek,"  Lentulus,  I'll  swear  that 
they  are  mistaken." 

We_haY£-now  succeeded,  Novatus,  in  bringing  com- 
posure to  the  mind  ;  it  either  does  not  feel  anger, 
or  is  siiperior  to  it.  Let  us  now  see  how  we  may 
allay  the  anger  of  others.  For  we  wish  not  merely 
to  be-healed  ourselves,  but  also  to  heal. 

We  shall  not  venture  to  soothe  the  first  burst  of 
anger  with  words.  It  is  both  deaf  and  mad  ;  we 
must  give  it  room.  Remedies  are  effective  when 
the  malady  subsides.  We  do  not  tamper  with  the 
eyes  when  they  are  swollen — for  in  their  stiff  condi- 
tion we  are  hkely  to  irritate  them  by  mo'ving  them — 
nor  with  other  affected  parts  while  they  are  inflamed. 
Rest  is  the  cure  in  the  first  stages  of  illness.  "  How 
httle,"  you  say,  "  is  yom-  remedy  worth,  if  it  quiets 
anger  when  it  is  subsiding  of  its  own  accord  !  "  In 
the  first  place,  it  makes  it  subside  all  the  more 
quickly  ;    in  the  second,  it  prevents  its  recurrence  ; 

345 


SENECA 

ne  recidat ;  ipsum  quoque  impetum,  quern  non 
audet  lenire,  fallet ;  removebit  omnia  ultionis 
instrumenta,  simulabit  iram,  ut  tamquam  adiutor 
et  doloris  comes  plus  auctoritatis  in  consiliis  habeat, 
moras  nectet  et,  dum  maiorem  poenam  quaerit, 
4  praesentem  differet.  Omni  arte  requiem  furori 
dabit.  Si  vehementior  erit,  aut  pudorem  illi  cui  non 
resistat  incutiet  aut  metum  ;  si  infirmior,  sermones 
inferet  vel  gratos  vel  novos  et  cupiditate  cognoscendi 
avocabit.  Medicum  aiunt,  cum  regis  filiam  curare 
deberet  nee  sine  ferro  posset,  dum  tumentem 
mammam  leniter  fovet,  scalpellum  spongea  tectum 
induxisse.  Repugnasset  puella  remedio  palam  ad- 
moto,  eadem,  quia  non  expectavit,  dolorem  tulit. 
Quaedam  non  nisi  decepta  sanantur. 

1  40.  Alteri  dices  :  "  Vide  ne  inimicis  iracundia  tua 
voluptati  sit,"  alteri  :  "  Vide  ne  magnitudo  animi 
tui  creditumque  apud  plerosque  robur  eadat.  In- 
dignor  me  hercules  et  non  invenio  dolendi  modum, 
sed  tempus  expectandum  est ;  dabit  poenas  ;  serva 
istud  in  animo  tuo  ;  cum  potueris,  et  pro  mora 
reddes."     Castigare  vero  irascentem  et  ultro  obirasci 

2  incitare  est ;  varie  adgredieris  blandeque,  nisi  forte 
tanta    persona    eris,    ut    possis    iram    comminuere, 

346 


ox  ANGER,  III.  xxxix.  3-xl   2 

it  ^\'ill  baffle,  also,  even  the  first  outburst  which  it 
makes  no  effort  to  soothe,  for  it  "will  remove  all  the 
weapons  of  revenge  ;  it  ^\-i\\  feign  anger  in  order  that,  / 
posing  thus  as  a  helper  and  comrade  of  our  resent---(— 
ment,  it  may  have  more  influence  in  counsel ;  it 
will  contrive  delays,  and  ynW  postpone  immediate 
punishment  by  looking  about  for  a  hea%-ier  one.  It 
will  employ  every  artifice  to  give  respite  to  the  mad- 
nes§.  If  the  victim  grows  \iolent,  it  will  enforce  on 
him  a^  sense  of  shame  or  fear  that  he  cannot  resist ; 
if  calmer,  it  will  introduce  conversation  that  is  either 
interesting  or  novel,  and  will  divert  him  by  stirring 
his  desire  for  knowledge.  There  is  a  story  that  once 
a  physician  had  to  cure  the  daughter  of  a  king,  and 
yet  could  not  without  using  the  knife.  And  so,  Avhile 
he  was  gently  dressing  her  swollen  breast,  he  inserted 
a  lance  concealed  in  a  sponge.  The  girl  would  have 
fought  against  the  remedy  openly  applied,  but 
because  she  did  not  expect  it,  she  endured  the  pain. 
Some  matters  are , cured jonly  by  deception.  ^ 

To  .one  man  you  will  say,  "  See  to  it  that  you  do 
not  by  your  anger  give  pleasure  to  your  foes  "  ;  to 
another,  "  See  to  it  that  you  do  not  lose  your  great- 
ness of  mind  and  the  reputation  you  have  in  the  eyes 
of  many  for  strength.  By  heavens,  I  myself  am 
indignant  and  I  am  sorr\-  beyond  measure,  but  we 
must  await  our  time.  He  shall  pay  the  penalty  ;i_ 
keep  that  well  in  mind.  WTicn  you  can,  you  ^^iHT' 
make  liim  pay  for  the  delay  as  well."  To  reprove 
a  man  when  he  is  angry  and  in  turn  to  become  angry 
at  him  serve  only  to  increase  his  anger.  You  will 
approach  him  with  various  appeals  and  persuasively, 
unless  you  happen  to  be  an  important  enough  person 
to  be  able  to  quell  his  anger  by  the  same  tactics  the 

347 


SENECA 

quemadmodum  fecit  divus  Augustus,  cum  cenaret 
apud  Vedium  Pollionem.  Fregerat  unus  ex  servis 
eius  crustallinum  ;  rapi  eum  Vedius  iussit  ne  vulgari 
quidem  more  periturum  ;  murenis  obici  iubebatur, 
quas  ingentis  in  piscina  continebat.  Quis  non  hoc 
ilium  putaret  luxuriae  causa  facer e  ?     Saevitia  erat. 

3  Evasit  e  manibus  puer  et  confugit  ad  Caesaris  pedes 
nihil  aliud  petiturus,  quam  ut  aliter  periret,  ne  esca 
fieret.  Motus  est  novitate  crudelitatis  Caesar  et 
ilium  quidem  mitti,  crustallina  autem  omnia  coram 

4  se  frangi  iussit  complerique  piscinam.  Fuit  Caesari 
sic  castigandus  amicus  ;  bene  usus  est  viribus  suis  : 
"  E  convivio  rapi  homines  imperas  et  novi  generis 
poenis  lancinari  ?  Si  calix  tuus  fractus  est,  viscera 
hominis    distrahentur  ?     Tantum    tibi    placebis,    ut 

6  ibi  aliquem  duci  iubeas,  ubi  Caesar  est  ?  "  Sic  cui 
tantum  potentiae  est,  ut  iram  ex  superiore  loco 
adgredi  possit,  male  tractet,  at  talem  dumtaxat, 
qualem  modo  rettuli,  feram,  immanem,  sanguinariam, 
quae  iam  insanabilis  est,  nisi  maius  aliquid  extimuit. 

1  41.  Pacem  demus  animo,  quam  dabit  praecep- 
torum  salutarium  adsidua  meditatio  actusque  rerum 
boni  et  intenta  mens  ad  unius  honesti  cupiditatem. 
Conscientiae    satis    fiat,    nil    in    famam    laboremus. 

2  Sequatur    vel    mala,    dum    bene    merentis.     "  At 

<•  Cf.  Be  dementia^  i.  18. 2. 
348 


ON  ANGER,  III.  XL.  2-xli.  2 

deified  Augustus  used  when  he  was  dining  with 
Vedius  Ponio.<*  When  one  of  his  slaves  had  broken 
a  crystal  cup,  Vedius  ordered  him  to  be  seized  and 
doomed  him  to  die,  but  in  an  extraordinary  way — 
he  ordered  him  to  be  thro^\Tl  to  the  huge  lampreys, 
which  he  kept  in  a  fish-pond.  Who  would  not 
suppose  that  he  did  this  merely  for  display  ?  It 
was  really  out  of  cruelty.  The  lad  slipped  from  his 
captors  and  fled  to  Caesir's  feet,  begging  only  that 
he  might  die  some  other  way — anything  but  being 
eaten.  Caesar,  shocked  by  such  an  innovation  in 
cruelty,  ordered  that  the  boy  be  pardoned,  and, 
besides,  that  all  the  crystal  cups  be  broken  before 
his  eyes  and  that  the  fish-pond  be  filled  up.  It  was 
so  that  it  befitted  Caesar  to  rebuke  a  friend  ;  he 
employed  his  power  rightly  :  "  Do  you  order  men 
to  be  hurried  from  a  banquet  to  death,  and  to  be  torn 
to  pieces  by  tortures  of  an  unheard-of  kind  ?  If  your 
cup  was  broken,  is  a  man  to  have  his  bowels  torn 
asunder  ?  Will  you  vaunt  yourself  so  much  as  to 
order  a  man  to  be  led  to  death  in  the  very  presence 
of  Caesar  ?  "  Thus  if  any  man's  power  is  so  great 
that  he  can  assail  anger  from  an  eminent  position,  let 
him  deal  >vith  it  harshly,  but  only  such  anger  as  that 
I  have  illustrated — fierce,  inhuman,  and  bloodthirsty, 
and  now  quite  incurable  unless  it  is  made  to  fear 
something  more  powerful. 

Let_us^ve-to  the  soul  that  peace  which  is  afforded 
by  constant  meditation  on  wholesome  instruction, 
by  noble  deeds,  and  a  mind  intent  upon  the  desire 
for  (5Trly  what  is  honourable.  Let  us  satisfy  our 
conscience  ;  for  reputation  let  us  strive  not  at  all. 
Let  even  a  bad  name  attend  us,  provided  that  we 
are  really  well-deserving.     "  But  the  populace,"  you 

34-9 


SENECA 

volgus  animosa  miratur  et  audaces  in  honore  sunt, 
placidi  pro  inertibus  habentur."  Primo  forsitan 
aspectu  ;  sed  simul  aequalitas  vitae  fidem  fecit  non 
segnitiem  illam  animi  esse  sed  pacem,  veneratur  illos 
3  populus  idem  colitque.  Nihil  ergo  habet  in  se  utile 
taeter  iste  et  hostilis  adfectus,  at  omnia  ex  contrario 
mala,  ferrum  et  ignes.  Pudore  calcato  caedibus 
inquinavit  manus,  membra  liberorum  dispersit,  nihil 
vacuum  reliquit  a  scelere,  non  gloriae  memor,  non 
infamiae  metuens,  inemendabiUs,  cum  ex  ira  in 
odium  obcalluit. 

1  42.  Careamus  hoc  malo  purgemusque  mentem  et 
exstirpemus  radicitus,  quae  quam\'is  tenuia  undecum- 
que  haeserint  renascentur,  et  iram  non  temperemus, 
sed  ex  toto  removeamus — quod  enim  malae  rei 
temperamentum  est  ?     Poterimus  autem,  adnitamur 

2  modo.  Nee  ulla  res  magis  proderit  quam  cogitatio 
mortahtatis.  Sibi  quisque  atque  alteri  dicat :  "  Quid 
iuvat  tamquam  in  aeternum  genitos  iras  indicere  et 
brevissimam  aetatem  dissipare  ?  Quid  iuvat  dies, 
quos  in  volup^ateiQ-honestam  impendere  licet,  in 
dolorem  alicuius  tormentumque  transferre  ?  Non 
capiunt  res  istae  iacturam  nee  tempus  vacat  perdere. 

3  Quid  ruimus  in  pugnam  ?  Quid  certamina  nobis 
arcessimus  ?  Quid  imbecillitatis  obliti  ingentia  odia 
suscipimus  et  ad  frangendum  fragiles  consurgimus  ? 
lam  istas  inimicitias,  quas  implacabili  gerimus  animo, 


350 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xLi.  2-xlii.  3 

say,  "  admires  spirited  action,  and  the  bold  are  held 
in  horibur  while  quiet  people  are  considered  in- 
effective." Perhaps  so,  at  first  sight.  But  when 
these  have  proved  by  the  even  tenor  of  their  hves 
that  they  seek,  not  inaction,  but  peace  of  mind,  that 
same  pubhc  "will  reverence  and  respect  them.  Con- 
seq^uentlsL  Jliis  Jiideous  and  ruinous  passion  serv'es 
not  a  single  useful  end,  but,  on  the  contrary,  evil  of 
every  sort,  the  sword,  and  flame.  Tramphng  under 
foot  every  scruple,  it  stains  the  hands  with  murder,  it 
scatters  abroad  the  limbs  of  children,  it  suffers  no 
place  fo  be  free  from  crime,  \\'ith  no  thought  of 
glorj',  with  no  fear  of  disgrace,  it  is  incurable  when 
once,  from  anger,  it  has  hardened  into  hate. 

Let  us  be  freed  from  this  evil,  let  us  clear  it  from 
our  minds  and  tear  it  up  by  the  roots,  for  if  there 
should  Unger  the  smallest  traces,  it  Mill  grow  again  ; 
and  let  us  not  tr}^  to  regulate  our  anger,  but  be  rid 
of  it  altogether— ior  what  regulation  can  there  be 
oflmye\il  thing  ?     Moreover,  we  can  do  it,  if  only 
we^^all  make  the   effort.     And  nothing  \nl\  help 
us  so  much  as  pondering  our  mortality.     Let  each/ 
man  say  to  himself  and  to  his  fellow-mortal  :   "  Why^ 
do  we,_as  if  born  to  live  for  ever,  take  dehght  in  pro- 
claiming our  wTath  and  in  wasting  the  little  span  of 
life  ?     \\  hy  do  we  delight  to  employ  for  somebody's 
distress  and  torture  the  days  that  we  might  devote  to  I 
virtuous  pleasure  ?   Your  fortunes  admit  no  squander-~r 
ing,  and  you  have  no  spare  time    to  waste.     Why 
do  we  rush  into  the  fray  ?     Why  do  we  in\ite  trouble 
for  ourselves  ?     WTiy  do  we,  forgetting  our  weakness, 
take  up  the  huge  burden  of  hate,  and,  easily  broken 
as  we  are,  rise  up  to  break  ?     Soon  a  fever  or  some 
other  bodily  ill  will  stay  that  war  of  hatred,  which 

351 


SENECA 

febris  aut  aliquod  aliud  malum  corporis  vetabit 
4  geri  ;  iam  par  acerrimum  media  mors  dirimet. 
Quid  tumultuamur  et  vitam  seditiosi  conturbamus  ? 
Stat  supra  caput  fatum  et  pereuntis  dies  imputat 
propiusque  ac  propius  accedit  ;  istud  tempus, 
quod  alienae  destinas  morti,  fortasse  circa  tuam 
est." 

1  43.  Quin  potius  vitam  brevem  colligis  placidamque 
et  tibi  et  ceteris  praestas  ?  Quin  potius  amabilem 
te,  dum  vivis,  omnibus,  desiderabilem,  cum  ex- 
cesseris,  reddis  ?  Quid  ilium  nimis  ex  alto  tecum 
agentem  detrahere  cupis  ?  Quid  ilium  oblatrantem 
tibi,  humilem  quidem  et  contemptum,  sed  superiori- 
bus  acidum  ac  molestum  exterere  viribus  tuis 
temptas  ?  Quid  servo,  quid  domino,  quid  regi,  quid 
clienti  tuo  irasceris  ?     Sustine  paulum  ;    venit  ecce 

2  mors  quae  vos  pares  faciat.  Videre  solemus  inter 
matutina  harenae  spectacula  tauri  et  ursi  pugnam 
inter  se  colligatorum,  quos,  cum  alter  alterum 
vexarunt,  suus  confector  expectat.  Idem  facimus, 
aliquem  nobiscum  adligatum  lacessimus,  cum  victo 
victorique  finis  et  quidem  maturus  immineat.  Quieti 
potius  pacatique  quantulumcumque  superest  exi- 
gamus  !     Nulli    cadaver    nostrum    iaceat    invisum  ! 

3  Saepe  rixam  conclamatum  in  vicinia  incendium  solvit 
et  interventus  ferae  latronem  viator emque  diducit. 
Colluctari  cum  minoribus  malis  non  vacat,  ubi  metus 
maior  apparuit.  Quid  nobis  cum  dimicatione  et 
insidiis  ?     Numquid  amplius  isti  cui  irasceris  quam 

352 


ON  ANGER,  III.  xLii.  3-xliii.  3 

we  now  wage  'vWth  such  unrelenting  purpose.  Soon 
death  will  step  in  and  part  the  fiercest  pair  of  fighters. 
Why  do  we  run  riot  and  perturb  life  with  our  uproar  ? 
Fate  looms  above  our  heads,  and  scores  up  to  our 
account  the  days  as  they  go  by,  and  draws  ever  nearer 
and  nearer.  That  hour  which  you  appoint  for  the 
deathpf  another  is  perchance  near  your  own." 

Why  do  you  not  rather  gather  up  your  brief  life 
and  render  it  a  peaceful  one  to  yourself  and  all  others  ? 
Why  do  you  not  rather  make  yourself  beloved  by  all 
while  you  live,  and  regretted  by  all  when  you  die  ? 
Why  do  you  long  to  drag  down  the  man  who  deals 
with  you  from  too  lofty  a  height  ?  Why  do  you  try 
with  all  your  might  to  crush  the  man  who  rails  against 
you,  a  low  and  contemptible  fellow,  but  sharp-tongued  \^ 
and  troublesome  to  his  betters  ?  Why  are  you  angry 
with  your  slave,  you  ^\^th  your  master,  you  with  your 
patron,  you  with  your  client  ?  Wait  a  little.  Behold, 
death  comes,  who  will  make  you  equals.  At  the 
morning  performances  in  the  arena  we  often  see  a 
battle  between  a  bull  and  a  bear  tied  together,  and 
when  they  have  harried  each  other,  an  appointed 
slayer  awaits  them.  Their  fate  is  ours  ;  we  harass 
some  one  bound  closely  to  us,  and  yet  the  end,  all 
too  soon,  threatens  the  victor  and  the  vanquished. 
Rather  let  us  spend  the  little  time  that  is  left  in 
repose  and  peace  !  Let  no  man  loathe  us  when  we 
lie  a  corpse  !  A  cry  of  fire  in  the  neighbourhood 
often  ends  a  fight,  and  the  arrival  of  a  wild  beast 
rescues  a  traveller  from  the  brigand.  We  have  no 
time  to  struggle  with  lesser  ills  when  a  more  threaten- 
ing fear  appears.  Why  do  we  concern  ourselves  A\ith 
combat  and  with  snares  ?  Can  you  wish  for  the  _]. 
victim  of  your  \^Tath  a  greater  ill  than  death  ?  Even 
VOL.  I  2  a  353 


SENECA 

mortem  optas  ?  Etiam  te  quiescente  morietur. 
Perdis    operam,    si    facere    vis    quod    futurum    est. 

4  "  Nolo,"  inquis,  "  utique  occidere,  sed  exilio,  sed 
ignominia,  sed  damno  adficere."  Magis  ignosco  ei, 
qui  vulnus  inimici  quam  qui  pusulam  eoncupiscit ; 
hie  enim  non  tantum  mali  animi  est,  sed  pusilli. 
Sive  de  ultimis  suppliciis  cogitas  sive  de  levioribus, 
quantulum  est  temporis,  quo  aut  ille  poena  sua 
torqueatur  aut  tu  malum  gaudium  ex  aliena  per- 

6  cipias  !  lam  istum  spiritum  exspuemus.  Interim, 
dum  trahimus,  dum  inter  homines  sumus,  colamus 
humanitatem.  Non  timori  cuiquam,  non  periculo 
simus,  detrimenta,  iniurias,  convicia,  vellicationes 
contemnamus  et  magno  animo  brevia  feramus  in- 
commoda.  Dum  respicimus,  quod  aiunt,  versamus- 
que  nos,  iam  mortalitas  aderit. 


3o4 


ON  ANGER,  III,  xLiii.  3-5 

though  you  do  not  move  a,  finger,  he  \\-ill  die.  You 
waste  your  pains  if  you  -wish  to  do  what  needs  must 
U£.  "  I  do  not  wish,"  you  say,  "  to  kill  him  at  all, 
but  to  punish  him  with  exile,  with  pubhc  disgrace, 
with  material  loss."  But  I  am  more  indulgent  to  the 
man  who  would  give  his  enemy  a  wound  than  to  the 
one  who  would  give  him  a  bUster  ;  for  the  latter  has 
not  only  an  e\il  mind,  but  a  petty  mind  as  well. 
WTiether  your  thoughts  '•un  on  tortures  severe  or 
shght,  how  short  is  the  time  in  which  either  your 
\ictim  can  w*rithe  under  your  torments,  or  you  derive 
a  wicked  joy  from  another's  pain  !  Soon  shall  we 
spew  forth  this  frail  spirit.  Meanwhile,  so  long  as 
we  draw  breath,  so  long  as  we  Uve  among  men,  let 
us  cherish  humanity.  Let  us  not  cause  fear  to  any 
man,  nor  danger  ;  let  us  scorn  losses,  wTongs,  abuse, 
and  taunts,  and  let  us  endure  with  heroic  mind  our 
short-Uved  ills.  While  we  are  looking  back,  as  they 
say,  and  turning  around,  straightway  death  will  be 
upon  us. 


355 


AD  NERONEM  CAESAREM 
DE  CLEMENTIA 

LIBER   I 

1  1.  Scribere  de  dementia,  Nero  Caesar,  institui,  ut 
quodam  modo  speculi  vice  fungerer  et  te  tibi  osten- 
derem  perventurum  ad  voluptatem  maximam  om- 
nium. Quamvis  enim  recte  factorum  verus  fructus 
sit  fecisse  nee  ullum  virtutum  pretium  dignum  illis 
extra  ipsas  sit,  iuvat  inspicere  et  circumire  bonam 
conscientiam,  turn  immittere  oculos  in  hanc  im- 
mensam  multitudinem  discordem,  seditiosam,  im- 
potentem,  in  perniciem  alienam  suamque  pariter 
exultaturam    si    hoc    iugum    fregerit,    et    ita    loqui 

2  secum  :  "  Egone  ex  omnibus  mortalibus  placui 
electusque  sum,  qui  in  terris  deorum  vice  fungerer  ? 
Ego  vitae  necisque  gentibus  arbiter ;  qualem 
quisque  sortem  statumque  habeat,  in  mea  manu 
positum  est ;  quid  cuique  mortalium  fortuna  datum 
velit,  meo  ore  pronuntiat ;  ex  nostro  response 
laetitiae  causas  populi  urbesque  concipiunt  ;  nulla 
pars  usquam  nisi  volente  propitioque  me  floret ; 
haec  tot  milia  gladiorum,  quae  pax  mea  comprimit, 

356 


TO  THE  EMPEROR  NERO 
ON  I<IERCY 

BOOK    I 

I  HAVE  undertaken,  Nero  Caesar,  to  write  on  the 
subject  of  mercy,  in  order  to  serve  in  a  way  the 
purpose  of  a  mirror,  and  thus  reveal  you  to  yourself 
as  one  destined  to  attain  to  the  greatest  of  all 
pleasures.  For,  though  the  true  profit  of  virtuous  i 
deeds  Ues  in  the  doing,  and  there  is  no  fitting  reward 
for  the  virtues  apart  from  the  virtues  themselves, 
still  it  is  a  pleasure  to  subject  a  good  conscience  to 
a  round  of  inspection,  then  to  cast  one's  eyes  upon 
this  vast  throng — discordant,  factious,  and  unruly, 
ready  to  run  riot  alike  for  the  destruction  of  itself 
and  others  if  it  should  break  its  yoke — and  finally 
to  commune  with  oneself  thus  :  "  Have  I  of  all 
mortals  found  favour  with  Heaven  and  been  chosen 
to  serve  on  earth  as  vicar  of  the  gods  ?  I  am  the 
arbiter  of  life  and  death  for  the  nations  ;  it  rests  in 
my  power  what  each  man's  lot  and  state  shall  be  : 
by  my  lips  Fortune  proclaims  what  gift  she  would 
bestow  on  each  human  being  ;  from  my  utterance 
peoples  and  cities  gather  reasons  for  rejoicing ; 
without  my  favour  and  grace  no  part  of  the  wide  world 
can  prosper  ;    all  those  many  thousands  of  swords 

357 


SENECA 

ad  nutum  meum  stringentur  ;  quas  nationes  funditus 
excidi,  quas  transportari,  quibus  libertatem  dari, 
quibus  eripi,  quos  reges  mancipia  fieri  quorumque 
capiti  regium  circumdari  decus  oporteat,  quae  ruant 

3  urbes,  quae  oriantur,  mea  iuris  dictio  est.  In  hac 
tanta  facultate  rerum  non  ira  me  ad  iniqua  supplicia 
compulit,  non  iuvenilis  impetus,  non  temeritas  homi- 
num  et  contumacia,  quae  saepe  tranquillissimis 
quoque  pectoribus  patientiam  extor§it,  non  ipsa 
ostentandae  per  terrores  potentiae  dira,  sed  frequens 
magnis  imperiis  gloria.  Conditum,  immo  con- 
strictum  apud  me  ferrum  est,  summa  parsimom'a 
etiam  vilissimi  sanguinis  ;  nemo  non,  cui  alia  desunt, 

4  hominis  nomine  apud  me  gratiosus  est.  Severitatem 
abditam,  at  clementiam  in  procinctu  habeo  ;  sic  me 
custodio,  tamquam  legibus,  quas  ex  situ  ac  tenebris 
in  lucem  evocavi,  rationem  redditurus  sim.  Alterius 
aetate  prima  motus  sum,  alterius  ultima ;  alium 
dignitati  donavi,  alium  humilitati ;  quotiens  nullam 
inveneram  misericordiae  causam,  mihi  peperci. 
Hodie  dis  inmortalibus,  si  a  me  rationem  repetant, 
adnltmerare  genus  humanum  paratus  sum." 

5  Potes  hoc,  Caesar,  audacter  praedicare  omnia, 
quae  in  fidem  tutelamque  tuam  venerunt,  tuta 
haberi,^  nihil  per  te  neque  vi  neque  clam  adimi  rei 
publicae.     Rarissimam  laudem  et  nulli  adhuc  princi- 

^  -que  tuam  .  .  .  tuta  ha-  supplied  by  Gertz. 

"  Literally,   "  I    have  spared    myself "   i.e.,  by  sparing 
another,  according  to  the  reasoning  set  forth  in  i.  5.  1. 

358 


ON  MERCY,  I.  I.  2-5 

which  my  peace  restrains  will  be  drawn  at  my  nod  ; 
what  nations  shall  be  utterly  destroyed,  which 
banished,  which  shall  receive  the  gift  of  liberty,  which 
have  it  taken  from  them,  what  kings  shall  become 
slaves  and  whose  heads  shall  be  crowned  with  royal 
honour,  what  cities  shall  fall  and  which  shall  rise — 
this  it  is  mine  to  decree.  With  all  things  thus  at  my 
disposal,  I  have  been  moved  neither  by  anger  nor 
youthful  impulse  to  unjjst  punishment,  nor  by  the 
foolhardiness  and  obstinacy  of  men  which  have  often 
wrung  patience  from  even  the  serenest  souls,  nor 
yet  by  that  vainglory  which  employs  terror  for  the 
display  of  might — a  dread  but  all  too  common  use 
of  great  and  lordly  power.  With  me  the  sword  is 
hidden,  nay,  is  sheathed  ;  I  am  sparing  to  the  utmost 
of  even  the  meanest  blood  ;  no  man  fails  to  find 
favour  at  my  hands  though  he  lack  all  else  but 
the  name  of  man.  Sternness  I  keep  hidden,  but 
mercy  ever  ready  at  hand.  I  so  hold  guard  over 
myself  as  though  I  were  about  to  render  an  account 
to  those  laws  which  I  have  summoned  from  decay 
and  darkness  into  the  light  of  day.  I  have  been 
moved  to  pity  by  the  fresh  youth  of  one,  by  the 
extreme  old  age  of  another  ;  one  I  have  pardoned 
for  his  high  position,  another  for  his  humble  state  ; 
whenever  I  found  no  excuse  for  pity,  for  my  own  sake 
I  have  spared."  To-day,  if  the  immortal  gods  should 
require  a  reckoning  from  me,  I  am  ready  to  give  full 
tale  of  the  human  race." 

This  pronouncement,  Caesar,  you  may  boldly 
make,  that  whatever  has  passed  into  your  trust  and 
guardianship  is  still  kept  safe,  that  through  you  the 
state  suffers  no  loss,  either  from  violence  or  from 
fraud.     It  is  the  rarest  praise,  hitherto  denied  to  all 

359 


SENECA 

pum  concessam  concupisti  innocentiam.  Non  perdit 
operam  nee  bonitas  ista  tua  singularis  ingratos  aut 
malignos  aestimatores  nancta  est.  Refertur  tibi 
gratia ;  nemo  unus  homo  uni  homini  tam  carus 
umquam  fuit,   quam   tu  populo   Romano,  magnum 

6  longumque  eius  bonum.  Sed  ingens  tibi  onus  im- 
posuisti  ;  nemo  iam  divum  Augustum  nee  Ti. 
Caesaris  prima  tempora  loquitur  nee,  quod  te  imitari 
velit,  exemplar  extra  te  quaerit ;  principatus  tuus 
ad  gustum^  exigitur.  Difficile  hoc  fuisset,  si  non 
naturalis  tibi  ista  bonitas  esset,  sed  ad  tempus 
sumpta.  Nemo  enim  potest  personam  diu  ferre, 
ficta  cito  in  naturam  suam  recidunt  ;  quibus  Veritas 
subest  quaeque,  ut  ita  dicam,  ex  sohdo  enascuntur, 
tempore  ipso  in  maius  meliusque  procedunt. 

7  Magnam  adibat  aleam  populus  Romanus,  cum 
incertum  esset,  quo  se  ista  tua  nobilis  indoles  daret  ; 
iam  vota  publica  in  tuto  sunt ;  nee  enim  periculum 
est,  ne  te  subita  tui  capiat  obhvio.  Facit  quidem 
avidos  nimia  felicitas,  nee  tam  temperatae  cupiditates 
sunt  umquam,  ut  in  eo,  quod  contigit,  desinant ; 
gradus  a  magnis  ad  maiora  fit,  et  spes  improbissimas 
complectuntur  insperata  adsecuti ;  omnibus  tamen 
nunc  civibus  tuis  et  haec  confessio  exprimitur  esse 
felices  et  ilia  nihil  iam  his  accedere  bonis  posse,  nisi 

8  ut  perpetua  sint.     Multa  illos  cogunt  ad  hanc  con- 

^  So  N :  augustum  most  uss.  :  obrussam  Haase, 
360 


ON  MERCY,  I.  I.  5-8 

other  princes,  that  you  have  coveted  for  yourself — 
innocence  of  WTong.  Nor  has  the  effort  been  in 
vain,  and  that  unparalleled  goodness  of  yours  has  not 
found  men  ungrateful  or  grudging  in  their  appraise- 
ment. Thanks  are  rendered  to  you  ;  no  human 
being  has  ever  been  so  dear  to  another  as  you  are 
to  the  people  of  Rome — its  great  and  lasting  blessing. 
But  it  is  a  mighty  burden  that  you  have  taken  upon 
yourself ;  no  one  to-day  talks  of  the  deified  Augustus 
or  the  early  years  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  or  seeks  for 
any  model  he  would  have  you  copy  other  than  your- 
self ;  the  standard  for  your  prineipate  is  the  foretaste 
you  have  given.  This  would  have  indeed  bfeen  diffi- 
cult if  that  goodness  of  yoiu-s  were  not  innate  but 
only  assimied  for  the  moment.  For  no  one  can 
wear  a  mask  long  ;  the  false  quickly  lapses  back  into 
its  own  nature  ;  but  whatever  has  truth  for  its 
foundation,  and  whatever  springs,  so  to  speak,  from 
out  the  solid  earth,  grows  by  the  mere  passing  of 
time  into  something  larger  and  better. 

Great  was  the  hazard  that  the  Roman  people 
faced  so  long  as  it  was  uncertain  what  course  those 
noble  talents  of  yours  would  take  ;  to-day  the 
prayers  of  the  state  are  assured,  for  there  is  no  danger 
that  you  \n\l  be  seized  by  sudden  forgetfulness  of 
yourself.  Over-much  prosperity,  it  is  true,  makes 
men  greedy,  and  desires  are  never  so  well  controlled 
as  to  cease  at  the  point  of  attainment  ;  the  ascent 
is  from  great  to  greater,  and  men  embrace  the 
widest  hopes  when  once  they  have  gained  what  they 
did  not  hope  for  ;  and  yet  to-day  your  subjects  one 
and  all  are  constrained  to  confess  that  they  are 
happy,  and,  too,  that  nothing  further  can  be  added 
to  their  blessings,  except  that  these  may  last.     Many 

361 


SENECA 

fessionem,  qua  nulla  in  homine  tardior  est :  securitas 
alta,  adfluens,  ius  supra  omnem  iniuriam  positum  ; 
obversatur  oculis  laetissima  forma  rei  publicae,  cui 
ad  summam  libertatem  nihil  deest  nisi  pereundi 
9  licentia.  Praecipue  tamen  aequalis  ad  maximos 
imosque  pervenit  clementiae  tuae  admiratio  ;  cetera 
enim  bona  pro  portione  fortunae  suae  quisque  sentit 
aut  expectat  maiora  niinoraque,  ex  dementia  omnes 
idem  sperant ;  nee  est  quisquam,  cui  tam  valde 
innocentia  sua  placeat,  ut  non  stare  in  conspectu 
clementiam  paratam  humanis  erroribus  gaudeat. 

1  2.  Esse  autem  aliquos  scio,  qui  dementia  pessimum 
quemque  putent  sustineri,  quoniam  nisi  post  crimen 
supervacua  est  et  sola  haec  v-irtus  inter  innocentes 
cessat.  Sed  primum  omnium,  sicut  medicinae  apud 
aegros  usus,  etiam  apud  sanos  honor  est,  ita  clemen- 
tiam, quamvis  poena  digni  invocent,  etiam  innocentes 
colunt.  Deinde  habet  haec  in  persona  quoque 
innocentium  locum,  quia  interim  fortuna  pro  culpa 
est ;  nee  innocentiae  tantum  dementia  succurrit, 
sed  saepe  virtuti,  quoniam  quidem  condicione  tem- 
porum  incidunt  quaedam,  quae  possint  laudata 
puniri.  Adice,  quod  magna  pars  hominum  est,  quae 
reverti  ad  innocentiam  possit,  si  <poenae  remissio 

2  fuerit  >  .^  Non  tamen  vulgo  ignoscere  decet  ;  nam 
ubi  discrimen  inter  malos  bonosque  sublatum  est, 
confusio   sequitur   et  vitiorum   eruptio  ;    itaque  ad- 

^  si  best  Mss.  with  a  lacuna  :  sed  AT. 

"  Stoicism    produced    many    "  conscientious    objectors  " 
who  were  high-minded,  yet  futile,  opponents  of  imperial  rule. 

362 


ON  MERCY,  I.  I.  8-II.  2 

facts  force  them  to  this  confession,  which  more  than 
any  other  a  man  is  loath  to  make  :  a  security  deep  "^ 
and  abounding,  and  justice  enthroned  above  all 
injustice  ;  before  their  eyes  hovers  the  fairest  vision 
of  a  state  which  lacks  no  element  of  complete  liberty 
except  the  hcence  of  self-destruction.  Above  all, 
however,  aUke  to  the  highest  and  the  lowest,  extends 
the  same  admiration  for  your  quahty  of  mercy  ;  for 
although  of  other  blessings  each  one  experiences  or 
expects  a  larger  or  smaller  measure  in  proportion  to 
his  lot,  yet  from  mercy  men  all  hope  to  have  the 
same ;  nor  is  there  any  man  so  wholly  satisfied  with 
his  own  innocence  as  not  to  rejoice  that  mercy  stands 
in  sight,  waiting  for  himian  errors. 

I  know,  however,  that  there  are  some  who  think 
that  mercy  upholds  the  worst  class  of  men,  since  it  is 
superfluous  unless  there  has  been  some  crime,  and 
since  it  alone  of  all  the  virtues  finds  no  exercise  among 
the  guiltless.  But,  first  of  all,  just  as  medicine  is 
used  by  the  sick,  yet  is  held  in  honour  by  the  healthy, 
so  >\'ith  mercy — though  it  is  those  who  deserve  punish- 
ment that  invoke  it,  yet  even  the  guiltless  cherish  it. 
Again,  this  xirtue  has  scope  even  in  the  person  of  i 
the  guiltless,  because  at  times  fortune  takes  the  '' 
place  of  guilt  ;  and  not  only  does  mercy  come  to  the 
rescue  of  innocence,  but  often  of  righteousness  also, 
inasmuch  as,  from  the  state  of  the  times,"  there  arise 
certain  acts  which,  while  praised,  may  yet  be 
punished.  Then,  too,  there  are  a  great  many  people 
who  might  be  turned  back  to  the  path  of  \artue  if 
[they  are  released  from  punishment].  Nevertheless, 
pardoning  ought  not  to  be  too  common  ;  for  when 
the  distinction  between  the  bad  and  the  good  is 
removed,  the  result  is  confusion  and  an  epidemic  of 

363 


SENECA 

hibenda  moderatio  est,  quae  sanabilia  ingenia  di- 
stinguere  a  deploratis  sciat.  Nee  promiscuam  habere 
ae  vulgarem  clementiam  oportet  nee  abscisam  ;  nam 
tam  omnibus  ignoscere  crudelitas  quam  nulli. 
Modum  tenere  debemus  ;  sed  quia  difficile  est 
temperamentum,  quidquid  aequo  plus  futurum  est, 
in  partem  humaniorem  praeponderet. 

3.  Sed  haec  sue  melius  loco  dicentur.  Nunc  in  tres 
partes  omnem  hanc  materiam  dividam.  Prima  erit 
manumissionis  ;  secunda,  quae  naturam  clementiae 
habitumque  demonstret  :  nam  cum  sint  vitia 
quaedam  virtutes  imitantia,  non  possunt  secerni, 
nisi  signa,  quibus  dinoscantur,  impresseris  ;  tertio 
loco  quaeremus,  quomodo  ad  hanc  virtutem  per- 
ducatur  animus,  quomodo  confirmet  eam  et  usu 
suam  faciat. 

Nullam  ex  omnibus  virtutibus  homini  magis  con- 
venire,  cum  sit  nulla  humanior,  constet  necesse  est 
non  solum  inter  nos,  qui  hominem  sociale  animal 
communi  bono  genitum  videri  volumus,  sed  etiam 
inter  illos,  qui  hominem  voluptati  donant,  quorum 
omnia  dicta  factaque  ad  utilitates  suas  spectant ; 
nam  si  quietem  petit  et  otium,  hanc  virtutem  naturae 
suae  nanctus  est,  quae  pacem  amat  et  manus  retinet. 
Nullum  tamen  dementia  ex  omnibus  magis  quam 
regem  aut  principem  decet.  Ita  enim  magnae  vires 
decori  gloriaeque  sunt,  si  illis  salutaris  potentia  est  ; 
nam  pestifera  vis  est  valere  ad  nocendum.  Illius 
demum   magnitudo    stabilis   fundataque    est,   quem 

"  A  reference  to  the  Stoic  emphasis  upon  the  responsibility 
of  the  individual  to  the  community. 
*  i.e.,  the  Epicureans. 

364 


ON  MERCY,  I.  n.  2-in.  3 

vice.  Therefore  a  wise  moderation  should  be  exer- 
cised which  will  be  capable  of  distinguishing  between 
curable  and  hopeless  characters.  Neither  should 
we  have  indiscriminate  and  general  mercy,  nor  yet 
preclude  it ;  for  it  is  as  much  a  cruelty  to  pardon 
all  as  to  pardon  none.  We  should  maintain  the 
mean ;  but  since  a  perfect  balance  is  difficult,  if 
anything  is  to  disturb  the  equipoise  it  should  turn 
the  scale  toward  the  kindlier  side. 

But  these  matters  will  be  more  fitly  discussed  in 
their  proper  place.  Here  I  shall  divide  this  subject 
as  a  whole  into  three  parts.  The  first  will  treat  of 
the  remission  of  punishment  ;  the  second  will  aim 
to  show  the  nature  and  aspect  of  mercy  ;  for  since 
there  are  certain  vices  which  counterfeit  virtues, 
they  cannot  be  separated  unless  you  stamp  them 
Avith  marks  by  which  they  may  be  kno^vn  apart. 
In  the  third  place  I  shall  inquire  how  the  mind  is  led 
to  adopt  this  virtue,  and  how  it  establishes  it  and 
by  practice  makes  it  its  owTi. 

That  no  one  of  all  the  virtues  is  more  seemly  for 
a  man,  since  none  is  more  human,  is  a  necessary  - 
conviction  not  only  for  those  of  us  who  maintain  that 
man  is  a  social  creature,  begotten  for  the  common 
good,"  but  also  for  those  who  give  man  over  to 
pleasure,**  whose  words  and  deeds  all  look  to  their  own 
advantage.  For  if  a  man  seeks  calm  and  quiet,  he 
finds  this  \irtue,  which  loves  peace  and  stays  the 
hand,  forthwith  suited  to  his  bent.  Yet  of  all  men 
none  is  better  graced  by  mercy  than  a  king  or  a 
prince.  For  great  power  confers  grace  and  glory 
only  when  it  is  potent  for  benefit  ;  it  is  surely  a 
baneful  might  that  is  strong  only  for  harm.  He 
alone  has  firm  and  well-grounded  greatness  whom 

365 


SENECA 

omnes  tarn  supra  se  esse  quam  pro  se  sciunt,  cuius 
curam  excubare  pro  salute  singulorum  atque  univer- 
sorum  cottidie  experiuntur,  quo  procedente  non, 
tamquam  malum  aliquod  aut  noxium  animal  e  cubili 
prosilierit,  difFugiunt,  sed  tamquam  ad  clarum  ac 
beneficum  sidus  certatim  ad  volant.  Obicere  se 
pro  illo  mucronibus  insidiantium  paratissimi  et  sub- 
sternere  corpora  sua,  si  per  stragem  illi  humanam 
iter  ad  salutem  struendum  sit,  somnum  eius  noc- 
turnis  excubiis  muniunt,  latera  obiecti  circumfusique 
defendunt,  incurrentibus  periculis  se  opponunt, 

4  Non  est  hie  sine  ratione  populis  urbibusque  con- 
sensus sic  protegendi  amandique  reges  et  se  suaque 
iactandi,  quocumque  desidera\'it  imperantis  salus  ; 
nee  haec  vilitas  sui  est  aut  dementia  pro  uno  capite 
tot  milia  excipere  ferrum  ac  multis  mortibus  unam 
animam  redimere  nonnumquam  senis  et  invalidi. 

5  Quemadmodum  totum  corpus  animo  deservit  et, 
cum  hoc  tanto  maius  tantoque  speciosius  sit,  ille  in 
occulto  maneat  tenuis  et  in  qua  sede  latitet  incertus, 
tamen  manus,  pedes,  oculi  negotium  illi  gerunt, 
ilium  haec  cutis  munit,  illius  iussu  iacemus  aut  in- 
quieti  discurrimus,  cum  ille  imperavit,  sive  avarus 
dominus  est,  mare  lucri  causa  scrutamur,  sive 
ambitiosus,  lam  dudum  dextram  flammis  obiecimus 
aut  voluntarii  terram  subsiluimus,  sic  haec  immensa 
multitudo  unius  animae  circumdata  illius  spiritu 
366 


ON  MERCY,  I    in.  S-5 

all  men  know  to  be  as  much  their  friend  as  he  is 
their  superior  ;  whose  concern  they  daily  find  to  be 
vigilant  for  the  safety  of  each  and  all  ;  upon  whose 
approach  they  do  not  flee  as  if  some  monster  or 
deadly  beast  had  leaped  from  his  lair,  but  rush 
eagerly  forward  as  toward  a  bright  and  beneficent 
star.  In  his  defence  they  are  ready  on  the  instant 
to  throw  themselves  before  the  swords  of  assassins, 
and  to  lay  their  bodies  beneath  his  feet  if  his  path 
to  safety  must  be  paved  with  slaughtered  men  ;  his 
sleep  they  guard  by  nightly  \igils,  his  person  they 
defend  with  an  encirchng  barrier,  against  assailing 
dangers  they  make  themselves  a  rampart. 

Not  A\"ithout  reason  do  cities  and  peoples  show 
this  accord  in  giWng  such  protection  and  love 
to  their  kings,  and  in  flinging  themselves  and  all 
they  have  into  the  breach  whenever  the  safety 
of  their  ruler  craves  it.  Nor  is  it  self-deprecia- 
tion or  madness  when  many  thousands  meet  the 
steel  for  the  sake  of  one  man,  and  with  many 
deaths  ransom  the  single  life,  it  may  be,  of  a  feeble 
dotard. 

The  whole  body  is  the  servant  of  the  mind,  and 
though  the  former  is  so  much  larger  and  so  much 
more  showy,  while  the  unsubstantial  soul  remains 
in\isible  not  knowing  where  its  secret  habitation 
lies,  yet  the  hands,  the  feet,  and  the  eyes  are  in  its 
employ  ;  the  outer  skin  is  its  defence  ;  at  its  bidding 
we  he  idle,  or  restlessly  run  to  and  fro  ;  when  it 
commands,  if  it  is  a  grasping  tyrant,  we  search  the  sea 
for  gain  ;  if  covetous  of  fame,  ere  now  we  have  thrust 
a  right  hand  into  the  flame,  or  plunged  willingly  into 
a  chasm.  In  the  same  way  this  vast  throng,  encirchng 
the  life  of  one  man,  is  ruled  by  his  spirit,  guided  by  his 

367 


SENECA 

regitur,  illius  ratione  flectitur  pressura  se  ac  fractura 
viribus  suis,  nisi  consilio  sustineretur. 

1  4.  Suam  itaque  incolumitatem  amant,  cum  pro  uno 
homine  denas  legiones  in  aciem  deducunt,  cum  in 
primam  frontem  procurrunt  et  adversa  vulneribus 
pectora  ferunt,  ne  imperatoris  sui  signa  vertantur, 
Ille  est  enim  vinculum,  per  quod  res  publica  cohaeret, 
ille  spiritus  vitalis,  quem  haec  tot  milia  trahunt  nihil 
ipsa  per  se  futura  nisi  onus  et  praeda,  si  mens  ilia 
imperii  subtrahatur. 

Rege  incolumi  mens  omnibus  una : 
amisso  rupere  fidem. 

2  Hie  casus  Romanae  pacis  exitium  erit,  hie  tanti 
fortunam  populi  in  ruinas  aget  ;  tam  diu  ab  isto 
periculo  aberit  hie  populus,  quam  diu  sciet  ferre 
frenos,  quos  si  quando  abruperit  vel  aliquo  casu 
discussos  reponi  sibi  passus  non  erit,  haec  unitas 
et  hie  maximi  imperii  contextus  in  partes  multas 
dissiliet,    idemque    huic    urbi    finis    dominandi    erit, 

3  qui  parendi  fuerit.  Ideo  principes  regesque  et 
quocumque  aho  nomine  sunt  tutores  status  publici 
non  est  mirum  amari  ultra  privatas  etiam  necessi- 
tudines  ;  nam  si  sanis  hominibus  publica  privatis 
potiora  sunt,  sequitur,  ut  is  quoque  carior  sit,  in  quem 
se  res  publica  convertit.  Olim  enim  ita  se  induit 
rei  publicae  Caesar,  ut  seduci  alterum  non  posset 
sine  utriusque  pernicie  ;  nam  et  illi  viribus  opus 
est  et  huic  capite. 

""  Virgil,  Oeorgics,  iv.  212,  where  he  is  speaking  of  bees 
and  their  devotion  to  their  "  king." 


ON  MERCY,  I.  III.  5-iv.  3 

reason,  and  would  crush  and  cripple  itself  with  its 
own  power  if  it  were  not  upheld  by  >visdom. 

It  is,  therefore,  their  ovra  safety  that  men  love,  " 
when  for  one  man  they  lead  ten  legions  at  a  time  into 
battle,  when  they  rush  to  the  forefront  and  expose 
their  breasts  to  wounds  that  they  may  save  the 
standards  of  their  emperor  from  defeat.  For  he  is 
the  bond  by  which  the  commonwealth  is  united,  the 
breath  of  life  which  these  many  thousands  draw,  who 
in  their  own  strength  would  be  only  a  burden  to 
themselves  and  the  prey  of  others  if  the  great  mind 
of  the  empire  should  be  withdrawn. 

If  safe  their  king,  one  mind  to  all ; 
Bereft  of  him,  they  troth  recall." 

Such  a  calamity  would  be  the  destruction  of  the 
Roman  peace,  such  a  calamity  will  force  the  fortune 
of  a  mighty  people  to  its  downfall.  Just  so  long  will 
this  people  be  free  from  that  danger  as  it  shall  know 
how  to  submit  to  the  rein  ;  but  if  ever  it  shall  tear 
away  the  rein,  or  shall  not  suffer  it  to  be  replaced  if 
shaken  loose  by  some  mishap,  then  this  unity  and 
this  fabric  of  mightiest  empire  will  fly  into  many 
parts,  and  the  end  of  this  city's  rule  will  be  one  with 
the  end  of  her  obedience.  Therefore  it  is  not  strange 
that  kings  and  princes  and  guardians  of  the  public 
order,  whatever  different  name  they  bear,  are  held 
more  dear  even  than  those  bound  to  us  by  private 
ties  ;  for  if  men  of  sense  put  public  interests  above-l- 
private,  it  follows  that  he  too  is  dearer  upon  whom 
the  whole  state  centres.  At  an  earlier  day,  in  fact, 
Caesar  so  clothed  himself  with  the  powers  of  state 
that  neither  one  could  be  withdrawn  without  the 
destruction  of  both.  For  while  a  Caesar  needs  power, 
the  state  also  needs  a  head. 

VOL.  I  2  B  369 


SENECA 

1  5.  Longius  videtur  recessisse  a  proposito  oratio 
mea,  at  mehercules  rem  ipsam  premit.  Nam  si,  quod 
adhuc  colligit,  tu  animus  rei  publicae  tuae  es,  ilia 
corpus  tuum,  vides,  ut  puto,  quam  necessaria  sit 
dementia  ;  tibi  enim  parcis,  cum  videris  alteri 
parcere.  Parcendum  itaque  est  etiam  improbandis 
civibus  non  aliter  quam  membris  languentibus,  et, 
si  quando  misso  sanguine  opus  est,     sustinenda  est 

2  manus,^  ne  ultra,  quam  necesse  sit,  incidat.  Est 
ergo,  ut  dicebam,  dementia  omnibus  quidem  homini- 
bus  secundum  naturam,  maxime  tamen  decora 
imperatoribus,  quanto  plus  habet  apud  illos,  quod 
servet,  quantoque  in  maiore  materia  apparet.  Quan- 
tulum    enim   nocet   privata   crudelitas  !     Principum 

3  saevitia  bellum  est.  Cum  autem  virtutibus  inter 
se  sit  Concordia  nee  ulla  altera  melior  aut  honestior 
sit,  quaedam  tamen  quibusdam  personis  aptior  est. 
Decet  magnanimitas  quemlibet  mortalem,  etiam 
ilium,  infra  quem  nihil  est ;  quid  enim  mains  aut 
fortius  quam  malam  fortunam  retundere  ?  Haec 
tamen  magnanimitas  in  bona  fortuna  laxiorem  locum 
habet  meliusque  in  tribunali  quam  in  piano  con- 
spicitur. 

4  dementia,  in  quamcumque  domum  pervenerit, 
eam  felicem  tranquillamque  praestabit,  sed  in  regia, 
quo  rarior,  eo  mirabilior.  Quid  enim  est  memora- 
bilius  quam  eum,  cuius  irae  nihil  obstat,  cuius 
graviori  sententiae  ipsi,  qui  pereunt,  adsentiuntur, 
quem  nemo  interpellaturus  est,  immo,  si  vehementius 

^  manus  added  by  Haase. 
370 


ON  MERCY,  I.  V.  1-4 

My  discourse  seems  to  have  withdra\vTi  somewhat 
far  from  its  purpose,  but,  in  very  truth,  it  bears 
closely  upon  the  real  issue.  For  if — and  this  is  what 
thus  far  it  is  estabhshing — ^j'ou  are  the  soul  of  the 
state  and  the  state  your  body,  you  see,  I  think,  how 
requisite  is  mercy  ;  for  you  are  merciful  to  yourself 
when  you  are  seemingly  merciful  to  another.  And 
so  even  reprobate  citizens  should  have  mercy  as  being 
the  weak  members  of  the  body,  and  if  there  should 
ever  be  need  to  let  blood,  the  hand  must  be  held 
under  control  to  keep  it  from  cutting  deeper  than 
may  be  necessary.  The  quality  of  mercy,  then,  as  I 
was  saying,  is  indeed  for  all  men  in  accordance  ■with 
nature,  but  in  rulers  it  has  an  especial  comehness 
inasmuch  as  with  them  it  finds  more  to  save,  and 
exhibits  itself  amid  ampler  opportunities.  For  how 
small  the  harm  the  cruelty  of  a  private  citizen  can 
do  !  But  when  princes  rage  there  is  war.  Though, 
moreover,  the  virtues  are  at  harmony  with  each 
other,  and  no  one  of  them  is  better  or  more  noble 
than  another,  yet  to  certain  people  a  certain  \Trtue^] — 
Avill  be  more  suited.  Greatness  of  soul  is  a  virtue 
that  is  seemly  for  every  human  being,  even  for  him 
who  is  the  lowliest  of  the  lowly.  For  what  is  greater 
or  braver  than  to  beat  do^\Ti  misfortune  ?  Yet  this 
greatness  of  soul  has  freer  play  under  circumstances 
of  good  fortune,  and  is  shown  to  better  advantage 
upon  the  judge's  bench  than  on  the  floor. 

Every  house  that  mercy  enters  she  ^\i\\  render 
peaceful  and  happy,  but  in  the  palace  she  is  more 
wonderful,  in  that  she  is  rarer.  For  what  is  more 
remarkable  than  that  he  whose  anger  nothing  can 
withstand,  to  whose  sentence,  too  heavy  though  it  be, 
even  the  \ictims  bow  the  head,  whom,  if  he  is  very 

371 


SENECA 

excanduit,  ne  deprecaturus  est  quidem,  ipsum  sibi 
manum  inicere  et  potestate  sua  in  melius  placidiusque 
uti  hoc  ipsum  cogitantem  :  "  Occidere  contra  legem 
nemo  non  potest,  servare  nemo  praeter  me  "  ? 
6  Magnam  fortunam  magnus  animus  decet,  qui,  nisi 
se  ad  illam  extulit  et  altior  stetit,  illam  quoque  infra 
ad^  terram  deducit  ;  magni  autem  animi  proprium 
est  placidum  esse  tranquillumque  et  iniurias  atque 
ofFensiones  superne  despicere.  Muliebre  est  furere 
in  ira,  ferarum  vero  nee  generosarum  quidem  prae- 
mordere  et  urguere  proiectos.  Elephanti  leonesque 
transeunt,  quae  impulerunt ;    ignobilis  bestiae  per- 

6  tinacia  est.  Non  decet  regem  saeva  nee  inexorabilis 
ira,  non  multum  enim  supra  eum  eminet,  cui  se 
irascendo  exaequat  ;  at  si  dat  vitam,  si  dat  dig- 
nitatem periclitantibus  et  meritis  amittere,  facit, 
quod  nulli  nisi  rerum  potenti  licet ;  vita  enim  etiam 
superiori    eripitur,    numquam    nisi    inferiori    datur. 

7  Servare  proprium  est  excellentis  fortunae,  quae 
numquam  magis  suspici  debet,  quam  cum  illi  con- 
tigit  idem  posse  quod  dis,  quorum  beneficio  in  lucem 
edimur  tam  boni  quam  mali.  Deorum  itaque  sibi 
animum  adserens  princeps  alios  ex  civibus  suis,  quia 
utiles  bonique  sunt,  libens  videat,  alios  in  numerum 
relinquat  ;  quosdam  esse  gaudeat,  quosdam  patiatur. 

1      6.  Cogitato,   in   hac    civitate,   in    qua    turba   per 

^  ad  added  by  Lipsius. 
372 


ON  MERCY,  I.  V.  4-vi.  1 

greatly  incensed,  no  one  will  venture  to  gainsay, 
nay,  even  to  entreat — that  this  man  should  lay  a 
restraining  hand  upon  himself,  and  use  his  power  to 
better  and  more  peaceful  ends  when  he  reflects, 
"  Any  one  can  ^iolate  the  law  to  kill,  none  but  I, 
to  save  "  ?  A  lofty  spirit  befits  a  lofty  station,  and 
if  it  does  not  rise  to  the  level  of  its  station  and  even 
stand  above  it,  the  other,  too,  is  dragged  downward 
to  the  ground.  Moreover,  the  pecuUar  marks  of  a 
lofty  spirit  are  mildness  and  composure,  and  the  lofty 
disregard  of  injustice  and  wTongs.  It  is  for  woman  to^ 
rage  in  anger,  for  wild  beasts  doubtless — and  yet  not 
even  the  noble  sort  of  these — to  bite  and  worry  their 
prostrate  victims.  Elephants  and  hons  pass  by  what 
they  have  stricken  do>vn  ;  it  is  the  ignoble  beast  that 
is  relentless.  Cruel  and  inexorable  anger  is  not 
seemly  for  a  king,  for  thus  he  does  not  rise  much 
above  the  other  man,  toward  whose  own  level  he 
descends  by  being  angry  at  him.  But  if  he  grants  hfe, 
if  he  grants  position  to  those  who  have  imperilled 
and  deserve  to  lose  them,  he  does  what  none  but  a 
sovereign  may ;  for  one  may  take  the  life  even  of  a 
superior,  but  not  give  it  ever  except  to  an  inferior. 
To  save  life  is  the  peculiar  pri\ilege  of  exalted  station, 
which  never  has  a  right  to  greater  admiration  than 
when  it  has  the  good  fortune  to  have  the  same  power 
as  the  gods,  by  whose  kindness  we  all,  the  e\il  as  welh- 
as  the  good,  are  brought  forth  into  the  Ught.  Let  a 
prince,  therefore,  appropriating  to  himself  the  spirit 
of  the  gods,  look  with  pleasure  upon  one  class  of  his 
citizens  because  they  are  useful  and  good  ;  others 
let  him  leave  to  make  up  the  count  ;  let  him  be  glad 
that  some  of  them  hve,  some  let  him  merely  endure. 
Consider  this  city,  in  which  the  throng  that  streams 

373 


SENECA 

latissima  itinera  sine  intermissione  defluens  eliditiir, 
quotiens  aliquid  obstitit,  quod  cursum  eius  velut 
torrentis  rapidi  moraretur,  in  qua  tribus  eodem 
tempore  theatris  caveae^  postulantur,  in  qua  con- 
sumitur,  quidquid  terris  omnibus  aratur,  quanta 
solitudo  ac  vastitas  futura  sit,  si  nihil  relinquitur, 

2  nisi  quod  iudex  severus  absolverit.  Quotus  quisque 
ex  quaesitoribus  est,  qui  non  ex  ipsa  ea  lege  teneatur, 
qua  quaerit  ?  quotus  quisque  accusator  vacat  culpa  ? 
Et  nescio,  an  nemo  ad  dandam  veniam  difficilior  sit, 

3  quam  qui  illam  petere  saepius  meruit.  Peecavimus 
omnes,  alii  gravia,  alii  leviora,  alii  ex  destinato,  alii 
forte  impulsi  aut  aliena  nequitia  ablati  ;  alii  in  bonis 
consiliis  parum  fortiter  stetimus  et  innocentiam 
inviti  ac  retinentes  perdidimus  ;  nee  deliquimus 
tantum,  sed  usque  ad  extremum  aevi  delinquemus. 

4  Etiam  si  quis  tam  bene  iam  purgavit  animum,  ut 
nihil  obturbare  eum  amplius  possit  ac  fallere,  ad 
innocentiam  tamen  peccando  pervenit. 

1  7.  Quoniam  deorum  feci  mentionem,  optime  hoc 
exemplum  principi  constituam,  ad  quod  formetur, 
ut  se  talem  esse  civibus,  quales  sibi  deos  velit. 
Expedit  ergo  habere  inexorabilia  peccatis  atque 
erroribus  numina,  expedit  usque  ad  ultimam  infesta 

^  caveae  Hosius  :  viae  mss. 

"  Those  of   Pompey,   Marcelhis,   and    Balbus,   each    of 
which,  it  must  be  remembered,  seated  many  thousands. 
""  i.e.,  of  the  ideal  wise  man  of  the  Stoics,  so  rarely  produced, 
j  Their  doctrine  that  virtue  is  not  merely  the  greatest  but  the 
only  good  allowed  no  gradation  of  goodness  or  badness,  and 
I  frankly  recognized  the  almost  universal  depravity  of  man- 
kind.    Seneca  with  his  humane  tendencies  gives  passionate 
emphasis  to  this  belief,  making  it  the  basis  of  a  plea  for 
mercy  and  kindness. 

374 


ON  MERCY,  I.  VI.  1-vii.  1 

ceaselessly  through  its  widest  streets  is  crushed 
to  pieces  whenever  anything  gets  in  the  way  to 
check  its  course  as  it  streams  like  a  rushing  torrent, — 
this  city  in  which  the  seating  space  of  three  theatres  ° 
is  required  at  one  time,  in  which  is  consumed  all  the 
produce  of  the  plough  from  every  land  ;  consider  how 
great  would  be  the  loneliness  and  the  desolation  of  it 
if  none  should  be  left  but  those  whom  a  strict  judge 
would  acquit.  How  fe\.-  prosecutors  there  are  who 
would  escape  conviction  under  the  very  law  which 
they  cite  for  the  prosecution  ;  how  few  accusers  are 
free  from  blame.  And,  I  am  inclined  to  think,  no 
one  is  more  reluctant  to  grant  pardon  than  he  who 
again  and  again  has  had  reason  to  seek  it.  We  have 
all  sinned — some  in  serious,  some  in  tri\ial  things  ; 
some  from  deliberate  intention,  some  by  chance 
impulse,  or  because  we  were  led  away  by  the  ■wicked- 
ness of  others  ;  some  of  us  have  not  stood  strongly 
enough  by  good  resolutions,  and  have  lost  our 
innocence  against  our  ^^ill  and  though  still  chnging 
to  it ;  and  not  only  have  we  done  WTong,  but  we 
shall  go  on  doing  wTong  to  the  very  end  of  life.  Even 
if  there  is  any  one  who  has  so  thoroughly  cleansed  his 
mind  that  nothing  can  any  more  confound  him  and 
betray  him,  yet  it  is  by  siiming  that  he  has  reached 
the  sinless  state.* 

Since  I  have  made  mention  of  the  gods,  I  shall  do 
very  well  to  estabhsh  this  as  the  standard  after  which 
a  prince  should  model  himself — that  he  should  wish 
so  to  be  to  his  subjects,  as  he  would  \\ish  the  gods  to  be 
to  himself.  Is  it,  then,  desirable  to  have  deities  that 
cannot  be  moved  to  show  mercy  to  our  sins  and 
mistakes  ?  Is  it  desirable  to  have  them  our  enemies 
even  to  the  point  of  our  complete  destruction  ?     And 

375 


SENECA 

•perniciem  ?     Et   quis  regum   erit   tutus,   cuius   non 

2  membra  haruspices  colligant  ?  Quod  si  di  placabiles 
et  aequi  delicta  potentium  non  statim  fulminibus 
persequuntur,  quanto  aequius  est  hominem  hominibus 
praepositum  mitianimo  exercereimperium  et  cogitare, 
uter  mundi  status  gratior  oculis  pulchriorque  sit, 
sereno  et  puro  die,  an  cum  fragoribus  crebris  omnia 
quatiuntur  et  ignes  hinc  atque  illinc  micant  !  Atqui 
non  alia  facies  est  quieti  moratique  imperii  quam 

3  sereni  caeli  et  nitentis.  Crudele  regnum  turbidum 
tenebrisque  obscurum  est,  inter  trementes  et  ad 
repentinum  sonitum  expavescentes  ne  eo  quidem, 
qui  omnia  perturbat,  inconcusso.  Facilius  privatis 
ignoscitur  pertinaciter  se  vindicantibus  ;  possunt 
enim  laedi,  dolorque  eorum  ab  iniuria  venit  ;  timent 
praeterea  contemptum,  et  non  rettulisse  laedentibus 
gratiam  infirmitas  videtur,  non  dementia  ;  at  cui 
ultio  in  facili  est,  is  omissa  ea  certam  laudem  man 

4  suetudinis  consequitur.  Humili  loco  positis  exercere 
manum,  litigare,  in  rixam  procurrere  ac  morem  irae 
suae  gerere  liberius  est  ;  leves  inter  paria  ictus  sunt ; 
regi  vociferatio  quoque  verborumque  intemperantia 
non  ex  maiestate  est. 

1  8.  Grave  putas  eripi  loquendi  arbitrium  regibus, 
quod  humillimi  habent.  "  Ista,"  inquis,  "  servitus 
est,  non  imperium."  Quid  ?  tu  non  experiris  istud 
nobis     esse,    tibi    servitutem  ?     Alia    condicio    est 

<»  To  be  struck  by  lightning  was  interpreted  by  the  sooth- 
sayers as  a  sign  of  the  displeasure  of  the  gods. 

S76 


ON  MERCY,  I.  VII.  i-viii    l 

•what  king  will  escape  the  danger  of  ha\-ing  the  sooth- 
sayers gather  up  his  riven  h'mbs  ?  <*  But  if  the  gods, 
merciful  and  just,  do  not  instantly  avenge  with  the 
thunderbolt  the  shortcomings  of"  the  mighty,  how 
much  more  just  is  it  for  a  man,  set  over  men,  to 
exercise  his  power  in  gentle  spirit  and  to  ask  him- 
self which  condition  of  the  world  is  more  pleasing 
to  the  eye  and  more  lovely — when  the  day  is  cahn 
and  clear,  or  when  all  nature  quakes  ^^ith  crash 
upon  crash  of  thunder,  and  hither  and  yonder  the 
lightnings  flash  ?  And  yet  the  aspect  of  a  quiet  and 
well-ordered  empire  is  not  different  from  that  of  a 
calm  and  shining  sky.  A  reign  that  is  cruel  is  stormy 
and  overcast  >\ith  gloom,  and,  while  men  tremble  and 
grow  pale  at  the  sudden  uproar,  even  he  who  is  the 
cause  of  all  the  turmoil  does  not  fail  to  shudder.  One 
in  private  life,  if  he  stubbornly  seeks  revenge,  is  more 
easily  pardoned  ;  for  it  is  possible  for  him  to  receive 
an  injur\%  and  his  resentment  springs  from  a  sense 
of  ^\Tong  ;  besides,  he  is  afraid  of  being  scorfted,  and, 
when  one  is  injured,  the  failure  to  make  requital 
seems  a  show  of  weakness,  not  of  mercy.  But  the 
man  for  whom  vengeance  is  easy,  by  disregarding  it, 
gains  assured  praise  for  clemency.  Those  placed  in 
lowly  station  are  more  free  to  use  force,  to  quarrel, 
to  rush  into  a  brawl,  and  to  indulge  their  WTath  ; 
when  the  odds  are  matched,  blows  fall  light  ;  but  in 
a  king,  even  loud  speech  and  unbridled  words  ill 
accord  \\ith  his  majesty. 

You  think  that  it  is  a  serious  matter  to  deprive 
kings  of  the  right  of  free  speech,  which  belongs  to 
the  humblest  man.  "  That,"  you  say,  "  is  ser\-itude, 
not  sovereignty."  WTiat  ?  are  you  not  aware  that 
the  sovereignty  is  ours,  the  servitude  yours  ?     Far 

377 


SENECA 

eorum,  qui  in  turba,  quam  non  excedunt,  latent, 
quorum  et  virtutes,  ut  appareant,  diu  luctantur  et 
vitia  tenebras  habent  ;  vestra  facta  dictaque  rumor 
excipit,  et  ideo  nullis  magis  curandum  est,  qualem 
famam  habeant,  quam  qui,  qualemcumque  meruerint, 

2  magnam  habituri  sunt.  Quam  multa  tibi  non  licent, 
quae  nobis  beneficio  tuo  licent  !  Possum  in  qualibet 
parte  urbis  solus  incedere  sine  timore,  quamvis 
nullus  sequatur  comes,  nullus  sit  domi,  nullus  ad 
latus  gladius  ;  tibi  in  tua  pace  armato  vivendum  est. 
Aberrare  a  fortuna  tua  non  potes  ;  obsidet  te  et, 
quocumque    descendis,    magno    apparatu    sequitur. 

3  Est  haec  summae  magnitudinis  servitus  non  posse 
fieri  minorem  ;  sed  cum  dis  tibi  communis  ipsa 
necessitas  est.  Nam  illos  quoque  caelum  alligatos 
tenet,  nee  magis  illis  descendere  datum  est  quam 

4  tibi  tutum  ;  fastigio  tuo  adfixus  es.  Nostros  motus 
pauci  sentiunt,  prodire  nobis  ac  recedere  et  mutare 
habitum  sine  sensu  publico  licet  ;  tibi  non  magis 
quam  soli  latere  contingit.  Multa  circa  te  lux  est, 
omnium  in  istam  conversi   oculi  sunt.     Prodire  te 

6  putas  ?  Oriris.  Loqui  non  potes,  nisi  ut  vocem 
tuam,  quae  ubique  sunt  gentes,  excipiant  ;  irasci 
non  potes,  nisi  ut  omnia  tremant,  quia^  neminem 
adfligere,  nisi  ut,  quidquid  circa  fuerit,  quatiatur. 
Ut  fulmina  paucorum  periculo  cadunt,  omnium  metu, 
sic  animadversiones  magnarum  potestatum  terrent 

^  quin  Baehrens  :  quia  MSS. 

"  Prodeo  is  the  ordinary  word  for  "going  out  of  doors," 
orior  is  used  of  the  sun. 

378 


ON  MERCY,  I.  Mil.  1-5 

different  is  the  position  of  those  who  escape  notice  in 
a  crowd  that  they  do  not  overtop,  whose  \Trtues 
must  struggle  long  in  order  to  be  seen,  whose  Mces 
keep  under  the  cover  of  obscurity  ;  but  the  words 
and  deeds  of  such  as  you  are  caught  up  by  rumour, 
and,  consequently,  none  should  be  more  concerned 
about  the  character  of  tneir  reputation  than  those 
who,  no  matter  what  reputation  they  may  deserve, 
are  sure  to  have  a  great  one.  How  many  things  there 
are  which  you  may  not  do,  which  we,  thanks  to  you, 
may  do  !  It  is  possible  for  me  to  walk  alone  without 
fear  in  any  part  of  the  city  I  please,  though  no  com- 
panion attends  me,  though  I  have  no  sword  at  my 
house,  none  at  my  side  ;  you,  amid  the  peace  you 
create,  must  live  armed.  You  cannot  escape  from 
your  lot  ;  it  besets  you,  and,  whenever  you  leave  the 
heights,  it  pursues  you  AWth  its  magnificence.  In 
this  lies  the  ser^tude  of  supreme  greatness — that  it 
cannot  become  less  great  ;  but  you  share  with  the 
gods  that  incMtable  condition.  For  even  they  are 
held  in  bondage  by  heaven,  and  it  is  no  more  lawful 
for  them  to  leave  the  heights  than  it  is  safe  for  you  ; 
you  are  nailed  to  your  pinnacle.  Our  movements 
are  noticed  by  few  ;  we  may  come  forth  and  retire  and 
change  our  dress  without  the  world  being  aware  ; 
you  can  no  more  hide  yourself  than  the  sun.  A  flood 
of  Ught  surrounds  you  ;  towards  it  ever)-  one  turns  his 
eyes.  Think  you  to  "  come  forth  "  ?  Nay,  you  rise." 
You  cannot  speak  but  that  all  the  nations  of  the 
earth  hear  your  voice  ;  you  cannot  be  angrv'  without 
causing  everj-thing  to  tremble,  because  you  cannot 
strike  any  one  down  without  shaking  all  that  is  around 
him.  As  the  hghtning's  stroke  is  dangerous  for  the 
few,  though  feared  by  all,  so  the  punishment  bom  of 

379 


SENECA 

latius  quam  nocent,  non  sine  causa  ;  non  enim,  quan- 
tum fecerit,  sed  quantum  facturus  sit,  cogitatur  in 

6  eo,  qui  omnia  potest.  Adice  nunc,  quod  privates 
homines  ad  accipiendas  iniurias  opportuniores  accep- 
tarum  patientia  facit,  regibus  certior  est  ex  man- 
suetudine  securitas,  quia  frequens  vindicta  paucorum 

7  odium  opprimit,  omnium  irritat.  Voluntas  oportet 
ante  saeviendi  quam  causa  deficiat  ;  alioqui,  quemad- 
modum  praecisae  arbores  plurimis  ramis  repullulant 
et  multa  satorum  genera,  ut  densiora  surgant, 
reciduntur,  ita  regia  crudelitas  auget  inimicorum 
numerum  tollendo  ;  parentes  enim  liberique  eorum, 
qui  interfecti  sunt,  et  propinqui  et  amici  in  locum 
singulorum  succedunt. 

1  9.  Hoc  quam  verum  sit,  admonere  te  exemplo 
domestico  volo.  Divus  Augustus  fuit  mitis  princeps, 
si  quis  ilium  a  principatu  suo  aestimare  incipiat  ;  in 
communi  quidem  rei  publicae  gladium  movit.  Cum 
hoc  aetatis  esset,  quod  tu  nunc  es,  duodevicensimum 
egressus  annum,  iam  pugiones  in  sinum  amicorum 
absconderat,  iam  insidiis  M.  Antonii  consulis  latus 

2  petierat,  iam  fuerat  collega  proscriptionis.  Sed 
cum  annum  quadragensimum  transisset  et  in  Galha 
moraretur,  delatum  est  ad  eum  indicium  L.  Cinnam, 
stolidi   ingenii   virum,   insidias   ei   struere  ;     dictum 


<»  i.e.,  while  associated  with  Antony  and  Lepidus  in  the 
triumvirate. 

''  This  allusion  determines  approximately  the  date  of  the 
composition  of  the  essay  ;  Nero's  eighteenth  birthday  was 
Dec.  15,  A.D.  55.  Octavius  was  really  over  twenty  at  the 
time  of  the  proscriptions  mentioned, 

"  Cassius  Dio,  Iv.  14-22,  places  the  incident  in  Rome. 
The  story  supplied  the  theme  of  Corneille's  Cinna. 

■*  Dio  gives  correctly  the  praenomen  Gaius ;  Lucius 
380 


ON  MERCY,  I.  VIII.  5-ix.  2 

great  power  causes  wider  terror  than  harm,  and  not 
without  reason  ;  for  when  the  doer  is  omnipotent,  men 
consider  not  how  much  he  has  done,  but  how  much  he 
is  Ukely  to  do.  Consider,  too,  that  whereas  private 
citizens,  by  enduring  the  \\Tongs  aheady  received, 
he  more  open  to  recei\'ing  others,  yet  kings  by 
clemency  gain  a  security  more  assured,  because 
repeated  punishment,  while  it  crushes  the  hatred  of 
a  few,  stirs  the  hatred  of  all.  The  inchnation  to  vent 
one's  rage  should  be  less  strong  than  the  provocation 
for  it  ;  otherwise,  just  as  trees  that  have  been 
trimmed  throw  out  again  countless  branches,  and  as 
many  kinds  of  plants  are  cut  back  to  make  them  grow 
thicker,  so  the  cruelty  of  a  king  by  removing  his 
enemies  increases  their  number  ;  for  the  parents  and 
children  of  those  who  have  been  killed,  their  relatives 
too  and  their  friends,  step  into  the  place  of  each 
single  \ictim. 

By  an  example  from  your  own  family  I  wish  to 
remind  you  how  true  this  is.  The  deified  Augustus 
was  a  mild  prince  if  one  should  undertake  to  judge 
him  from  the  time  of  his  principate  ;  but  when  he 
shared  the  state  with  others,"  he  A^-ielded  the  sword. 
When  he  was  at  your  present  age,  having  just  passed 
his  eighteenth  year,"  he  had  already  buried  his 
dagger  in  the  bosom  of  friends  ;  he  had  already  in 
stealth  aimed  a  blow  at  the  side  of  the  consul,  Mark 
Antony ;  he  had  already  been  a  partner  in  pro- 
scription. But  when  he  had  passed  his  fortieth  year 
and  was  staying  in  Gaul,'^  the  information  was  brought 
to  him  that  Lucius  Cinna,"*  a  dull-witted  man,  was 
concocting  a  plot  against  him.     He  was  told  where 

Cornelius  Cinna,  son-in-law  of  Pompey,  was  the  father  of  the 
conspirator. 

381 


SENECA 

est,   et   ubi   et   quando   et   quemadmodum   adgredi 

3  vellet  ;  unus  ex  consciis  deferebat.  Constituit  se 
ab  eo  vindicare  et  consilium  amicorum  advocari 
iussit.  Nox  illi  inquieta  erat,  cum  cogitaret  adule- 
scentem  nobilem,  hoc  detracto  integrum,  Cn.  Pompei 
nepotem,  damnandum  ;  iam  unum  hominem  occidere 
non  poterat,  cui  M.  Antonius  proscriptionis  edictum 

4  inter  cenam  dictarat.  Gemens  subinde  voces  varias 
emittebat  et  inter  se  contrarias  :  "  Quid  ergo  ? 
Ego  percussorem  meum  securum  ambulare  patiar 
me  sollicito  ?  Ergo  non  dabit  poenas,  qui  tot 
civilibus  bellis  frustra  petitum  caput,  tot  navalibus, 
tot  pedestribus  proeliis  incolume,  postquam  terra 
marique  pax  parata  est,  non  occidere  constituat, 
sed  immolare  ?  "  (nam  sacrificantem  placuerat  adoriri). 

5  Rursus  silentio  interposito  maiore  multo  voce  sibi 
quam  Cinnae  irascebatur  :  "  Quid  vivis,  si  perire 
te  tam  multorum  interest  ?  Quis  finis  erit  suppli- 
ciorum  ?  Quis  sanguinis  ?  Ego  sum  nobilibus  adu- 
lescentulis  expositum  caput,  in  quod  mucrones 
acuant ;    non  est  tanti  vita,  si,  ut  ego  non  peream, 

6  tam  multa  perdenda  sunt."  Interpellavit  tandem 
ilium  Livia  uxor  et  :  "  Admittis,"  inquit,  "  muliebre 
consilium  ?  Fac,  quod  medici  solent,  qui,  ubi  usitata 
remedia  non  procedunt,  temptant  contraria,  Se- 
veritate  nihil  adhuc  profecisti  ;  Salvidienum  Lepidus 
secutus  est,  Lepidum  Murena,  Murenam  Caepio, 
Caepionem  Egnatius,  ut  alios  taceam,  quos  tantum 


"  Cf.  Cassius  Dio,  xlviii.  33  ;   Suetonius,  Augustus,  66. 

^  Suetonius,  Aug.  19,  mentions  these,  in  the  same  order, 
and  others. 
382 


ON  MERCY,  I.  IX.  2-6 

and  when  and  how  he  meant  to  attack  him  ;  one  of 
the  accomplices  gave  the  information.  Augustus 
resolved  to  revenge  himself  upon  the  fellow,  and 
ordered  a  council  of  his  friends  to  be  called.  He 
spent  a  restless  night,  reflecting  that  it  was  a  young 
man  of  noble  birth,  blameless  but  for  this  act,  the 
grandson  of  Gnaeus  Pompeius,  who  was  to  be  con- 
demned. He  could  not  now  bear  to  kill  one  man, 
he  to  whom  Mark  Antony  had  dictated  the  edict  of 
proscription  while  they  dined.  He  moaned,  and  now 
and  then  would  burst  forth  into  fitful  and  inconsistent 
speech  :  "  What  then  ?  shall  I  let  my  murderer  walk 
about  in  unconcern  while  I  am  filled  with  fear  ? 
What !  Shall  he  not  pay  the  penalty  who,  sought 
in  vain  as  my  life  has  been  in  so  many  civil  wars, 
saved  unhurt  in  so  many  battles  of  fleets  and  armies, 
now  that  peace  prevails  on  land  and  sea,  is  determining 
not  to  murder  but  to  immolate  me  ?  "  (for  the  plan 
was  to  attack  him  while  off"ering  sacrifice).  Again, 
after  an  interval  of  silence,  in  louder  tone  he  would 
express  much  greater  indignation  at  himself  than 
at  Cinna  :  "  Why  do  you  live  on  if  so  many  are 
concerned  to  have  you  die  ?  What  end  vriW  there  be 
of  punishments,  and  of  bloodshed  ?  I  am  the  ob\ious 
victim  for  whom  young  men  of  noble  birth  should 
whet  their  swords.  If  so  many  must  perish  in  order 
that  I  may  not,  my  life  is  not  worth  the  price."  At 
length  Livia,  his  wife,  broke  in  and  said  :  "  Will  you 
take  a  woman's  advice  ?  Follow  the  practice  of 
physicians,  who  when  the  usual  remedies  do  not 
work  try  just  the  opposite.  So  far  you  have  accom- 
pUshed  nothing  by  severity.  SaMdienus  "  was  fol- 
lowed by  Lepidus,  Lepidus  by  Murena,  Murena  by 
Caepio,  Caepio  by  Egnatius,**  to  say  nothing  of  the 

383 


SENECA 

ausos  pudet.  Nunc  tempta,  quomodo  tibi  cedat 
dementia  ;  ignosce  L.  Cinnae.  Deprensus  est  ; 
iam   nocere   tibi  non  potest,   prodesse  famae   tuae 

7  potest."  Gavisus,  sibi  quod  advocatum  invenerat, 
uxori  quidem  gratias  egit,  renuntiari  autem  extemplo 
amicis,  quos  in  consilium  rogaverat,  imperavit  et 
Cinnam  unum  ad  se  accersit  dimissisque  omnibus 
e  cubiculo,  cum  alteram  Cinnae  poni  cathedram 
iussisset  :  "  Hoc,"  inquit,  "  primum  a  te  peto,  ne 
me  loquentem  interpelles,  ne  medio  sermone  meo 
proclames  ;    dabitur  tibi  loquendi  liberum  tempus. 

8  Ego  te,  Cinna,  cum  in  hostium  castris  invenissem, 
non  factum  tantum  mihi  inimicum  sed  natum, 
servavi,  patrimonium  tibi  omne  concessi.  Hodie 
tam  felix  et  tam  dives  es,  ut  victo  victores  invideant. 
Sacerdotium  tibi  petenti  praeteritis  compluribus, 
quorum  parentes  mecum  militaverant,  dedi  ;    cum 

9  sic  de  te  meruerim,  occidere  me  constituisti."  Cum 
ad  banc  vocem  exclamasset  procul  hanc  ab  se  abesse 
dementiam  :  "  Non  praestas,"  inquit,  "  fidem, 
Cinna  ;  convenerat,  ne  interloquereris.  Occidere, 
inquam,  me  paras  "  ;  adiecit  locum,  socios,  diem, 
ordinem   insidiarum,  cui   commissum  esset   ferrum. 

10  Et  cum  defixum  videret  nee  ex  conventione  iam, 
sed  ex  conscientia  tacentem  :  "  Quo,"  inquit,  "  hoc 
animo  facis  ?  Ut  ipse  sis  princeps  ?  Male  me- 
hercules  cum  populo  Romano  agitur,  si  tibi  ad  im- 


384 


ON  MERCY,  I.  IX.  6-10 

others  whose  monstrous  daring  makes  one  ashamed. 
Try  now  how  mercy  will  work  :  pardon  Lucius  Cinna. 
He  has  been  arrested  ;  now  he  cannot  do  you  harm, 
but  he  can  help  your  reputation."  Happy  to  have 
found  a  supporter,  he  thanked  his  A\1fe,  then  ordered 
that  the  request  to  the  friends  who  had  been  asked 
to  the  conference  be  at  once  countermanded,  and 
sunmioned  only  Cinna  to  his  presence.  Ha\ing  sent 
every  one  else  from  the  room,  he  ordered  a  second 
chair  to  be  placed  for  Cinna  and  said :  '•  My  first 
request  of  you  is,  that  you  will  not  interrupt  me 
while  I  am  talking,  that  you  will  not  in  the  course 
of  my  words  utter  a  protest  ;  you  will  be  given  free 
opportunity  to  speak.  Cinna,  though  I  found  you 
in  the  camp  of  the  enemy,  not  made,  but  born,  my 
deadly  foe,  I  saved  you,  I  allowed  you  to  keep  the 
whole  of  your  father's  estate.  To-day  you  are  so 
prosperous,  so  rich,  that  your  conquerors  en\y  you, 
the  conquered.  When  you  sought  holy  office,  I 
gave  it  to  you,  passing  over  many  whose  fathers  had 
fought  under  me.  Though  such  is  the  service  that 
I  have  done  you,  you  have  determined  to  kill  me." 
When  at  these  words  Cinna  cried  out  that  he  was 
far  from  such  madness,  he  said  :  "  You  are  not  keeping 
faith,  Cinna  ;  it  was  agreed  that  you  were  not  to 
interrupt.  You  are  making  ready,  I  say,  to  kill  me." 
He  mentioned,  further,  the  place,  his  confederates, 
the  plan  of  the  plot,  the  one  who  had  been  entrusted 
with  the  dagger.  And  when  he  saw  that  Cinna  had 
dropped  his  eyes,  silent  now,  not  because  of  his 
compact,  but  because  of  his  conscience,  he  said  : 
"  What  is  your  purpose  in  this  ?  Is  it  that  you  your- 
self may  become  the  prince  ?  On  my  word,  the  Roman 
people  are  hard  put  to  it  if  nothing  stands  in  the 
VOL.  I  2  c  385 


SENECA 

perandum  nihil  praeter  me  obstat .  Domum  tueri  tuam 
non  potes,  nuper  libertini  hominis  gratia  in  private 
iudicio  superatus  es  ;  adeo  nihil  facilius  potes  quam 
contra  Caesarem  advocare.  Cedo,  si  spes  tuas  solus 
impedio,  Paulusne  te  at  Fabius  Maximus  et  Cossi 
et  Servilii  ferent  tantumque  agmen  nobilium  non 
inania  nomina  praeferentium,  sed  eorum,  qui  imagini- 
bus  suis  decori  sint  ?  " 

11  Ne  totam  eius  orationem  repetendo  magnam 
partem  voluminis  oceupem  (diutius  enim  quam 
duabus  horis  loeutum  esse  constat,  cum  hanc  poenam, 
qua  sola  erat  contentus  futurus,  extenderet)  : 
"  Vitam,"  inquit,  "  tibi,  Cinna,  iterum  do,  prius 
hosti,  nunc  insidiatori  ac  parricidae.  Ex  hodierno 
die  inter  nos  amicitia  incipiat  ;  contendamus,  utrum 
ego  meliore  fide  tibi  vitam  dederim  an  tu  debeas." 

12  Post  hoc  detulit  ultro  consulatum  questus,  quod  non 
auderet  petere.  Amicissimum  fidelissimumque  ha- 
buit,  heres  solus  illi  fuit.  Nulhs  amplius  insidiis 
ab  ullo  petitus  est. 

1  10.  Ignovit  abavus  tuus  victis  ;  nam  si  non  igno- 
^dsset,  quibus  imperasset  ?  Sallustium  et  Cocceios 
et  DeilHos  et  totam  cohortem  primae  admissionis 
ex  adversariorum  castris  conscripsit ;  iam  Domitios, 
Messalas,  Asinios,  Cicerones,  quidquid  floris  erat 
in  civitate,  clementiae  suae  debebat.  Ipsum  Lepi- 
dum  quam  diu  mori  passus  est !  Per  multos  annos 
386 


ON  MERCY,  I.  IX.  lo-x.  l 

way  of  your  ruling  except  me.  You  cannot  guard 
your  ovm  house  ;  just  lately  the  influence  of  a  mere 
freedman  defeated  you  in  a  private  suit ;  plainly, 
nothing  can  be  easier  for  you  than  to  take  action 
against  Caesar !  Tell  me,  if  I  alone  block  your 
hopes,  >nll  Paulus  and  Fabius  Maximus  and  the 
Cossi  and  the  Servilii  and  the  great  hne  of  nobles, 
who  are  not  the  representatives  of  empty  names, 
but  add  distinction  to  their  pedigree — will  these 
put  up  ^\ith  you  ? 

Not  to  fill  up  a  great  part  of  my  book  in  repeating 
all  his  words — for  he  is  known  to  have  talked  more 
than  two  hours,  lengthening  out  this  ordeal  with 
which  alone  he  intended  to  be  content — at  last  he 
said  :  "  Cinna,  a  second  time  I  grant  you  yom-  Ufe  ; 
the  first  time  you  were  an  open  enemy,  now,  a  plotter 
and  a  parricide.  From  this  day  let  there  be  a 
beginning  of  friendship  between  us  ;  let  us  put  to 
the  test  which  one  of  us  acts  in  better  faith — I  in 
granting  you  your  life,  or  you  in  ONving  it  to  me." 
Later  he,  unsolicited,  bestowed  upon  him  the  consul- 
ship, chiding  him  because  he  did  not  boldly  stand 
for  the  office.  He  found  Cinna  most  friendly  and 
loyal,  and  became  his  sole  heir.  No  one  plotted 
against  him  further. 

Your  great-great-grandfather  spared  the  van- 
quished ;  for  if  he  had  not  spared  them,  whom 
would  he  have  had  to  rule  ?  Sallustius  and  a 
Cocceius  and  a  Deillius  and  the  whole  inner  circle 
of  his  court  he  recruited  from  the  camp  of  his 
opponents  ;  and  now  it  was  his  own  mercifulness 
that  gave  him  a  Domitius,  a  Messala,  an  Asinius,  a 
Cicero,  and  all  the  flower  of  the  state.  What  a  long 
time  was  granted  even  Lepidus  to  die  !     For  many 

387 


SENECA 

tulit  ornamenta  principis  retinentem  et  pontificatum 
maximum  non  nisi  mortuo  illo  transferri  in  se  passus 
est ;     maluit    enim    ilium    honorem    vocari    quam 

2  spolium.  Haec  eum  dementia  ad  salutem  securita- 
temque  perduxit ;  haec  gratum  ac  favorabilem 
reddidit,  quamvis  nondum  subactis  populi  Romani 
cervicibus  manum  imposuisset  ;  haec  hodieque 
praestat  illi  famam,  quae  vix  vivis  principibus  servit. 

3  Deum  esse  non  tamquam  iussi  credimus  ;  bonum 
fuisse  principem  Augustum,  bene  illi  parentis  nomen 
convenisse  fatemur  ob  nullam  aliam  causam,  quam 
quod  contumelias  quoque  suas,  quae  acerbiores 
principibus  solent  esse  quam  iniuriae,  nulla  crudelitate 
exsequebatur,  quod  probrosis  in  se  dictis  adrisit, 
quod  dare  ilium  poenas  apparebat,  cum  exigeret, 
quod,  quoscumque  ob  adulterium  filiae  suae  damna- 
verat,  adeo  non  occidit,  ut  dimissis  quo  tutiores  essent, 

4  diplomata  daret.  Hoc  est  ignoscere,  cum  scias 
multos  futuros,  qui  pro  te  irascantur  et  tibi  sanguine 
alieno  gratificentur,  non  dare  tantum  salutem,  sed 
praestare. 

1  11.  Haec  Augustus  senex  aut  iam  in  senectutem 
annis  vergentibus  ;  in  adulescentia  caluit,  arsit  ira, 
multa  fecit,  ad  quae  invitus  oculos  retorquebat. 
Comparare  nemo  mansuetudini  tuae  audebit  divum 
Augustum,  etiam  si  in  certamen  iuveniUum  annorum 

"  The  notorious  Julia,  banished  by  Augustus  on  account 
of  her  infidelity  to  Tiberius. 

388 


ON  xMERCY,  I.  X.  1-xi.  1 

years  he  suffered  liipi  to  retain  the  insignia  of  a 
ruler,  and  only  after  the  other's  death  did  he  permit 
the  office  of  chief  pontiff  to  be  transferred  to  him- 
self;  for  he  preferred  to  have  it  called  an  honour 
rather  than  a  spoil.  This  mercifulness  led  him  on 
to  safety  and  security,  this  made  him  popular  and 
beloved,  although  the  necks  of  the  Roman  people 
had  not  yet  been  humbled  when  he  laid  hand  upon 
them  ;  and  to-day  this  preserves  for  him  a  reputation 
which  is  scarcely  -within  the  power  of  rulers  even 
while  they  live.  A  god  we  beUeve  him  to  be,  but 
not  because  we  are  bidden  ;  that  Augustus  was  a 
good  prince,  that  he  well  deserved  the  name  of 
father,  this  we  confess  for  no  other  reason  than 
becaiise  he  did  not  avenge  with  cruelty  even  the 
personal  insults  which  usually  sting  a  prince  more  than 
wrongs,  because  when  he  was  the  victim  of  lampoons 
he  smiled,  because  he  seemed  to  suffer  punishment 
when  he  was  exacting  it,  because  he  was  so  far  from 
killing  the  various  men  whom  he  had  convicted  of 
intriguing  with  his  daughter  <*  that  he  banished 
them  for  their  greater  safety,  and  gave  them  their 
credentials.  Not  merely  to  grant  dehverance,  but 
to  guarantee  it,  when  you  know  that  there  will  be 
many  to  take  up  your  quarrel  and  do  you  the  favour 
of  shedding  an  enemy's  blood — this  is  really  to 
forgive. 

Such  was  Augustus  when  he  was  old,  or  just  upon 
the  verge  of  old  age.  In  youth  he  was  hot-headed, 
flared  up  vvith  anger,  and  did  many  things  which  he 
looked  back  upon  with  regret.  To  compare  the 
mildness  of  the  deified  Augustus  with  yours  no 
one  will  dare,  even  if  the  years  of  youth  shall 
be    brought    into    competition    with    an    old    age 

389 


SENECA 

deduxerit  senectutem  plus  quam  maturam  :  fuerit 
moderatus  et  clemens,  nempe  post  mare  Actiacum 
Romano  cruore  infectum,  nempe  post  fractas  in 
Sicilia  classes  et  suas  et  alienas,  nempe  post  Peru- 

2  sinas  aras  et  proscriptiones.  Ego  vero  clementiam 
non  voco  lassam  crudelitatem  ;  haec  est,  Caesar, 
dementia  vera,  quam  tu  praestas,  quae  non  saevitiae 
paenitentia  coepit,  nullam  habere  maculam,  num- 
quam  civilem  sanguinem  fudisse ;  haec  est  in 
maxima  potestate  verissima  animi  temperantia  et 
humani  generis  comprendens  ut  sui  amor  non  cupi- 
ditate  aliqua,  non  temeritate  ingenii,  non  priorum 
principum  exemplis  corruptum,  quantum  sibi  in 
cives  suos  liceat,  experiendo  temptare,  sed  hebetare 

3  aciem  imperii  sui.  Praestitisti,  Caesar,  civitatem 
incruentam,  et  hoc,  quod  magno  animo  gloriatus  es 
nullam  te  toto  orbe  stillam  cruoris  humani  misisse, 
eo  maius  est  mirabiliusque,  quod  nulli  umquam 
citius  gladius  commissus  est. 

4  dementia  ergo  non  tantum  honestiores  sed 
tutiores  praestat  ornamentumque  imperiorum  est 
simul  et  certissima  salus.  Quid  enim  est,  cur  reges 
consenuerint  liberisque  ac  nepotibus  tradiderint 
regna,  tyrannorum  exsecrabilis  ac  brevis  potestas 
sit  }  Quid  interest  inter  tyrannum  ac  regem  (species 
enim  ipsa  fortunae  ac  licentia  par  est),  nisi  quod 
tyranni  in  voluptatem  saeviunt,  reges  non  nisi  ex 
causa  ac  necessitate  ? 

1       12.  "  Quid    ergo  ?     Non    reges    quoque    occidere 

"  In  the  battle  with  Antony  and  Cleopatra  (31  b.c). 

^  When  Sextus  Pompey  was  defeated  in  36  b.c. 

*  A  rumour  was  current  that  Octavius  after  the  siege  of 
Perusia  (41-40  b.c.)  sacrificed  many  of  the  captives  at  an 
altar  erected  to  Julius  Caesar  ;  c/.  Suetonius,  Augustus,  15  ; 
Cassius  Dio,  xlviii.  14. 
390 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XI.  1-xii.  1 

that  was  more  than  ripe.  Granted  that  he  was 
restrained  and  merciful — yes,  to  be  sure,  but  it 
was  after  Actium's  waters  had  been  stained"  with 
Roman  blood,  after  his  o\vn  and  an  enemy's  fleet 
had  been  wrecked  off  Sicily,*  after  the  holocaust 
of  Perusia  <=  and  the  proscriptions.  I,  surely,  do  not 
call  weariness  of  cruelty  mercy.  True  mercy,  Caesar, 
is  this  which  you  display,  which  arises  from  no  regret 
for  Wolence,  that  bears  no  stain  and  never  shed  a 
compatriot's  blood.  In  a  position  of  unhmited  power 
this  is  in  the  truest  sense  self-control  and  an  all- 
embracing  love  of  the  human  race  even  as  of  one- 
self—not to  be  perverted  by  any  low  desire,  or  by 
hastiness  of  nature,  or  by  the  precedent  of  earlier 
princes  into  testing  by  experiment  what  Hcence  one 
may  employ  against  fellow-citizens,  but  rather  to 
dull  the  edge  of  supreme  power.  Your  gift,  Caesar, 
is  a  state  unstained  by  blood,  and  your  prideful  boast 
that  in  the  whole  world  you  have  shed  not  a  drop 
of  human  blood  is  the  more  significant  and  wonder- 
ful because  no  one  eyer  had  the  sword  put  into  his 
hands  at  an  earlier  age. 

Mercy,  then,  makes  rulers  not  only  more  honoured, 
but  safer,  and  is  at  the  same  time  the  glory  of 
sovereign  power  and  its  surest  protection.  For  why 
is  it  that  kings  have  groM'n  old  and  have  handed  on 
their  thrones  to  children  and  grandchildren,  while 
a  tyrant's  sway  is  accursed  and  short  ?  What  differ- 
ence is  there  between  a  tyrant  and  a  king  (for  they 
are  aUke  in  the  mere  outward  show  of  fortune  and 
extent  of  power),  except  that  tyrants  are  cruel  to 
serve  their  pleasure,  kings  only  for  a  reason  and  by 
necessity  ? 

"  What  then  ?  "  you  say  ;  "  do  not  kings  also  often 

391 


SENECA 

Solent  ?  "  Sed  quotiens  id  fieri  publica  utilitas 
persuadet ;  tyrannis  saevitia  cordi  est.  Tyrannus 
autem  a  rege  factis  distat,  non  nomine  ;  nam  et 
Dionysius  maior  iure  meritoque  praeferri  multis 
regibus  potest,  et  L.  Sullam  tyrannum  appellari  quid 
prohibet,  cui  occidendi  finem  fecit  inopia  hostium  ? 

2  Descenderit  licet  e  dictatura  sua  et  se  togae  reddi- 
derit,  quis  tamen  umquam  tyrannus  tam  a\'ide 
humanum  sanguinem  bibit  quam  ille,  qui  septem 
milia  civium  Romanorum  contrucidari  iussit  et,  cum 
in  vicino  ad  aedem  Bellonae  sedens  exaudisset 
conclamationem  tot  milium  sub  gladio  gementium, 
exterrito  senatu  :  "  Hoc  agamus,"  inquit,  "  patres 
conscripti  ;  seditiosi  pauculi  meo  iussu  occiduntur  "  ? 

3  Hoc  non  est  mentitus  ;  pauci  SuUae  videbantur.  Sed 
mox  de  Sulla,  cum  quaeremus,  quomodo  hostibus 
irascendum  sit,  utique  si  in  hostile  nomen  cives  et 
ex  eodem  corpore  abrupti  transierint  ;  interim,  hoc 
quod  dicebam,  dementia  efficit,  ut  magnum  inter 
regem  tyrannumque  discrimen  sit,  uterque  licet 
non  minus  armis  valletur  ;  sed  alter  arma  habet, 
quibus  in  munimentum  pacis  utitur,  alter,  ut  magno 
timore  magna  odia  compescat,  nee  illas  ipsas  manus, 

4  quibus  se  commisit,  securus  adspicit.  Contrariis  in 
contraria  agitur  ;  nam  cum  invisus  sit,  quia  timetur, 
392 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XII.  1-4 

kill  ?  "  Yes,  but  only  when  they  are  induced  to  do 
so  for  the  good  of  the  state.  Tyrants  take  delight 
in  cruelty.  But  the  difference  between  a  tyrant 
and  a  king  is  one  of  deeds,  not  of  name  ;  for  while 
the  elder  Dionysius  "  may  justly  and  deservedly  be 
counted  better  than  many  kjngs,  what  keeps  Lucius 
Sulla  from  being  styled  a  tyrant,  whose  killing  was 
stopped  only  by  a  dearth  of  foes  ?  Though  he 
abdicated  the  dictatorship  and  returned  to  private 
life,  yet  what  tyrant  ever  drank  so  greedily  of  human 
blood  as  he,  who  ordered  seven  thousand  Roman 
citizens  to  be  butchered  at  one  time,  and  who,  as  he 
sat  nearby  at  the  temple  of  Bellona  and  heard  the 
mingled  cry  of  the  many  thousands  moaning  beneath 
the  sword,  said  to  the  terror-stricken  senate,  "  Let 
us  attend  to  business,  Gentlemen  of  the  Senate  ; 
only  a  few  seditious  persons  are  being  killed  by  my 
order  "  ?  This  was  no  he  ;  to  Sulla  they  seemed  a 
few.  But  more  about  Sulla  by  and  by,  when  we  shall 
take  up  the  question  of  the  sort  of  anger  we  should 
have  for  enemies,  particularly  if  fellow-countrymen 
have  broken  away  from  the  body  politic  and  passed 
over  into  the  category  of  enemies.  Meanwhile,  as  I 
was  saying,  it  is  mercy  that  makes  the  distinction 
between  a  king  and  a  tyrant  as  great  as  it  is,  though 
both  are  equally  fenced  about  vrith  arms  ;  but  the 
one  uses  the  arms  which  he  has  to  fortify  good- will, 
the  other  to  curb  great  hatred  by  great  fear,  and 
yet  the  very  hands  to  which  he  has  entrusted  himself 
he  cannot  view  ^^ithout  concern.  Conflicting  causes 
force  him  to  conflicting  courses  :  for  since  he  is 
hated  because  he  is  feared,  he  \\ishes  to  be  feared 

"  See  Index. 

393 


SENECA 

timeri  vult,  quia  invisus  est,  et  illo  exsecrabili  versu, 
qui  multos  praecipites  dedit,  utitur  : 

Oderint,  dum  metuant, 

ignarus,   quanta   rabies   oriatur,   ubi   supra   modum 
odia  creverunt. 

Temperatus  enim  timor  cohibet  animos,  adsiduus 
vero  et  acer  et  extrema  admovens  in  audaciam 
5  iacentes  excitat  et  omnia  experiri  suadet.  Sic  feras 
linea  et  pinnae  clusas  contineant ;  easdem  a  tergo 
eques  telis  incessat,  temptabunt  fugam  per  ipsa, 
quae  fugerant,  proculcabuntque  formidinem,  Acer- 
rima  virtus  est,  quam  ultima  necessitas  extundit. 
Relinquat  oportet  securi  aliquid  metus  multoque 
plus  spei  quam  periculorum  ostentet  ;  alioqui,  ubi 
quiescenti  paria  metuuntur,  incurrere  in  pericula 
iuvat  et^  aliena  anima  abuti. 

1  13.  Placido  tranquilloque  regi  fida  sunt  auxilia 
sua,  ut  quibus  ad  communem  salutem  utatur, 
gloriosusque  miles  (publicae  enim  securitati  se  dare 
operam  videt)  omnem  laborem  libens  patitur  ut 
parentis  custos  ;    at  ilium  acerbum  et  sanguinarium 

2  neeesse  est  graventur  stipatores  sui.  Non  potest 
habere  quisquam  bonae  ac  fidae  voluntatis  ministros, 
quibus  in  tormentis  ut  eeuleo  et  ferramentis  ad 
mortem  paratis  utitur,  quibus  non  aliter  quam  bestiis 
homines  obiectat,  omnibus  reis  aerumnosior  ac 
solhcitior,  ut  qui  homines  deosque  testes  facinorum 
ac  vindices  timeat,  eo  perductus,  ut  non  liceat  illi 

*  Hosius,  after  Haase,  inserts  ut  after  et. 


"  A  favourite  quotation  ;   cf,  De  Ira,  i.  20.  4  ;  De  Clem. 

ii.  2.  2. 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XII.  4-xiii.  2 

because  he  is  hated,  and  not  kno^ving  what  frenzy 
is  engendered  when  hatred  grows  too  great,  he  takes 
as  a  motto  that  accursed  verse  which  has  driven  many 
to  their  fall : 

Let  them  hate,  if  only  they  fear." 

Now  fear  in  moderation  restrains  men's  passions,  *" 
but  the  fear  that  is  constant  and  sharp  and  brings 
desperation  arouses  the  sluggish  to  boldness,  and 
urges  them  to  stop  at  nothing.  In  the  same  way,  a 
string  of  feathers  may  keep  ^\^ld  beasts  hemmed  in, 
but  let  a  horseman  come  upon  them  from  behind  with 
javelins,  and  they  ^vill  try  to  escape  through  the  very 
objects  that  had  made  them  run,  and  aWII  trample 
do^^^l  their  fear.  No  courage  is  so  bold  as  that 
forced  by  utter  desperation.  Fear  should  leave  some 
sense  of  security,  and  hold  out  much  more  of  hope  than 
of  peril;  otherwise,  if  an  inoffensive  man  is  made  to  fear 
the  same  peril  as  others,  he  takes  pleasure  in  rushing 
into  peril  and  making  an  end  of  a  hfe  that  is  forfeit. 

A  king  that  is  peaceable  and  gentle  finds  his  guards 
trusty,  since  he  employs  them  for  the  common  safety, 
and  the  soldier,  seeing  that  he  is  gi\ing  liis  service 
for  the  security  of  the  state,  is  proud  and  wilhng  to 
undergo  any  hardship  as  a  protector  of  the  father  of 
his  countr)'  ;  but  he  that  is  harsh  and  bloodthirsty 
inevitably  gets  the  ill-will  of  his  own  henchmen.  It 
is  impossible  for  any  one  to  hold  the  good-will  and 
loyalty  of  servitors  whom  he  uses,  like  the  rack  and 
the  axe,  as  instruments  of  torture  and  death,  to  whom 
he  flings  men  as  he  would  to  wild  beasts  ;  no  prisoner 
at  the  bar  is  so  troubled  and  anxious  as  he,  seeing 
that  he  is  in  fear  of  men  and  gods,  the  witnesses  and 
the  avengers  of  crimes,  yet  has  reached  a  point  where 

395 


SENECA 

mutare  mores.  Hoc  enim  inter  cetera  vel  pessimum 
habet  crudelitas,  perseverandum  est  nee  ad  meliora 
patet  regressus ;  scelera  enim  sceleribus  tuenda 
sunt.     Quid  autem  eo  infelicius,  cui  iam  esse  malo 

3  necesse  est  ?  O  miserabilem  ilium,  sibi  certe  ! 
Nam  ceteris  misereri  eius  nefas  sit,  qui  caedibus  ac 
rapinis  potentiam  exercuit,  qui  suspecta  sibi  cuncta 
reddidit  tarn  externa  quam  domestica,  cum  arma 
metuat,  ad  arma  confugiens,  non  amicorum  fidei 
credens,  non  pietati  liberorum  ;  qui,  ubi  circum- 
spexit,  quaeque  fecit  quaeque  facturus  est,  et 
conscientiam  suam  plenam  sceleribus  ac  tormentis 
adaperuit,    saepe     mortem    timet,     saepius    optat, 

4  invisior  sibi  quam  servientibus.  E  contrario  is,  cui 
curae  sunt  universa,  qui  alia  magis,  alia  minus  tuetur, 
nullam  non  rei  publicae  partem  tamquam  sui  nutrit, 
inclinatus  ad  mitiora,  etiam  si  ex  usu  est  animad- 
vertere,  ostendens  quam  invitus  aspero  rpmedio 
manus  admoveat,  in  cuius  animo  nihil  hostile,  nihil 
efFerum  est,  qui  potentiam  suam  placide  ac  salu- 
tariter  exercet  approbare  imperia  sua  civibus  cupiens, 
felix  abunde  sibi  visas,  si  fortunam  suam  publicarit, 
sermone  adfabilis,  aditu  accessuque  facilis,  vultu, 
qui  maxime  populos  demeretur,  amabilis,  acquis 
desideriis  propensus,  etiam  iniquis  non^  acerbus,  a 

5  tota  civitate  amatur,  defenditur,  colitur,     Eadem  de 

^  non  added  by  Haase. 
396 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XIII.  2-5 

he  has  not  the  power  to  change  his  conduct.  For 
added  to  all  the  rest,  this  is  still  cruelty- 's  greatest 
curse — that  one  must  persist  in  it,  and  no  return  to 
better  things  is  open  ;  for  crime  must  be  safeguarded 
by  crime.  But  what  creature  is  more  unhappy  than 
the  man  who  now  cannot  help  being  ^vicked  ?  A 
wTctch  to  be  pitied,  at  least  by  himself !  for  that 
others  should  pity  him  would  be  a  crime — a  man  who 
has  utilized  his  power  for  murder  and  pillage,  who 
has  caused  mistrust  of  all  his  deahngs  whether  at 
home  or  abroad,  who  resorts  to  the  sword  because  he 
fears  the  sword,  who  trusts  neither  the  loyalty  of 
friends  nor  the  affection  of  his  children  ;  who,  when 
he  has  surveyed  what  he  has  done  and  what  he 
intends  to  do,  and  has  laid  bare  his  conscience 
burdened  ^^■ith  crimes  and  torturings,  often  fears  to 
die  but  more  often  prays  for  death,  more  hateful  as 
he  is  to  himself  than  to  his  servitors.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  whose  care  embraces  all,  who,  while  guard- 
ing here  with  greater  vigilance,  there  with  less,  yet 
fosters  each  and  ever\'  part  of  the  state  as  a  portion 
of  himself ;  who  is  inclined  to  the  milder  course  even 
if  it  would  profit  him  to  punish,  showing  thus  how 
loath  he  is  to  turn  his  hand  to  harsh  correction  ;  whose 
mind  is  free  from  all  hostiUty,  from  all  brutality  ; 
who  so  covets  the  approbation  of  his  countrj-men 
upon  his  acts  as  ruler  that  he  wields  his  power  with 
mildness  and  for  their  good  ;  who  thinks  himself 
aboundingly  happy  if  he  can  make  the  public  sharers 
in  his  own  good  fortune  ;  w-ho  is  affable  in  speech, 
easy  of  approach  and  access,  lovable  in  countenance, 
which  most  of  all  ^vins  the  affection  of  the  masses, 
well-disposed  to  just  petitions  and  even  to  the  unjust 
not  harsh — such  a  one  the  whole  state  loves,  defends, 

397 


SENECA 

illo  homines  secreto  loquuntur  quae  palam.  Tollere 
filios  cupiunt  et  publicis  malis  sterilitas  indieta 
recluditur ;  bene  se  meriturum  de  liberis  suis 
quisque  non  dubitat,  quibus  tale  saeculum  ostenderit. 
Hie  princeps  suo  beneficio  tutus  nihil  praesidiis  eget. 
arma  ornamenti  causa  habet. 

1  14.  Quod  ergo  officium  eius  est  ?  Quod  bonorum 
parentium,  qui  obiurgare  liberos  non  numquam 
blande,  non  numquam  minaeiter  solent,  aliquando 
admonere  etiam  verberibus.  Numquid  aliquis  sanus 
fiUum  a  prima  offensa  exheredat  ?  Nisi  magnae 
et  multae  iniuriae  patientiam  evicerunt,  nisi  plus 
est,  quod  timet,  quam  quod  damnat,  non  accedit  ad 
deeretorium  stilum ;  multa  ante  temptat,  quibus 
dubiam  indolem  et  peiore  iam  loco  positam  revocet  ; 
simul  deploratum  est,  ultima  experitur.  Nemo  ad 
supplicia  exigenda  pervenit,  nisi  qui  remedia  con- 

2  sumpsit.  Hoc,  quod  parenti,  etiam  principi  facien- 
dum est,  quem  appellavimus  Patrem  Patriae  non 
adulatione  vana  adducti.  Cetera  enim  cognomina 
honori  data  sunt ;  Magnos  et  Felices  et  Augustos 
diximus  et  ambitiosae  maiestati  quidquid  potuimus 
titulorum  congessimus  illis  hoc  tribuentes  ;  Patrem 
quidem  Patriae  appellavimus,  ut  sciret  datam  sibi 
potestatem     patriam,     quae     est     temperantissima 

3  liberis  consulens  suaque  post  illos  reponens.  Tarde 
sibi  pater  membra  sua  abscidat,  etiam,  cum  absci- 

"  i.e.,  to  disinheritance  in  his  will. 


i 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XIII.  5-xiv.  3 

and  reveres.  ^Vhat  people  say  of  such  a  man  is  the 
same  in  secret  as  in  public.  They  are  eager  to  rear 
up  sons,  and  the  childlessness  once  imposed  by  pubUc 
ills  is  now  relaxed  ;  no  one  doubts  that  his  children 
will  have  cause  to  thank  him  for  permitting  them  to 
see  so  happy  an  age.  Such  a  prince,  protected  by  his 
own  good  deeds,  needs  no  bodyguard  ;  the  arms  he 
wears  are  for  adornment  only. 

What,  then,  is  his  duty  ?  It  is  that  of  the  good 
parent  who  is  wont  to  reprove  his  children  sometimes 
gently,  sometimes  vrith  threats,  who  at  times  ad- 
monishes them  even  by  stripes.  Does  any  father  in 
his  senses  disinherit  a  son  for  his  first  offence  ?  Only 
when  great  and  repeated  >\Tong-doing  has  overcome 
his  patience,  only  when  what  he  fears  outweighs  what 
he  reprimands,  does  he  resort  to  the  decisive  pen  "  ; 
but  first  he  makes  many  an  effort  to  reclaim  a  charac- 
ter that  is  still  unformed,  though  inclined  now  to  the 
more  e^■il  side ;  when  the  case  is  hopeless,  he  tries 
extreme  measures.  No  one  resorts  to  the  exaction 
of  punishment  until  he  has  exhausted  all  the  means 
of  correction.  This  is  the  dut^'  of  a  father,  and  it  is 
also  the  duty  of  a  prince,  whom  not  in  empty  flatterv' 
we  have  been  led  to  call  "  the  Father  of  his  Country." 
For  other  designations  have  been  granted  merely  by 
way  of  honour  ;  some  we  have  styled  "  the  Great," 
"  the  Fortunate,"  and  "  the  August,"  and  we  have 
heaped  upon  pretentious  greatness  all  possible  titles 
as  a  tribute  to  such  men  ;  but  to  "  the  Father  of  his 
Country  "  we  have  given  the  name  in  order  that  he 
may  know  that  he  has  been  entrusted  with  a  father's 
power,  which  is  most  forbearing  in  its  care  for  the 
interests  of  his  children  and  subordinates  his  own  to 
theirs.     Slow  would  a  father  be  to  sever  his  own  flesh 

399 


SENECA 

derit,  reponere  cupiat,  et  in  abscidendo  gemat 
cunctatus  multum  diuque  ;  prope  est  enim,  ut 
libenter  damnet,  qui  cito ;  prope  est,  ut  inique 
puniat,  qui  nimis. 

1  15.  Trichonem  equitem  Romanum  memoria  nostra, 
quia  filium  suum  flagellis  occiderat,  populus  graphiis 
in  foro  confodit  ;  vix  ilium  Augusti  Caesaris  auctoritas 
infestis  tarn  patrum  quam  filiorum  manibus  eripuit, 

2  Tarium,  qui  filium  deprensum  in  parricidii  consilio 
damnavit  causa  cognita,  nemo  non  suspexit,  quod 
contentus  exilio  et  exilio  delicato  Massiliae  parri- 
cidam  continuit  et  annua  illi  praestitit,  quanta 
praestare  integro  solebat  ;  haec  liberalitas  efFecit, 
ut,  in  qua  civitate  numquam  deest  patronus  peioribus, 
nemo  dubitaret,  quin  reus  merito  damnatus  esset, 
quem  is  pater  damnare  potuisset,  qui  odisse  non 
poterat. 

3  Hoe  ipso  exemplo  dabo,  quem  compares  bono  patri. 
bonum  principem.  Cogniturus  de  filio  Tarius  advo- 
cavit  in  consilium  Caesarem  Augustum  ;  venit  in 
privatos  penates,  adsedit,  pars  alieni  consilii  fuit, 
non  dixit  :  "  Immo  in  meam  domum  veniat  "  ;  quod 
si  factum  esset,  Caesaris  futura  erat  cognitio,  non 

4  patris.  Audita  causa  excussisque  omnibus,  et  his, 
quae  adulescens  pro  se  dixerat,  et  his,  quibus  argue- 


"   Cf.  the  story  of  Milo's  enjoying  in  exile  the  mullets 
of  Marseilles  in  Cassius  Dio,  xl.  54. 

400 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XIV.  3-xv.  4 

and  blood  ;  aye,  after  severing  he  would  yearn  to 
restore  them,  and  while  severing  he  would  groan 
aloud,  hesitating  often  and  long  ;  for  he  comes  near 
to  condemning  gladly  who  condemns  swiftly,  and  to 
punishing  unjustly  who  punishes  unduly. 

Within  my  memorv^  the  people  in  the  forum  stabbed 
Tricho,  a  Roman  knight,  \\ith  their  -wTiting-styles 
because  he  had  flogged  his  son  to  death  ;  Augustus 
Caesar's  authorit\"  barely  rescued  him  from  the  in- 
dignant hands  of  fathers  no  less  than  of  sons.  Tarius, 
on  the  other  hand,  having  detected  his  son  in  a  plot 
against  his  hfe,  when  after  investigating  the  case  he 
found  him  guilty,  won  the  admiration  of  ever}"  one 
because,  satisfying  himself  ^\^th  exile — and  a  luxuri- 
ous exile — he  detained  the  parricide  at  Marseilles," 
furnishing  him  with  the  same  liberal  allowance  that  he 
had  been  in  the  habit  of  giving  him  before  his  guilt  ; 
the  effect  of  this  generosity  was  that,  in  a  community 
where  a  \-illain  never  lacks  a  defender,  no  one  doubted 
that  the  accused  man  had  been  justly  condemned, 
since  the  father  who  could  not  hate  him  had  found  it 
possible  to  condemn  him. 

I  will  now  use  tins  ver}^  case  to  show  you  an  example 
of  a  good  prince  v\ith  whom  you  may  compare  the 
good  father.  When  Tarius  was  ready  to  open  the 
inquir}^  on  his  son,  he  invited  Augustus  Caesar  to 
attend  the  council  ;  Augustus  came  to  the  hearth 
of  a  private  citizen,  sat  beside  him,  and  took  part 
in  the  dehberation  of  another  household.  He  did 
not  say,  "  Rather,  let  the  man  come  to  my  house  "  ; 
for,  if  he  had,  the  inquiry  would  have  been  conducted 
by  Caesar  and  not  by  the  father.  When  the  case 
had  been  heard  and  all  the  evidence  had  been  sifted 
— what  the  young  fellow  said  in  his  defence,  and 
VOL.  I  2  p  401 


SENECA 

batur,  petit,  ut  sententiam  suam  quisque  scriberet, 
ne  ea  omnium  fieret,  quae  Caesaris  fuisset ;  deinde, 
priusquam    aperirentur    codicilli,    iuravit    se    Tarii, 

5  liominis  locupletis,  hereditatem  non  aditurum.  Dicet 
aliquis  :  "  Pusillo  animo  timuit,  ne  videretur  locum 
spei  suae  aperire  velle  filii  damnatione."  Ego  contra 
sentio  ;  quilibet  nostrum  debuisset  adversus  opiniones 
malignas  satis  fiduciae  habere  in  bona  conscientia, 
principes  multa  debent  etiam  famae  dare.     Iuravit 

6  se  non  aditurum  hereditatem.  Tarius  quidem  eodem 
die  et  alterum  heredem  perdidit,  sed  Caesar  liber- 
tatem  sententiae  suae  redemit ;  et  postquam  ap- 
probavit  gratuitam  esse  severitatem  suam,  quod 
principi  semper  curandum  est,  dixit  relegandum,  quo 

7  patri  videretur.  Non  culleum,  non  serpentes,  non 
carcerem  decrevit  memor,  non  de  quo  censeret,  sed 
cui  in  consilio  esset ;  molhssimo  genere  poenae 
contentum  esse  debere  patrem  dixit  in  fiho  adules- 
centulo  impulso  in  id  scelus,  in  quo  se,  quodproximum 
erat  ab  innocentia,  timide  gessisset ;    debere  ilium 

1  ab  urbe  et  a  parentis  oculis  submoveri.  16.  O  dignum, 
quem  in  consilium  patres  advocarent  !  O  dignum, 
quern  coheredem  innocentibus  liberis  scriberent  ! 
Haec  dementia  principem  decet  ;  quocumque 
venerit,  mansuetiora  omnia  faciat. 


"  i.e.,  Caesar  as  well  as  his  son. 

*  In  early  times  the  parricide  was  sewn  into  a  sack  with 
a  dog,  a  cock,  a  snake,  and  a  monkey,  and  drowned. 
402 


ON  MERCY,  I.  x^^  4-.v^i.  1 

what  was  brought  up  in  accusation  against  him — 
Caesar  requested  each  man  to  give  his  verdict  in 
^\Titing,  lest  all  should  vote  according  to  his  lead. 
Then,  before  the  tablets  were  opened,  he  solemnly- 
declared  that  he  would  accept  no  bequest  from 
Tarius,  who  was  a  rich  man.  Some  will  say,  "  He 
showed  weakness  in  fearing  that  he  might  seem  to 
be  trying  to  clear  the  field  for  his  ovm  prospects  by 
sentencing  the  son."  I  think  differently  ;  any  one 
of  us  might  well  have  had  enough  faith  in  his  own 
good  conscience  to  \\ithstand  hostile  criticism,  but 
princes  are  bound  to  give  much  heed  even  to  report. 
He  solemnly  declared  that  he  would  not  accept  a 
bequest.  Tarius  did  indeed  on  one  and  the  same  day 
lose  a  second  heir  "  also,  but  Caesar  saved  the  integrity 
of  his  vote  ;  and  after  he  had  proved  that  his  severity 
was  disinterested — for  a  prince  should  always  have 
regard  for  this — he  said  that  the  son  ought  to  be 
banished  to  whatever  place  the  father  should  decide. 
His  sentence  was  not  the  sack,^  nor  serpents,  nor 
prison,  since  his  thought  was  not  of  the  man  on  whom 
he  was  passing  sentence,  but  of  him  for  whom  he 
Mas  acting  as  counsellor.  He  said  that  the  mildest 
sort  of  punishment  ought  to  satisfy  a  father  in  the 
case  of  a  son  who  was  verj-  youthful  and  had  been 
moved  to  commit  this  crime,  but  in  committing  it 
had  shown  himself  faint-hearted — which  was  next 
door  to  being  innocent ;  therefore  the  son  should  be 
banished  from  the  city  and  from  his  father's  sight. 
How  worthy  he  was  of  being  asked  by  parents  to 
share  their  counsels  !  how  worthy  of  being  recorded 
a  co-heir  with  the  children  who  were  innocent !  This 
is  the  spirit  of  mercy  that  graces  the  prince ;  wherever 
he  goes  he  should  make  everything  more  peaceable. 

403 


SENECA 

Nemo  regi   tarn   vilis   sit,    ut    ilium    perire    non 

2  sentiat,  qualiscumque  pars  imperii  est.  In  magna 
imperia  ex  minoribus  petamus  exemplum.  Non 
unum  est  imperandi  genus  ;  imperat  princeps  civibus 
suis,  pater  liberis,  praeceptor  discentibus,  tribunus 

3  vel  centurio  militibus.  Nonne  pessimus  pater  vide- 
bitur,  qui  adsiduis  plagis  liberos  etiam  ex  levissimis 
causis  compescet  ?  Uter  autem  praeceptor  liberali- 
bus  studiis  dignior,  qui  excarnificabit  discipulos,  si 
memoria  illis  non  constiterit  aut  si  parum  agilis  in 
legendo  oculus  haeserit,  an  qui  monitionibus  et 
verecundia  emendare  ac  docere  malit  ?  Tribunum 
centurionemque     da     saevum  :      desertores     faciet, 

4  quibus  tamen  ignoscitur.  Numquidnam  aequum  est 
gravius  homini  et  durius  imperari,  quam  imperatur 
animalibus  mutis  ?  Atqui  equum  non  crebris  ver- 
beribus  exterret  domandi  peritus  magister  ;  fiet 
enim  formidolosus  et  contumax,  nisi  eum  blandiente 

5  tactu  permulseris.  Idem  facit  ille  venator,  quique 
instituit  catulos  vestigia  sequi  quique  iam  exercitatis 
utitur  ad  excitandas  vel  persequendas  feras  :  nee 
crebro  illis  minatur  (contundet  enim  animos  et,  quid- 
quid  est  indolis,  comminuetur  trepidatione  degeneri) 
nee  licentiam  vagandi  errandique  passim  concedit. 
Adicias  liis  licet  tardiora  agentes  iumenta,  quae, 
cum  ad  contumeliam  et  miserias  nata  sint,  nimia 
saevitia  cogantur  iugum  detractare. 


<»  i.e.,  though  guilty  of  desertion. 
404 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XVI.  1-5 

In  the  eyes  of  a  ruler  let  no  man  count  for  so  little 
that  his  destruction  is  not  noted  ;    be  he  what  he 
may,  he  is  part  of  the  realm.     From  the  forms  of 
lesser  power  let  us  draw  a  parallel  for  great  power. 
There  is  more  than  one  kind  of  power  :   a  prince  has 
power  over  his  subjects,  a  father  over  liis  children, 
a  teacher  over  his  pupils,  a  tribune  or  a  centurion 
over  his  soldiers.     Will  he  not  seem  the  worst  sort 
of  father   who   controls   his   children   by   constant 
whippings  for  even  the  most  trifling  offences  ?     And 
of  teachers,  which  ^«ll  reflect  more  credit  upon  the 
Uberal  studies — the  one  who  will  draw  the  blood  of 
his  pupils  if  their  memory  is  weak,  or  if  the  eye  is 
not  quick  and  lags  in  reading,  or  the  one  who  chooses 
rather  by  kind  admonition  and  a  sense  of  shame  to 
correct,  and  so  to  teach,  his  pupils  ?     Show  me  a 
tribune  or  centurion  that  is  harsh  ;    he  will  cause 
deserters,  who  all  the  same  "  are  pardonable.     Is  it 
just,  I  ask,  that  man  should  be  subjected  to  severer 
and  harsher  rule  than  dumb  beasts  ?     And  yet  the 
horse  is  not  plied  with  the  lash  and  terrified  by  the 
horse-breaker  who  is  an  expert  ;    for  it  wll   grow 
fearful  and  obstinate  unless  it  is  soothed  with  caress- 
ing hand.     The  same  is  true  of  the  hunter,  whether 
he  is  teaching  young  dogs  to  follow  the  trail,  or  makes 
use  of  those  already  trained  for  routing  out  the  game 
or  running  it  down  :    he  neither  employs  constant 
threats  (for  that  \n\]  break  their  spirit,  and  all  their 
native  qualities  Nnll  be  gradually  lost  in  a  timidity 
unworthy  of  their  breed),  nor  does  he  allow  them  to 
range  and  roam  around  without  restraint.  This  applies 
again  to  drivers  of  the  more  sluggish  beasts  of  burden, 
which,  though  they  are  born  to  abuse  and  misery,  may 
be  driven  to  refuse  the  yoke  by  too  much  cruelty. 

405 


SENECA 

1  17.  Nullum  animal  morosius  est,  nullum  maiore 
arte  tractandum  quam  homo,  nulli  magis  parcendum. 
Quid  enim  est  stultius  quam  in  iumentis  quidem  et 
canibus  erubescere  iras  exercere,  pessima  autem 
condicione  sub  homine^  hominem  esse  ?  Morbis 
medemur  nee  irascimur  ;  atqui  et  hie  morbus  est 
animi ;      mollem     medicinam     desiderat     ipsumque 

2  medentem  minime  infestum  aegro.  Mali  medici 
est  desperare,  ne  curet  :  idem  in  iis,  quorum  animus 
adfectus  est,  facere  debebit  is,  cui  tradita  salus 
omnium  est,  non  cito  spem  proicere  nee  mortifera 
signa  pronuntiare  ;  luctetur  cum  vitiis,  resistat, 
aliis  morbum  suum  exprobret,  quosdam  molli 
curatione  decipiat  citius  meliusque  sanaturus  re- 
mediis  fallentibus  ;   agat  princeps  curam  non  tantum 

3  salutis,  sed  etiam  honestae  cicatricis.  Nulla  regi 
gloria  est  ex  saeva  animadversione  (quis  enim 
dubitat  posse  ?),  at  contra^  ma^dma,  si  vim  suam 
continet,  si  multos  irae  alienae  eripuit,  neminem 
suae  impendit. 

1  18.  Servis  imperare  moderate  laus  est.  Et  in 
mancipio  cogitandum  est,  non  quantum  illud  impune 
possit  pati,  sed  quantum  tibi  permittat  aequi  bonique 
natura,  quae  parcere  etiam  captivis  et  pretio  paratis 

^  homine  added  by  Lipsius. 
406 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XVII.  1-xviii.  1 

No  creature  is  more  difficult  of  temper,  none  needs 
to  be  handled  with  greater  skill,  than  man,  and  to 
none  should  more  mercy  be  shown.  For  what  is  more 
senseless  than  to  subject  man  to  the  foulest  treatment 
at  the  hands  of  man,  while  one  will  blush  to  vent  his 
anger  on  beasts  of  burden  and  dogs  ?  Diseases  do 
not  make  us  angry — we  try  to  cure  them  ;  yet  here 
too  is  a  disease,  but  of  the  mind  ;  it  requires  gentle 
treatment,  and  one  to  treat  it  who  is  anything  but 
hostile  to  his  patient.  It  is  a  poor  physician  that 
lacks  faith  in  his  ability  to  cure  ;  and  he  who  has 
been  entrusted  with  the  life  of  all  the  people  ought 
to  act  upon  the  same  principle  in  dealing  ^ath  those 
whose  mind  is  diseased  ;  he  ought  not  to  be  too 
quick  to  give  up  hope  or  to  pronounce  the  symptoms 
fatal  ;  he  should  ^\Testle  with  their  troubles  and 
stay  them  ;  some  he  should  reproach  with  their 
malady,  some  he  should  dupe  by  a  sugared  dose  in 
order  to  make  a  quicker  and  a  better  cure  by  using 
deceptive  remedies  ;  the  aim  of  the  prince  should  be 
not  merely  to  restore  the  health,  but  also  to  leave 
no  shameful  scar.  No  glory  redounds  to  a  ruler  from 
cruel  punishment — for  who  doubts  his  ability  to  give 
it  ? — but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  greatest  glory  is  his 
if  he  holds  his  power  in  check,  if  he  rescues  many 
from  the  WTath  of  others,  if  he  sacrifices  none  to  his 
own. 

It  is  praiseworthy  to  use  authority  over  slaves 
with  moderation.  Even  in  the  case  of  a  human 
chattel  you  should  consider  not  how  much  he  can  be 
made  to  suffer  without  retaliating,  but  how  much 
you  are  permitted  to  inflict  by  the  principles  of 
equity  and  right,  which  require  that  mercy  should 
be  shown   even  to  captives   and  purchased  slaves. 

407 


SENECA 

iubet.  Quanto  iustius  iubet  hominibus  liberis, 
ingenuis,  honestis  non  ut  mancipiis  abuti  sed  ut  his, 
quos  gradu  antecedas  quorumque  tibi  non  servitus 

2  tradita  sit,  sed  tutela.  Servis  ad  statuam  licet  con- 
fugere  ;  cum  in  servum  omnia  liceant,  est  aliquid, 
quod  in  hominem  licere  commune  ius  animantium 
vetet.  Quis  non  Vedium  Pollionem  peius  oderat 
quam  servi  sui,  quod  muraenas  sanguine  humano 
saginabat  et  eos,  qui  se  aliquid  offenderant,  in 
vivarium,  quid  aliud  quam  serpentium,  abici  iubebat  ? 
O  hominem  mille  mortibus  dignum,  sive  devorandos 
servos  obiciebat  muraenis,  quas  esurus  erat,  sive  in 
hoc  tantum  illas  alebat,  ut  sic  aleret. 

3  Quemadmodum  domini  crudeles  tota  civitate 
commonstrantur  invisique  et  detestabiles  sunt,  ita 
regum  et  iniuria  latius  patet  et  infamia  atque  odium 
saeculis  traditur  ;  quanto  autem  non  nasci  melius 
fuit,  quam  numerari  inter  publico  malo  natos  ! 

1  19.  Excogitare  nemo  quicquam  poterit,  quod 
magis  decorum  regenti  sit  quam  dementia,  quo- 
cumque  modo  is  et  quocumque  iure  praepositus 
ceteris  erit.  Eo  scilicet  formosius  id  esse  magnifi- 
centiusque  fatebinmr,  quo  in  maiore  praestabitur 
potestate,    quam   non   oportet   noxiam    esse,   si   ad 

2  naturae  legem  componitur.  Natura  enim  commenta 
408 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XVIII.  1-xix.  2 

With  how  much  more  justice  do  they  require  that 
free,  free-born,  and  reputable  men  should  not  be 
treated  as  mere  chattels,  but  as  those  who,  out- 
stripped by  you  in  rank,  have  been  committed  to 
your  charge  to  be,  not  your  slaves,  but  your  wards. 
Even  slaves  have  the  right  of  refrige  at  the  statue 
of  a  god  ;  and  although  the  law  allows  anything 
in  deahng  with  a  slave,  yet  in  deahng  ^ith  a  human 
being  there  is  an  extreme  which  the  right  common  to 
all  li\-ing  creatures  refuses  to  allow.  Who  did  not 
hate  Vedius  Polho  even  more  than  his  o^\"n  slaves 
did,  because  he  would  fatten  liis  lampreys  on  human 
blood,  and  order  those  who  had  for  some  reason 
incurred  his  displeasm-e  to  be  thrown  into  his  fish- 
pond— or  why  not  say  his  snake-preserve  ?  The 
monster  !  He  deserved  to  die  a  thousand  deaths, 
whether  he  threw  his  slaves  as  food  to  lampreys 
he  meant  to  eat,  or  whether  he  kept  lampreys  only 
to  feed  them  on  such  food  ! 

Even  as  cruel  masters  are  pointed  at  mth  scorn 
throughout  the  whole  city,  and  are  hated  and  loathed, 
so  with  kings  ;  while  the  WTong  they  do  extends  more 
N^-idely,  the  infamy  and  hatred  which  they  incur  is 
handed  down  to  the  ages.  But  how  much  better  not 
to  have  been  born  than  to  be  counted  among  those 
born  to  the  public  harm  ! 

It  Avill  be  impossible  for  one  to  imagine  anything 
more  seemly  for  a  ruler  than  the  quality  of  mercy, 
no  matter  in  what  manner  or  with  what  justice  he 
has  been  set  over  other  men.  We  shall  admit,  of 
course,  that  this  quality  is  the  more  beautiful  and 
wonderful,  the  greater  the  power  under  wliich  it  is 
displayed  ;  and  this  power  need  not  be  harmful  if 
it  is  adjusted  to  Nature's  law.     For  Nature  herself 

409 


SENECA 

est  regem,  quod  et  ex  aliis  animalibus  licet  cognoscere 
et  ex  apibus  ;  quarum  regi  amplissimum  cubile  est 
medioque  ac  tutissimo  loco  ;  praeterea  opere  vacat 
exactor  alienorum  operum,  et  amisso  rege  totum 
dilabitur,  nee  umquam  plus  unum  patiuntur  meliorem- 
que  pugna  quaerunt  ;  praeterea  insignis  regi  forma 
est    dissimilisque    ceteris    cum    magnitudine    turn 

3  nitore.  Hoc  tamen  maxime  distinguitur  :  ira- 
cundissimae  ac  pro  corporis  captu  pugnacissimae 
sunt  apes  et  aculeos  in  volnere  relinquunt,  rex  ipse 
sine  aculeo  est ;  noluit  ilium  natura  nee  saevum  esse 
nee  ultionem  magno  constaturam  petere  telumque 
detraxit  et  iram  eius  inermem  reliquit. 

Exemplar  hoc  magnis  regibus  ingens  ;  est  enim 
illi  mos  exercere  se  in  parvis  et  ingentium  rerum 

4  documenta  minima  largiri.^  Pudeat  ab  exiguis 
animalibus  non  trahere  mores,  cum  tanto  hominum 
moderatior  esse  animus  debeat,  quanto  vehementius 
nocet.  Utinam  quidem  eadem  homini  lex  esset 
et  ira  cum  telo  suo  frangeretur  nee  saepius  liceret 
nocere  quam  semel  nee  alienis  viribus  exercere 
odia  !  Facile  enim  lassaretur  furor,  si  per  se  sibi 
satis  faceret  et  si  mortis  periculo  vim  suam  effunderet. 

5  Sed  ne  nunc  quidem  illi  cursus  tutus  est ;  tantum 
enim  necesse  est  timeat,  quantum  timeri  voluit,  et 
manus    omnium    observet    et    eo    quoque    tempore, 

^  minima  argere  (agere)  0 :  urgere  Haupt :  spargere 
Madvig :  largiri  ego  scripsi :  in  minima  {sc.  re)  parere 
Hosius  :  arguere  Ball. 


"  Really  the  queen-bee. 

""  Cf.  Virgil's  mock-heroic  description  of  the  battle  of  the 
bees  in  Georgics,  iv.  67-87. 
"  i.e.,  from  the  tiniest  things. 

410 


ox  MERCY,  I.  XIX.  2-5 

conceived  the  idea  of  king,  as  we  may  recognize 
from  the  case  of  bees  and  other  creatures  ;  the  king  " 
of  the  bees  has  the  roomiest  cell,  placed  in  the  central 
and  safest  spot ;  besides,  he  does  no  work,  but  super- 
intends the  work  of  the  others,  and  if  they  lose  their 
king,  they  all  scatter  ;  they  never  tolerate  more  than 
one  at  a  time,  and  they  discover  the  best  one  by 
means  of  a  fight*  ;  moreover  the  appearance  of  the 
king  is  striking  and  different  from  that  of  the  others 
both  in  size  and  beauty.  His  greatest  mark  of  dis- 
tinction, however,  lies  in  this  :  bees  are  most  easily 
provoked,  and,  for  the  size  of  their  bodies,  excellent 
fighters,  and  where  they  wound  they  leave  their 
stings  ;  but  the  king  himself  has  no  sting.  Nature 
did  not  wish  him  to  be  cruel  or  to  seek  a  revenge  that 
would  be  so  costly,  and  so  she  removed  his  weapon, 
and  left  his  anger  unarmed. 

Great  kings  will  find  herein  a  mighty  precedent ; 
for  it  is  Nature's  way  to  exercise  herself  in  small 
matters,  and  to  bestow  the  tiniest "  proofs  of  great 
principles.  Shameful,  were  it  not  to  draw  a  lesson 
from  the  ways  of  the  tiny  creatures,  since,  as  the 
mind  of  man  has  so  much  more  power  to  do  harm, 
it  ought  to  show  the  greater  self-control.  Would 
at  least  that  a  man  were  subject  to  the  same 
law,  and  that  his  anger  broke  off  along  with  his 
weapon,  and  that  he  could  not  injure  more  than 
once  or  use  the  strength  of  others  to  wreak  his  hatred  ; 
for  he  would  soon  grow  weary  of  his  rage  if  he  had  no 
instrument  to  satisfy  it  but  liimself,  and  if  by  giWng 
rein  to  his  violence  he  ran  the  risk  of  death.  But 
even  as  it  is,  such  a  man  has  no  safe  course ;  for  he 
must  fear  as  much  as  he  wishes  to  be  feared,  must 
watch  the  hands  of  every  person,  and  count  himself 

411 


SENECA 

quo  non  captatur,  peti  se  iudicet  nullumque  momen- 
tum immune  a  metu  habeat.  Hanc  aliquis  agere 
vitam  sustinet,  cum  liceat  innoxium  aliis,  ob  hoc 
securum,  salutare  potentiae  ius  laetis  omnibus 
tractare  ?  Errat  enim,  si  quis  existimat  tutum  esse 
ibi  regem,   ubi  nihil  a  rege  tutum   est  ;    securitas 

6  securitate  mutua  paciscenda  est.  Non  opus  est 
instruere  in  altum  editas  arces  nee  in  adscensum 
arduos  colles  emunire  nee  latera  montium  abscidere, 
multiplicibus  se  muris  turribusque  saepire  :  salvum 
regem  dementia  in  aperto  praestabit.  Unum  est 
inexpugnabile  munimentum  amor  civium. 

7  Quid  pulchrius  est  quam  vivere  optantibus  cunctis 
et  vota  non  sub  custode  nuncupantibus  ?  si  paulum 
valetudo  titubavit,  non  spem  hominum  excitari, 
sed  metum  ?  nihil  esse  cuiquam  tam  pretiosum, 
quod  non  pro  salute  praesidis  sui  commutatum  velit  ? 

8  O  ne  ille,  cui  contingit,  sibi  quoque  vivere  debeat  ; 
in  hoc  adsiduis  bonitatis  argumentis  probavit  non 
rem  publicam  suam  esse,  sed  se  rei  publicae.  Quis 
huic  audeat  struere  aliquod  periculum  ?  Quis  ab  hoc 
non,  si  possit,  fortunam  quoque  avertere  velit,  sub 
quo  iustitia,  pax,  pudicitia,  securitas,  dignitas  florent, 
sub  quo  opulenta  civitas  copia  bonorum  omnium 
abundat  ?  Nee  alio  animo  rectorem  suum  intuetur, 
quam,  si  di  immortales  potestatem  visendi  sui  faciant, 

"  i.e.,   the   pleasure   derived    from    so   much   solicitude 
becomes  in  itself  a  motive  for  living. 

412 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XIX.  5-8 

assailed  even  when  no  one  is  for  laying  hold  on  him, 
and  not  a  moment  must  he  have  that  is  free  from 
dread.  Would  any  one  endure  to  live  such  a  hfe 
when,  doing  no  harm  to  others  and  consequently 
fearless,  he  might  exercise  beneficently  his  pri\-ilege 
of  power  to  the  happiness  of  all  ?  For  if  any  one 
thinks  that  a  king  can  abide  in  safety  where  notliing 
is  safe  from  the  king,  he  is  AATong  ;  for  the  price  of 
security  is  an  interchange  of  security.  He  has  no 
need  to  rear  on  high  his  towering  castles,  or  to  wall 
about  steep  hills  against  ascent,  or  to  cut  away  the 
sides  of  mountains,  or  to  encircle  himself  A\ith  rows 
of  walls  and  turrets  ;  through  mercy  a  king  vriW  be 
assured  of  safety  on  an  open  plain.  His  one  im- 
pregnable defence  is  the  love  of  his  countrjTnen. 

And  what  is  more  glorious  than  to  live  a  life  which 
all  men  hope  may  last,  and  for  which  all  voice  their 
prayers  when  there  is  none  to  watch  them  ?  to 
excite  men's  fears,  not  their  hopes,  if  one's  health 
gives  way  a  little  ?  to  have  no  one  hold  anything  so 
precious  that  he  would  not  gladly  give  it  in  exchange 
for  his  chieftain's  safety  ?  Oh,  surely  a  man  so 
fortunate  would  owe  it  also  to  himself  to  hve  "  ;  to 
that  end  he  has  shown  by  constant  evidences  of  his 
goodness,  not  that  the  state  is  his,  but  that  he  is 
the  state's.  Who  would  dare  to  de\ise  any  danger 
for  such  a  man  ?  Who  would  not  ^vish  to  shield  him 
if  he  could,  even  from  the  chance  of  ill — him  beneath 
whose  sway  justice,  peace,  chastity,  secxirity,  and 
honour  flourish,  under  whom  the  state  abounds  in 
wealth  and  a  store  of  all  good  things  ?  Nor  does  it 
gaze  upon  its  ruler  ^\■ith  other  emotion  than,  did 
they  vouchsafe  us  the  power  of  beholding  them, 
we    should    gaze    upon    the    immortal    gods — vnth 

413 


SENECA 

intueamur  venerantes  colentesque.  Quid  autem  ? 
9  non  proximum  illis  locum  tenet  is,  qui  se  ex  deorum 
natura  gerit,  beneficus  ac  largus  et  in  melius  potens  ? 
Hoc  adfectare,  hoc  imitari  decet,  maximum  ita 
liaberi,  ut  optimus  simul  habeare. 

1  20.  A  duabus  causis  punire  princeps  solet,  si  aut 
se  vindicat  aut  alium.  Prius  de  ea  parte  disseram, 
quae  ipsum  contingit  ;    difficilius  est  enim  moderari, 

2  ubi  dolori  debetur  ultio,  quam  ubi  exemplo.  Super- 
vacuum  est  hoc  loco  admonere,  ne  facile  credat,  ut 
verum  excutiat,  ut  innocentiae  faveat  et,  ut  appareat, 
non  minorem  agi  rem  periclitantis  quam  iudicis  sciat ; 
hoc  enim  ad  iustitiam,  non  ad  clementiam  pertinet  ; 
nunc  ilium  hortamur,  ut  manifeste  laesus  animum 
in  potestate  habeat  et  poenam,  si  tuto  poterit,  donet, 
si   minus,   temperet  longeque   sit   in  suis   quam   in 

3  alienis  iniuriis  exorabilior.  Nam  quemadmodum 
non  est  magni  animi,  qui  de  alieno  liberalis  est,  sed 
ille,  qui,  quod  alteri  donat,  sibi  detrahit,  ita  clemen- 
tem  vocabo  non  in  alieno  dolore  facilem,  sed  eum, 
qui,  cum  suis  stimulis  exagitetur,  non  prosilit,  qui 
intellegit  magni  animi  esse  iniurias  in  summa  po- 
tentia  pati  nee  quicquam  esse  gloriosius  principe 
impune  laeso. 

1  21.  Ultio  duas  praestare  res  solet  :  aut  solacium 
414 


1 


ON  MERCY,  I.  xix.  8-xxi.  1 

veneration  and  with  worship.  But  tell  me  :  he  who 
bears  himself  in  a  godlike  manner,  who  is  beneficent 
and  generous  and  uses  his  power  for  the  better  end 
— does  he  not  hold  a  place  second  only  to  the  gods  ? 
It  is  well  that  this  should  be  your  aim,  this  your  ideal : 
to  be  considered  the  greatest  man,  only  if  at  the 
same  time  you  are  considered  the  best. 

A  prince  usually  inflicts  punishment  for  one  of 
two  reasons,  to  avenge  either  himself  or  another.  I 
shall  first  discuss  the  situation  in  which  he  is  person- 
ally concerned  ;  for  moderation  is  more  difficult  when 
vengeance  serves  the  end  of  anger  rather  than  of 
discipline.  At  this  point  it  is  needless  to  caution  him 
to  be  slow  in  behe\"ing,  to  ferret  out  the  truth,  to  be- 
friend innocence,  and  to  remember  that  to  prove 
this  is  as  much  the  business  of  the  judge  as  of  the  man 
under  trial  ;  for  all  this  concerns  justice,  not  mercy, 
WTiat  I  now  urge  is  that,  although  he  has  been 
clearly  injured,  he  should  keep  his  feehngs  under 
control,  and,  if  he  can  in  safety,  should  remit  the 
punishment ;  if  not,  that  he  should  modify  it,  and  be 
far  more  ^villing  to  forgive  wTongs  done  to  himself 
than  to  others.  For  just  as  the  magnanimous  man 
is  not  he  who  makes  free  ^vith  what  is  another's, 
but  he  who  deprives  himself  of  what  he  gives  to 
some  one  else,  so  I  shall  not  call  him  merciful 
who  is  peaceable  when  the  smart  is  another's,  but 
him  who,  though  the  spur  galls  himself,  does  not 
become  restive,  who  understands  that  it  is  mag- 
nanimous to  brook  injuries  even  where  authority  is 
supreme,  and  that  there  is  nothing  more  glorious 
than  a  prince  who,  though  "WTonged,  remains  un- 
avenged. 

^'engeance  accomplishes  usually  one  of  two  pur- 

415 


SENECA 

adfert  ei,  qui  accepit  iniuriam,  aut  in  reliquum  securi- 
tatem.  Principis  maior  est  fortuna,  quam  ut  solacio  5 
egeat,  manifestiorque  vis,  quam  ut  alieno  malo  ' 
opinionem  sibi  virium  quaerat.  Hoc  dico,  cum  ab 
inferioribus  petitus  violatusque  est ;  nam  si,  quos 
pares  aliquando  habuit,  infra  se  videt,  satis  vindicatus 
est.  Regem  et  servus  occidit  et  serpens  et  sagitta  ; 
servavit  quidem  nemo  nisi  maior  eo,  quern  servabat. 

2  Uti  itaque  animose  debet  tanto  munere  deorum 
dandi  auferendique  vitam  potens.  In  iis  praesertim, 
quos  scit  aliquando  sibi  par  fastigium^  obtinuisse, 
hoc  arbitrium  adeptus  ultionem  implevit  perfecitque, 
quantum  verae  poenae  satis  erat  ;  perdidit  enim 
vitam,  qui  debet,  et,  quisquis  ex  alto  ad  inimici  pedes 
abiectus  alienam  de  capite  regnoque  sententiam 
expectavit,  in  servatoris  sui  gloriam  vivit  plusque 
eius  nomini  confert  incolumis,  quam  si  ex  oculis 
ablatus  esset.     Adsiduum  enim  spectaculum  alienae 

3  virtutis  est ;  in  triurapho  cito  transisset.  Si  vero 
regnum  quoque  suum  tuto  relinqui  apud  eum  potuit 
reponique  eo,  unde  deciderat,  ingenti  incremento 
surgit  laus  eius,  qui  contentus  fuit  ex  rege  victo 
nihil  praeter  gloriam  sumere.  Hoc  est  etiam  ex 
victoria   sua   triumphare   testarique    nihil   se,    quod 

^  <par>  fastigium  Pincianus  :  fastigio  ifss. 
416 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XXI.  1-3 

poses  :  if  a  person  has  been  injured,  it  gives  him 
either  a  compensation  or  immunity  for  the  future. 
But  a  prince's  fortune  is  too  exalted  for  him  to  feel 
the  need  of  compensation,  and  his  power  is  too 
evident  to  lead  him  to  seek  a  reputation  for  power 
by  injury  to  another.  That,  I  say,  is  so,  when  he  has 
been  assailed  and  outraged  by  his  inferiors  ;  for 
in  the  case  of  foes  whom  he  once  counted  his  equals, 
he  has  vengeance  enough  if  he  sees  them  beneath 
his  heel.  A  slave,  a  snake,  or  an  arrow  may  slay 
even  a  king  ;  but  no  one  has  saved  a  hfe  who  was 
not  greater  than  the  one  whom  he  saved.  Con- 
sequently he  who  has  the  power  to  give  and  to  take 
away  life  ought  to  use  this  great  gift  of  the  gods  in 
a  noble  spirit.  If  he  attains  this  mastery  over  those 
who,  as  he  knows,  once  occupied  a  pinnacle  that 
matched  his  own,  upon  such  especially  he  has  abeady 
sated  his  revenge  and  accomplished  all  that  genuine 
punislunent  required  ;  for  that  man  has  lost  his  hfe 
who  owes  it  to  another,  and  whosoever,  ha\ing  been 
cast  down  from  high  estate  at  his  enemy's  feet,  has 
awaited  the  verdict  of  another  upon  his  hfe  and 
throne,  lives  on  to  the  glory  of  his  preserver,  and 
by  being  saved  confers  more  upon  the  other's  name 
than  if  he  had  been  removed  from  the  eyes  of  men. 
For  he  is  a  lasting  spectacle  of  another's  prowess  ; 
in  a  triumph  he  would  have  passed  quickly  out  of 
sight.  If,  however,  it  has  been  possible  in  safety 
to  leave  also  his  throne  in  his  possession,  and  to 
restore  him  to  the  height  from  which  he  fell,  the 
praise  of  him  who  was  content  to  take  from  a  con- 
quered king  nothing  but  his  glory  will  rise  in  increas- 
ing greatness.  This  is  to  triumph  even  over  his 
own  victory,  and  to  attest  that  he  found  among 
VOL.  I  2e  417 


SENECA 

4  dignum  esset  victore,  apud  victos  invenisse.  Cum 
civibus  et  ignotis  atque  humilibus  eo  moderatius 
agendum  est,  quo  minoris  est  adflixisse  eos.  Qui- 
busdam  libenter  parcas,  a  quibusdam  te  vindicare 
fastidias  et  non  aliter  quam  ab  animalibus  parvis  sed 
obterentem  inquinantibus  reducenda  manus  est ; 
at  in  iis,  qui  in  ore  civitatis  servati  punitique  erunt, 
occasione  notae  clementiae  utendum  est. 

]  22.  Transeamus  ad  alienas  iniurias,  in  quibus 
vindicandis  haec  tria  lex  s^cuta  est,  quae  princeps 
quoque  sequi  debet  :  aut  ut  eum,  quem  punit, 
emendet,  aut  ut  poena  eius  ceteros  meliores  reddat, 
aut  ut  sublatis  malis  securiores  ceteri  vivant.  Ipsos 
facilius  emendabis  minore  poena  ;  diligentius  enim 
vivit,  cui  aliquid  integri  superest.  Nemo  dignitati 
perditae    parcit ;      impunitatis   genus    est    iam    non 

2  habere  poenae  locum.  Civitatis  autem  mores  magis 
corrigit  parcitas  animadversionum  ;  facit  enim 
consuetudinem  peccandi  multitudo  peceantium,  et 
minus  gravis  nota  est,  quam  turba  damnationum 
levat,  et  severitas,  quod  maximum  remedium  habet, 

3  adsiduitate  amittit  auctoritatem.  Constituit  bonos 
mores  civitati  princeps  et  vitia  eluit,  si  patiens 
eorum  est,  non  tamquam  probet,  sed  tamquam 
invitus  et  cum  magno  tormento  ad  castigandum 
veniat.  Verecundiam  peccandi  facit  ipsa  dementia 
418 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XXI.  4-xxii.  3 

the  vanquished  nothing  that  was  worthy  of  the 
victor.  To  his  fellow-countrymen,  to  the  obscure, 
and  to  the  lowly  he  should  show  the  greater  modera- 
tion, as  he  has  the  less  to  gain  by  crushing  them. 
Some  men  we  should  be  glad  to  spare,  on  some  we 
should  scorn  to  be  avenged,  and  we  should  recoil 
from  them  as  from  the  tiny  insects  which  defile  the 
hand  that  crushes  them  ;  but  in  the  case  of  those 
whose  names  ^\■ill  be  upon  *he  hps  of  the  community, 
whether  they  are  spared  or  punished,  the  oppor- 
tunity for  a  notable  clemency  should  be  made  use  of. 
Let  us  pass  now  to  the  injuries  done  to  others,  in 
the  punishment  of  which  these  three  aims,  which  the 
law  has  had  in  \iew,  should  be  kept  in  \iew  also  by 
the  prince  :  either  to  reform  the  man  that  is  punished, 
or  by  punishing  him  to  make  the  rest  better,  or  by 
remo\ing  bad  men  to  let  the  rest  live  in  greater 
security.  You  Avill  more  easily  reform  the  culprits 
themselves  by  the  hghter  form  of  punishment ;  for 
he  will  hve  more  guardedly  who  has  something  left 
to  lose.  No  one  is  sparing  of  a  ruined  reputation  ; 
it  brings  a  sort  of  exemption  from  punishment  to 
have  no  room  left  for  punishment.  The  morals  of 
the  state,  moreover,  are  better  mended  by  the 
sparing  use  of  punitive  measures  ;  for  sin  becomes 
familiar  from  the  multitude  of  those  who  sin,  and 
the  official  stigma  is  less  weighty  if  its  force  is 
weakened  by  the  very  number  that  it  condemns,  and 
severity,  which  provides  the  best  corrective,  loses  its 
potency  by  repeated  application.  Good  morals  are 
estabUshed  in  the  state  and  vice  is  wiped  out  if  a 
prince  is  patient  v\ith  vice,  not  as  if  he  approved  of 
it,  but  as  if  unvvilhngly  and  vvith  great  pain  he 
had  resort  to  chastisement.     The  very  mercifulness 

419 


SENECA 

regentis  ;    gravior  multo  poena  videtur,  quae  a  miti 
viro  constituitur. 

1  23.  Praeterea  videbis  ea  saepe  committi,  quae 
saepe  vindicantur.  Pater  tuus  plures  intra  quin- 
quennium culleo  insuit,  quam  omnibus  saeculis 
insutos  accepimus.  Multo  minus  audebant  liberi 
nefas  ultimum  admittere,  quam  diu  sine  lege  crimen 
fuit.  Summa  enim  prudentia  altissimi  viri  et  rerum 
naturae  peritissimi  maluerunt  velut  incredibile  scelus 
et  ultra  audaciam  positum  praeterire  quam,  dum 
vindicant,  ostendere  posse  fieri ;  itaque  parricidae 
cum  lege  coeperunt,  et  illis  facinus  poena  monstravit ; 
pessimo    vero    loco    pietas    fuit,    postquam    saepius 

2  culleos  vidimus  quam  cruces.  In  qua  civitate  raro 
homines  puniuntur,  in  ea  consensus  fit  innocentiae 
et  indulgetur  velut  publico  bono.  Putet  se  inno- 
centem  esse  civitas,  erit ;  magis  irascetur  a  communi 
frugalitate  desciscentibus,  si  paucos  esse  eos  viderit. 
Periculosum  est,  mihi  crede,  ostendere  civitati, 
quanto  plures  mall  sint. 

1  24.  Dicta  est  aliquando  a  senatu  sententia,  ut 
servos  a  liberis  cultus  distingueret  ;  deinde  apparuit, 
quantum  periculum  immineret,  si  servi  nostri  nume- 
rare  nos  coepissent.  Idem  scito  metuendum  esse, 
si  nulli  ignoscitur ;  cito  apparebit,  pars  civitatis 
deterior    quanto    praegravet.     Non    minus    principi 

"  i.e.,  Claudius,  Nero's  adoptive  father ;  not  a  cruel,  but 
an  antiquarian,  emperor. 

"  i.e.,  punished  more  parricides  ;   cf.  i.  15.  7. 
420 


ON  MERCY,  I.  xxii.  3-xxiv.  1 

of  the  ruler  makes  men  shrink  from  doing  wrong  ; 
the  punishment  which  a  kindly  man  decrees  seems 
all  the  more  severe. 

You  will  notice,  besides,  that  the  sins  repeatedly- 
punished  are  the  sins  repeatedly  committed.  Your 
father"  ^nthin  five  years  had  more  men  sewed  up  in  the 
sack  ^  than,  by  all  accounts,  there  had  been  \-ictims 
of  the  sack  throughout  al'  time.  Children  ventured 
much  less  often  to  incur  the  supreme  sin  so  long  as 
the  crime  lay  outside  the  pale  of  the  law.  For  by 
supreme  wisdom  the  men  of  the  highest  distinction 
and  of  the  deepest  insight  into  the  ways  of  nature 
chose  rather  to  ignore  the  outrage  as  one  incredible 
and  passing  the  bounds  of  boldness,  than  by  punishing 
it  to  point  out  the  possibility  of  its  being  done  ;  and 
so  the  crime  of  parricide  began  with  the  law  against 
it,  and  punishment  showed  children  the  way  to  the 
deed  ;  filial  piety  was  truly  at  its  lowest  ebb  after 
the  sack  became  a  more  common  sight  than  the 
cross.  In  that  state  in  which  men  are  rarely  punished 
a  sympathy  for  uprightness  is  formed,  and  encourage- 
ment is  given  to  this  virtue  as  to  a  common  good. 
Let  a  state  think  itself  blameless,  and  it  ^^^ll  be  so  ; 
its  anger  against  those  who  depart  from  the  general 
sobriety  \\'ill  be  greater  if  it  sees  that  they  are  few. 
Believe  me,  it  is  dangerous  to  show  a  state  in  how 
great  a  majority  evil  men  are. 

A  proposal  was  once  made  in  the  senate  to  dis- 
tinguish slaves  from  free  men  by  their  dress  ;  it  then 
became  apparent  how  great  would  be  the  impending 
danger  if  our  slaves  should  begin  to  count  our  number. 
Be  sure  that  we  have  a  like  danger  to  fear  if  no  man's 
guilt  is  pardoned  ;  it  will  soon  become  apparent  how 
greatly  the  worse  element  of  the  state  preponderates. 

421 


SENECA 

turpia  sunt  multa  supplicia  quam  medico  multa 
2  funera  ;  remissius  imperanti  melius  paretur.  Natura 
contumax  est  humanus  animus  et  in  contrarium 
atque  arduum  nitens  sequiturque  facilius  quam 
ducitur  ;  et  ut  generosi  ac  nobiles  equi  melius  facili 
freno  reguntur,  ita  clementiam  voluntaria  innocentia 
impetu  suo  sequitur,  et  dignam  putat  civitas,  quam 
servet  sibi.     Plus  itaque  hac  via  proficitur. 

1  25.  Crudelitas  minime  humanum  malum  est  in- 
dignumque  tarn  miti  animo  ;  ferina  ista  rabies  est 
sanguine  gaudere  ac  vulneribus  et  abiecto  homine 
in  silvestre  animal  transire.  Quid  enim  interest, 
oro  te,  Alexander,  leoni  Lysimachum  obicias  an  ipse 
laceres  dentibus  tuis  ?  Tuum  illud  os  est,  tua  ilia 
feritas.  O  quam  cuperes  tibi  potius  ungues  esse, 
tibi  rictum  ilium  edendorum  hominum  capacem  ! 
Non  exigimus  a  te,  ut  manus  ista,  exitium  familiarium 
certissimum,  ulli  salutaris  sit,  ut  iste  animus  ferox, 
insatiabile  gentium  malum,  citra  sanguinem  cae- 
demque  satietur  ;  dementia  iam  vocatur,  ad  occi- 
dendum     amicum     cum^     carnifex     inter    homines 

2  eligitur.  Hoc  est,  quare  vel  maxime  abominanda  sit 
saevitia,  quod  excedit  fines  primum  solitos,  deinde 
humanos,  nova  supplicia  conquirit,  ingenium  advocat 
ut^  instrumenta  excogitet  per  quae  varietur  atque 

^  cum  added  by  Baehrens. 
*  ut  added  by  Gertz. 

"  i.e.,  "  mercy." 
*  One  of  Alexander's  generals  ;   cf.  T>e  Ira,  iii.  17.  2. 

422 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XXIV.  1-xxv.  2 

Numerous  executions  are  not  less  discreditable  to  a 
prince  than  are  numerous  funerals  to  a  physician  ; 
the  more  indulgent  the  ruler,  the  better  he  is  obeyed. 
Man's  spirit  is  by  nature  refractorj-,  it  struggles 
against  opposition  and  difficulty,  and  is  more  ready 
to  follow  than  to  be  led  ;  and  as  well-bred  and  high- 
spirited  horses  are  better  managed  by  a  loose  rein, 
so  a  voluntary  uprightress  follows  upon  mercy  under 
its  own  impulse,  and  the  state  accounts  it"  worthy 
to  be  maintained  for  the  state's  own  sake.  By  this 
course,  therefore,  more  good  is  accompHshed. 

Cruelty  is  an  e\i\  thing  befitting  least  of  all  a  man, 
and  is  unworthy  of  his  spirit  that  is  so  kindly  ;  for 
one  to  take  dehght  in  blood  and  wounds  and,  throw- 
ing off  the  man.  to  change  into  a  creature  of  the 
woods,  is  the  madness  of  a  ^^^ld  beast.  For  what 
difference  does  it  make,  I  beg  of  you,  Alexander, 
whether  you  throw  Lysimachus  *  to  a  hon,  or  yourself 
tear  him  to  pieces  with  your  teeth  ?  That  hon's  maw 
is  yours,  and  yours  its  savager}".  How  pleased  you 
would  have  been  had  its  claws  been  yom^  instead, 
and  yours  those  gaping  jaws,  big  enough  to  swallow 
men  I  We  do  not  require  of  you  that  that  hand  of 
yours,  the  surest  destruction  of  familiar  friends, 
should  save  the  life  of  any  man,  that  yoiu*  savage 
spirit,  the  insatiate  curse  of  nations,  should  sate 
itself  with  anything  short  of  blood  and  slaughter  ; 
we  call  it  now  a  mercy  if  to  kill  a  friend  the  butcher  is 
chosen  among  niankind.  The  reason  why  brutality 
is  most  of  all  abhorred  is  this  :  because  it  trans- 
t^resses  first  all  ordinary,  and  then  all  human, 
liounds,  searches  out  new  kinds  of  torture,  calls 
ingenuity  into  play  to  invent  de\ices  by  which 
suffering  may  be  varied  and  prolonged,  and  takes 

423 


SENECA 

extendatur  dolor,  delectatur  malis  hominum  ;  tunc 
illi  dirus  animi  morbus  ad  insaniam  pervenit  ultimam, 
cum    crudelitas    versa    est    in    voluptatem    et    iam 

3  occidere  hominem  iuvat.  Matura  talem  virum  a 
tergo  sequitur  aversio,  odia,  venena,  gladii ;  tarn 
multis  periculis  petitur,  quam  multorum  ipse  peri- 
culum  est,  privatisque  non  numquam  consiliis,  alias 
vero  consternatione  publica  circumvenitur.  Levis 
enim  et  privata  pernicies  non  totas  urbes  movet ; 
quod  late  furere  coepit  et  omnes  appetit,  undique 

4  configitur.  Serpentes  parvulae  fallunt  nee  publice 
conquiruntur  ;  ubi  aliqua  solitam  mensuram  transit 
et  in  monstrum  excrevit,  ubi  fontes  sputu  inficit  et, 
si  adflavit,  deurit  obteritque,  quacumque  incessit, 
ballistis    petitur.     Possunt    verba    dare    et    evadere 

6  pusilla  mala,  ingentibus  obviam  itur.  Sic  unus  aeger 
ne  domum  quidem  perturbat ;  at  ubi  crebris  mortibus 
pestilentiam  esse  apparuit,  conclamatio  civitatis  ac 
fuga  est,  et  dis  ipsis  manus  intentantur.  Sub  uno 
aliquo  tecto  flamma  apparuit  :  familia  vicinique 
aquam  ingerunt  ;  at  incendium  vastum  et  multas 
iam  domos  depastum  parte  urbis  obruitur. 

1  26.  Crudelitatem  privatorum  quoque  serviles 
manus  sub  certo  crucis  periculo  ultae  sunt ;  tyran- 
norum  gentes   populique   et,   quorum   erat  malum, 

"  With  probably  allusion  to  Caligula,  the  stock  example. 
424 


ON  xMERCY,  I.  xxv.  2-xxvi    1 

delight  in  the  afflictions  of  mankind  ;  then  indeed 
the  dread  disease  of  that  man's  "  mind  has  reached 
the  farthest  limit  of  insanity,  when  cruelty  has 
changed  into  pleasure  and  to  kill  a  human  being 
now  becomes  a  joy.  Hot  upon  the  heels  of  such  a 
man  follow  loathing,  hatred,  poison,  and  the  sword  ; 
he  is  assailed  by  as  many  perils  as  there  are  many  men 
to  whom  he  is  himself  a  peril,  and  he  is  beset  some- 
times by  the  plots  of  individuals,  at  times,  indeed, 
by  an  uprising  of  the  community.  For  whole  cities 
are  not  roused  by  the  trivial  destruction  of  single 
individuals ;  but  that  which  begins  to  rage  wide- 
spread and  aims  at  all  becomes  the  mark  of  every 
weapon.  Tiny  snakes  pass  unnoticed  and  no 
organized  hunt  is  made  for  them  ;  but  when  one 
exceeds  the  usual  size  and  grows  into  a  monster, 
when  it  poisons  springs  with  its  venom,  with  its 
breath  scorches  and  destroys,  then,  wherever  it 
advances,  it  is  attacked  \\ith  engines  of  war.  Petty 
evils  may  elude  us  and  escape,  but  we  go  out  against 
the  great  ones.  So,  too,  one  sick  person  causes  no 
confusion  even  in  his  own  household  ;  but  when 
repeated  deaths  show  that  a  plague  prevails,  there 
is  a  general  outcry  and  flight  of  the  community, 
and  threatening  hands  are  hfted  toward  the  gods 
themselves.  If  a  fire  is  discovered  beneath  some 
single  roof,  the  family  and  the  neighbours  pour  on 
water  ;  but  a  widespread  conflagration  that  has  now 
consumed  many  homes  is  put  down  only  by  the 
destruction  of  half  the  city. 

The  cruelty  even  of  men  in  private  station  has 
been  avenged  by  the  hands  of  slaves  despite  their 
certain  risk  of  crucifixion  ;  nations  and  peoples  have 
set  to  work  to  extirpate  the  cruelty  of  tyrants,  when 

425 


SENECA 

et  ei,  quibus  inminebat,  exscindere  adgressi  sunt. 
Aliquando  sua  praesidia  in  ipsos  consurrexerunt 
perfidiamque  et  impietatem  et  feritatem  et,  quidquid 
ab  illis  didicerant,  in  ipsos  exercuerunt.  Quid  enim 
potest  quisquam  ab  eo  sperare,  quern  malum  esse 
doeuit  ?     Non  diu   nequitia   apparet   nee,   quantum 

2  iubetur,  peccat.  Sed  puta  esse  tutam  crudelitatem, 
quale  eius  regnum  est  ?  Non  aliud  quam  captarum 
urbium  forma  et  terribiles  facies  publici  metus. 
Omnia  maesta,  trepida,  confusa  ;  voluptates  ipsae 
timentur ;  non  convivia  securi  ineunt,  in  quibus 
lingua  sollicite  etiam  ebriis  custodienda  est,  non 
speetacula,  ex  quibus  materia  criminis  ac  periculi 
quaeritur.  Apparentur  licet  magna  impensa  et 
regiis  opibus  et  artificum  exquisitis  nominibus,  quem 
tamen  ludi  in  carcere  iuvent  ? 

3  Quod  istud,  di  boni,  malum  est  occidere,  saevire, 
delectari  sono  catenarum  et  civium  capita  decidere, 
quocumque  ventum  est,  multum  sanguinis  fundere, 
aspectu  suo  terrere  ac  fugare  ?  Quae  alia  vita 
esset,  si  leones  ursique  regnarent,  si  serpentibus 
in  nos  ac  noxiosissimo  cuique  animali  daretur  po- 

4  testas  ?  Ilia  rationis  expertia  et  a  nobis  immanitatis 
crimine  damnata  abstinent  suis,  et  tuta  est  etiam 
inter  feras  similitudo  ;  horum  ne  a  necessariis  quidem 
sibi  rabies  temperat,  sed  externa  suaque  in  aequo 
426 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XXVI.  1-4 

some  were  suffering  from  it  and  others  felt  its 
menace.  At  times  the  tyrants'  own  guards  have 
risen  up  against  them,  and  have  practised  upon  their 
persons  the  treachery  and  disloyalty  and  brutality 
and  all  else  that  they  themselves  had  taught  them. 
For  what  can  any  one  expect  from  him  whom  he 
himself  has  taught  to  be  bad  ?  Wickedness  is  not 
obsequious  long,  nor  guil;:y  of  crime  only  to  the  extent 
that  it  is  bid.  But  suppose  that  cruel  rule  is  safe, 
what  sort  of  a  kingdom  has  it  ?  Nothing  but  the 
bare  outUnes  of  captured  cities  and  the  terror- 
stricken  countenances  of  widespread  fear.  Every- 
where is  sorrow,  panic,  and  disorder  ;  even  pleasures 
give  rise  to  fear  ;  men  are  not  safe  when  they  go  to 
the  festal  board,  for  there  the  tongue  even  of  the 
drunkard  must  guard  itself  with  care,  nor  to  the 
pubUc  shows  where  the  material  is  sought  for  accusa- 
tion and  ruin.  Provided  though  they  are  at  huge 
expense,  in  regal  opulence,  and  with  artists  of  the 
choicest  reputation,  yet  whom  would  games  dehght 
in  prison  ? 

Ye  gods  !  what  curse  is  this — to  kill,  to  rage,  to 
take  dehght  in  the  clank  of  chains  and  in  cutting  off 
the  heads  of  fellow-countrymen,  to  spill  streams  of 
blood  wherever  one  may  go,  and  by  one's  appearance 
to  terrify  and  repel  ?  What  else  would  living  be  if 
lions  and  bears  held  sway,  if  serpents  and  all  the 
creatures  that  are  most  destructive  were  given 
supremacy  over  us  ?  These,  devoid  of  reason  and 
doomed  to  death  by  us  on  the  plea  of  their  ferocity, 
yet  spare  their  kind,  and  even  among  wild  beasts 
likeness  forms  a  safeguard ;  but  t}Tants  do  not 
withhold  their  fury  even  from  their  kin,  strangers 
and  friends  are  treated  just  alike,  and  the  more  they 

427 


SENECA 

habet,  quo  plus  se  exercitat,  eo  incitatior.^  A 
singulorum  deinde  caedibus  in  exitia  gentium  serpit, 
et  inicere  tectis  ignem,  aratrum  vetustis  urbibus 
inducere  potentiam  putat  ;  et  unum  occidi  iubere  aut 
alterum  parum  imperatorium  credit  ;  nisi  eodem 
tempore  grex  miserorum  sub  ictu  stetit,  erudelitatem 
suam  in  ordinem  coactam  putat. 

Felicitas  ilia  multis  salutem  dare  et  ad  vitam  ab 
ipsa  morte  revocare  et  mereri  dementia  civicam. 
Nullum  ornamentum  principis  fastigio  dignius  pul- 
chriusque  est  quam  ilia  corona  ob  cives  servatos,  non 
hostilia  arma  detracta  victis,  non  currus  barbarorum 
sanguine  cruenti,  non  parta  bello  spolia.  Haec 
divina  potentia  est  gregatim  ac  publice  servare  ; 
multos  quidem  occidere  et  indiscretos  incendii  ac 
ruinae  potentia  est. 

^  <eo  incitat>ior  supplied  by  Gertz. 

»  A  chaplet  of  oak  leaves,  with  which  the  soldier  who 
had  saved  the  life  of  a  fellow-Roman  in  battle  was 
honoured.  The  distinction  was  bestowed  on  Augustus 
as  the  saviour  of  citizens  and  was  frequently  assumed  by 
later  emperors. 


428 


ON  MERCY,  I.  XXVI.  4-5 

indulge  their  fury,  the  more  \iolent  it  becomes. 
Then  from  the  murder  of  one  and  again  another  it 
creeps  on  to  the  wiping  out  of  nations,  and  to  hurl 
the  firebrand  on  the  roofs  of  houses  and  to  drive 
the  plough  over  ancient  cities  are  considered  a  sign 
of  power,  and  to  order  the  kilhng  of  one  or  two  is 
believed  to  be  too  small  a  show  of  royal  might  ; 
unless  at  one  time  a  herd  of  poor  wretches  stands 
beneath  the  blade,  rage  counts  its  cruelty  forced 
under  control. 

True  happiness  consists  in  giving  safety  to  many, 
in  calling  back  to  life  from  the  very  verge  of  death, 
and  in  earning  the  ci\ic  crown"  by  showing  mercy. 
No  decoration  is  more  worthy  of  the  eminence  of  a 
prince  or  more  beautiful  than  that  crown  bestowed 
for  saving  the  hves  of  fellow-citizens  ;  not  trophies 
torn  from  a  vanquished  enemy,  nor  chariots  stained 
•with  barbarian  blood,  nor  spoils  acquired  in  war. 
To  save  life  by  crowds  and  universally,  this  is  a 
godlike  use  of  power;  but  to  kill  in  multitudes 
and  without  distinction  is  the  power  of  conflagration 
and  of  ruin. 


429 


AD  NERONEM  CAESAREM 
DE  CLEMENTIA 

LIBER    II 

1  1.  Ut  de  dementia  scriberem,  Nero  Caesar,  una 
me  vox  tua  maxime  compulit,  quam  ego  non  sine 
admiratione  et,  cum  diceretur,  audisse  memini  et 
deinde  aliis  narrasse,  vocem  generosam,  magni 
animi,  magnae  lenitatis,  quae  non  composita  nee 
alienis  auribus  data  subito  erupit  et  bonitatem  tuam 
cum   fortuna    tua    litigantem    in   medium   adduxit. 

2  Animadversurus  in  latrones  duos  Burrus  praefectus 
tuus,  vir  egregius  et  tibi  principi  natus,  exigebat 
a  te,  scriberes,  in  quos  et  ex  qua  causa  animadverti 
velles ;  hoc  saepe  dilatum  ut  aliquando  fieret, 
instabat.  Invitus  invito  cum  chartam  protulisset 
traderetque,     exclamasti :     "  Vellem    litteras     ne- 

3  scirem  !  "  O  dignam  vocem,  quam  audirent  omnes 
gentes,  quae  Romanum  imperium  incolunt  quaeque 
iuxta  iacent  dubiae  libertatis  quaeque  se  contra 
viribus  aut  animis  attollunt  !  O  vocem  in  con- 
430 


TO  THE  EMPEROR  NERO 
ON  MERCY 


I  HAVE  been  especially  induced  to  write  on  mercy 
by  a  single  utterance  of  yours,  Nero  Caesar,  which 
I  remember,  when  it  was  made,  I  heard  not  without 
admiration  and  afterwards  repeated  to  others — a 
noble,  high-minded  utterance,  showing  great  gentle- 
ness, which  unpremeditated  and  not  intended  for 
others'  ears  suddenly  burst  from  you,  and  brought 
into  the  open  your  kind-heartedness  chafing  against 
your  lot.  Burrus,  your  prefect,  a  rare  man,  born  to 
serve  a  prince  like  you,  was  about  to  execute  two 
brigands,  and  was  bringing  pressure  upon  you  to 
record  their  names  and  the  reasons  why  you  wished 
their  execution  ;  this,  often  deferred,  he  was  insist- 
ing should  at  last  be  done.  He  was  reluctant,  you 
were  reluctant,  and,  when  he  had  produced  the  paper 
and  was  handing  it  to  you,  you  exclaimed,  "  Would 
that  I  had  not  learned  to  ^^Tite."  \Miat  an  utterance  ! 
All  nations  should  have  heard  it — those  who  dwell 
^^ithin  the  Roman  empire,  and  those  on  its  borders 
who  are  scarcely  assured  of  their  liberty,  and  those 
who  through  strength  or  courage  rise  up  against  it 
WTiat  an  utterance  !     It  should  have  been  spoken 

431 


SENECA 

tionem  omnium  mortalium  mittendam,  in  cuius 
verba  principes  regesque  iurarent  !  O  vocem  publica 
generis  humani  innocentia  dignam,  cui  redderetur 
4  antiquum  illud  saeculum !  Nunc  profecto  con- 
sentire  decebat  ad  aequum  bonumque  expulsa  alieni 
cupidine,  ex  qua  omne  animi  malum  oritur,  pietatem 
integritatemque  cum  fide  ac  modestia  resurgere  et 
vitia  diuturno  abusa  regno  dare  tandem  felici  ac 
puro  saeculo  locum. 

1  2.  Futurum  hoc,  Caesar,  ex  magna  parte  sperare 
et  confidere  libet.  Tradetur  ista  animi  tui  man- 
suetudo  difFundeturque  paulatim  per  omne  imperii 
corpus,  et  cuncta  in  similitudinem  tuam  formabuntur. 
A  capite  bona  valetudo  :  inde  omnia  vegeta  sunt 
atque  erecta  aut  languore  demissa,  prout  animus 
eorum  vivit  aut  marcet.  Erunt  cives,  erunt  socii 
digni  hac  bonitate,  et  in  totum  orbem  recti  mores 

2  revertentur  ;  parcetur  ubique  manibus  tuis.  Diutius 
me  morari  hie  pater e,  non  ut  blandum  auribus  tuis 
(nee  enim  hie  mihi  mos  est ;  maluerim  veris  oflfendere 
quam  placere  adulando)  ;  quid  ergo  est  ?  Praeter 
id,  quod  bene  factis  dictisque  tuis  quam  famiharissi- 
mum  esse  te  cupio,  ut,  quod  nunc  natura  et  impetus 
est,  fiat  indicium,  illud  mecum  considero  multas 
voces  magnas,  sed  detestabiles,  in  vitam  humanam 
pervenisse  celebresque  vulgo  ferri,  ut  illam  : 
"  Oderint,  dum  metuant,"  cui  Graecus  versus  similis 

«  The  Golden  Age— Shelly's 

The  world's  golden  dawn 
Earliest  and  most  benign. 
*  Cf.  i.  12.  4. 

'  'E/ioC  davdvTOS  yaia  fux^W'^  irvpi' 

oi'dep  fxiXei  fioi'  rd/jLa  yap  koXQs  ^xei. 
(Nauck.  Traff.  Graec.  Fragm.,  Adesp.,  513.) 

432 


ON  MERCY,  II.  I.  3-n.  2 

before  a  gathering  of  all  mankind,  that  unto  it  princes 
and  kings  might  pledge  allegiance.  What  an  utter- 
ance !  Worthy  of  the  universal  innocence  of  man- 
kind, in  favour  whereof  that  long  past  age  "  should  be 
renewed.  Now  assuredly  it  were  fitting  that  men, 
thrusting  out  covetousness  from  which  springs  every 
evil  of  the  heart,  should  conspire  for  righteousness 
and  goodness,  that  piety  and  uprightness  along  ^\-ith 
honour  and  temperance  should  rise  again,  and  that 
vice,  ha\"ing  misused  its  long  reign,  should  at  length 
give  place  to  an  age  of  happiness  and  purity. 

We  are  pleased  to  hope  and  trust,  Caesar,  that  in 
large  measure  this  ^\ill  happen.  That  kindness  of 
your  heart  will  be  recounted,  ^\^ll  be  diffused  httle 
by  httle  throughout  the  whole  body  of  the  empire, 
and  all  tilings  ^^•ill  be  moulded  into  your  hkeness. 
It  is  from  the  head  that  comes  the  health  of  the 
body  ;  it  is  through  it  that  all  the  parts  are  lively 
and  alert  or  languid  and  drooping  according  as 
their  animating  spirit  has  life  or  withers.  There 
^\^ll  be  citizens,  there  will  be  alhes  worthy  of  this 
goodness,  and  uprightness  will  return  to  the  whole 
world ;  your  hands  will  every^vhere  be  spared. 
Permit  me  to  linger  longer  on  this  point,  but  not 
merely  to  please  your  ears  ;  for  that  is  not  my  way — 
I  would  rather  offend  with  the  truth  than  please  by 
flattery.  What  then  is  my  reason  ?  Besides  wishing 
you  to  be  as  familiar  as  possible  with  your  own  good 
deeds  and  words  in  order  that  what  is  now  a  natural 
impulse  may  become  a  principle,  I  reflect  upon  this, 
that  many  striking  but  odious  sayings  have  made 
their  entry  into  human  life  and  are  bandied  about 
as  famous  ;  as  for  example,  "  Let  them  hate  if  only 
they  fear,"  *  and  the  Greek  verse ''  similar  to  it,  in 
VOL.  I  2  F  433 


SENECA 


I 


est,  qui  se  mortuo  terrain  misceri  ignibus  iubet,  et 
3  alia  huius  notae.  Ac  nescio  quomodo  ingenia  in^ 
immani  et  in\isa  materia  secundiore  ore  expresserunt 
sensus  vehementes  et  concitatos  ;  nullam  adhuc 
vocem  audii  ex  bono  lenique  animosam.  Quid  ergo 
est  ?  Ut  raro,  invitus  et  cum  magna  cunctatione, 
ita  aliquando  scribas  necesse  est  istud,  quod  tibi  in 
odium  litteras  adduxit,  sed,  sicut  facis,  cum  magna 
cunctatione,  cum  multis  dilationibus. 

1  3.  Et  ne  forte  decipiat  nos  speciosum  clementiae 
nomen  aliquando  et  in  contrarium  abducat,  videamus. 
quid  sit  dementia  qualisque  sit  et  quos  fines  habeat. 

Clementia  est  temperantia  animi  in  potestate 
ulciscendi  vel  lenitas  superioris  adversus  inferiorem 
in  constituendis  poenis.  Plura  proponere  tutius 
est,  ne  una  finitio  parum  rem  comprehendat  et,  ut 
ita  dicam,  formula  excidat  ;  itaque  dici  potest  et 
inclinatio   animi   ad   lenitatem   in   poena    exigenda. 

2  Ilia  finitio  contradictiones  inveniet,  quamvis  maxime 
ad  verum  accedat,  si  dixerimus  clementiam  esse 
moderationem  aliquid  ex  merita  ac  debita  poena 
remittentem  :  reclamabitur  nullam  \irtutem  cui- 
quam  minus  debito  facere.  Atqui  hoc  omnes 
intellegunt  clementiam  esse,  quae  se  flectit  citra  id, 
quod  merito  constitui  posset. 

1      4.  Huic  contrariam  imperiti  putant  severitatem  ; 

^  in  added  by  Madvig :  ingenia  inmania  et  invisa  materia 
secundiori  expresserunt  OT  corrected  by  Lipsius. 

"  Here,  apparently  "pity,"  which  is  shown  below  to  be 
a  fault,  not  a  virtue. 

''  A  praetor's  statement  of  the  issue  between  contestant 
in  a  suit  was  called  a  formula.     This  was  transmitted  in 
the  iudex,  who  after  hearing  the  evidence  decided  whether  j 
the  statement  was  true  or  false.     Hence  to  lose  a  suit  was  ; 
formula  cadere  or  excidere. 

4S4 


ON  MERCY,  II.  II.  2-iv.  1 

which  a  man  would  have  the  earth  convulsed  with 
flame  when  once  he  is  dead,  and  others  of  this  type. 
And  somehow  or  other  gifted  men  when  dealing  ^nth 
a  cruel  and  hateful  theme  have  moulded  violent  and 
passionate  thoughts  into  more  felicitous  phrase ;  never 
before  have  I  heard  from  good  and  gentle  lips  an 
utterance  that  was  full  of  spirit.  What  then  is  the 
conclusion  ?  Though  it  oe  seldom,  against  your  ^^^ll, 
and  after  great  reluctance,  yet  there  are  times  when 
you  must  wTite  the  sort  of  thing  that  made  you  hate 
all  WTiting,  but  you  must  do  it,  as  you  now  do,  after 
great  reluctance,  after  much  procrastination. 

And  in  order  that  we  may  not  perchance  be 
deceived  at  times  by  the  plausible  name  of  mercy 
and  led  into  an  opposite  quality,"  let  us  see  what 
mercy  is,  what  is  its  nature,  and  what  its  hmitations. 

Mercy  means  restraining  the  mind  from  vengeance 
when  it  has  the  power  to  take  it,  or  the  leniency  of 
a  superior  towards  an  inferior  in  fixing  punishment. 
In  the  fear  that  one  definition  may  not  be  com- 
prehensive enough,  and,  so  to  speak,  the  case*  be 
lost,  it  is  safer  to  offer  several ;  and  so  mercy  may 
also  be  termed  the  inclination  of  the  mind  towards 
leniency  in  exacting  punishment.  The  follo^ving 
(definition  -will  encounter  objections,  however  closely 
iit  approaches  the  truth  ;  if  we  shall  say  that  merc}^ 
lis  the  moderation  which  remits  something  from  the 
punishment  that  is  deserved  and  due,  it  will  be 
objected  that  no  \-irtue  gives  to  any  man  less  than 
Tiis  due.  Everybody,  however,  understands  that 
the  fact  of  the  case  is  that  mercy  consists  in 
stopping  short  of  what  might  have  been  deservedly 
imposed. 

The  ill-informed  think  that  its  opposite  is  strict- 

435 


SENECA 

sed  nulla  virtus  virtuti  contraria  est.  Quid  ergo 
opponitur  clementiae  ?  Crudelitas,  quae  nihil  aliud 
est  quam  atrocitas  animi  in  exigendis  poenis.  "  Sed 
quidam  non  exigunt  poenas,  crudeles  tamen  sunt, 
tamquam  qui  ignotos  homines  et  obvios  non  in 
compendium,  sed  occidendi  causa  occidunt  nee  inter- 
ficere  contenti  saeviunt,  ut  Busiris  ille  et  Procrustes 
et  piratae,  qui  captos  verberant  et  in  ignem  vivos 

2  imponunt."  Ha6c  crudelitas  quidem  ;  sed  quia  nee 
ultionem  sequitur  (non  enim  laesa  est)  nee  peccato 
alicui  irascitur  (nullum  enim  antecessit  crimen), 
extra  finitionem  nostram  cadit  ;  finitio  enim  con- 
tinebat  in  poenis  exigendis  intemperantiam  animi. 
Possumus  dicere  non  esse  hanc  crudelitatem,  sed 
feritatem,  cui  voluptati  saevitia  est  ;  possumus 
insaniam  vocare  :  nam  varia  sunt  genera  eius  et 
nullum  certius,  quam  quod  in  caedes  hominum  et 

3  lancinationes  pervenit.  Illos  ergo  crudeles  vocabo, 
qui  puniendi  causam  habent,  modum  non  habent, 
sicut  in  Phalari,  quem  aiunt  non  quidem  in  homines 
innocentes,  sed  super  humanum  ac  probabilem 
modum  saevisse.  Possumus  efFugere  cavillationem 
et  ita  finire,  ut  sit  crudelitas  inclinatio  animi  ad 
asperiora.  Hanc  dementia  repellit  longe  iussam 
stare  a  se  ;   cum  severitate  illi  convenit. 

4  Ad  rem  pertinet  quaerere  hoc  loco,  quid  sit 
misericordia ;  plerique  enim  ut  virtutem  earn 
laudant  et  bonum  hominem  vocant  misericordem. 
Et  haec  vitium  animi  est.  Utraque  circa  severitatem 
circaque  clementiam  posita  sunt,  quae  vitare  de- 
bemus  ;  per  speciem  enim  severitatis  in  crudelitatem 


436 


ON  MERCY,  II.  IV.  1-4 

ness  ;  but  no  \-irtue  is  the  opposite  of  a  virtue.  What 
then  is  set  over  against  mercy  ?  It  is  cruelty,  which 
is  nothing  else  than  harshness  of  mind  in  exacting 
punishment.  "  But,"  you  say,  "  there  are  some  who 
do  not  exact  punishment,  and  yet  are  cruel,  such  as 
those  who  kill  the  strangers  they  meet,  not  for  the 
sake  of  gain,  but  for  the  sake  of  kilhng,  and,  not 
content  ^^"ith  killing,  they  torture,  as  the  notorious 
Busiris  and  Procrustes,  and  the  pirates  who  lash  their 
captives  and  commit  them  to  the  flames  alive." 
This  indeed  is  cruelty  ;  but  because  it  does  not 
result  from  vengeance — for  no  injur}'  was  suffered — 
and  no  sin  stirs  its  wTath — ^for  no  crime  preceded  it — 
it  falls  outside  of  our  definition  ;  for  by  the  definition 
the  mental  excess  was  limited  to  the  exaction  of 
punishment.  That  which  finds  pleasure  in  torture 
we  may  say  is  not  cruelty,  but  savager}- — we  may 
even  call  it  madness  ;  for  there  are  various  kinds  of 
madness,  and  none  is  more  unmistakable  than  that 
which  reaches  the  point  of  murdering  and  mutilating 
men.  Those,  then,  that  I  shall  call  cruel  are  those 
who  have  a  reason  for  punishing,  but  do  not  have 
moderation  in  it,  like  Phalaris,  who,  they  say, 
tortured  men,  even  though  they  were  not  innocent, 
in  a  manner  that  was  inhuman  and  incredible. 
Avoiding  sophistry  we  may  define  cruelty*  to  be  the 
inchnation  of  the  mind  toward  the  side  of  harshness. 
This  quality'  mercy  repels  and  bids  it  stand  afar  from 
her  ;  with  strictness  she  is  in  harmony. 

At  this  point  it  is  pertinent  to  ask  what  pity  is. 
For  many  commend  it  as  a  virtue,  and  call  a  pitiful 
man  good.  But  this  too  is  a  mental  defect.  We 
ought  to  avoid  both,  closely  related  as  they  are  to 
strictness  and  to   mercy.     For  under  the  guise   of 

437 


SENECA 

incidimus,^  per  speciem  clementiae  in  misei'icordiam. 
In  hoc  leviore  periculo  erratur,  sed  par  error  est  a 

1  vero  recedentium.  5.  Ergo  quemadmodum  religio 
deos  colit,  superstitio  violat,  ita  clementiam  man- 
suetudinemque  omnes  boni  viri  praestabunt,  miseri- 
cordiam  autem  vitabunt ;  est  enim  vitium  pusilli 
animi  ad  speciem  alienorum  malorum  succidentis. 
Itaque  pessimo  cuique  familiarissima  est ;  anus  et 
mulierculae  sunt,  quae  lacrimis  nocentissimorum 
moventur,  quae,  si  liceret,  carcerem  efFringerent. 
Misericordia  non  causam,  sed  fortunam  spectat  ; 
dementia  rationi  accedit. 

2  Scio  male  audire  apud  imperitos  sectam  Stoicorum 
tamquam  duram  nimis  et  minime  principibus  regi- 
busque  bonum  daturam  consilium  ;  obicitur  illi, 
quod  sapientem  negat  misereri,  negat  ignoscere. 
Haec,  si  per  se  ponantur,  invisa  sunt  ;  videntur 
enim    nullam    relinquere    spem    humanis    erroribus, 

3  sed  omnia  delicta  ad  poenam  deducere.  Quod  si 
est,  quidnam  haec  scientia,  quae  dediscere  humani- 
tatem  iubet  portumque  adversus  fortunam  certis- 
simum  mutuo  auxilio  cludit  ?  Sed  nulla  secta 
benignior  leniorque  est,  nulla  amantior  hominum 
et  communis  boni  attentior,  ut  propositum  sit  usui 
esse  et  auxilio  nee  sibi  tantum,  sed  universis  sin- 

4  gulisque  consulere.  Misericordia  est  aegritudo  animi 
ob  alienarum  miseriarum  speciem  aut  tristitia  ex 
alienis  malis  contracta,  quae  accidere  immerentibus 

^  per  .  .  .  incidimus  supplied  by  Gertz. 
438 


ON  MERCY,  II.  IV.  4-v.  4 

strictness  we  fall  into  cruelty,  under  the  guise  of 
mercy  into  pity.  In  the  latter  case  a  Ughter  risk  is 
involved,  it  is  true,  but  the  error  is  equal  in  both, 
since  in  both  we  fall  slxort  of  what  is  right.  Con- 
sequently, just  as  religion  does  honour  to  the  gods, 
while  superstition  >\Tongs  them,  so  good  men  will  all 
display  mercy  and  gentleness,  but  pity  they  ^vill 
avoid  ;  for  it  is  the  failing  of  a  weak  nature  that 
succumbs  to  the  sight  of  others'  ills.  And  so  it  is 
most  often  seen  in  the  poorest  tjpes  of  persons  ; 
there  are  old  women  and  wretched  females  who  are 
moved  by  the  tears  of  the  worst  criminals,  who,  if 
they  could,  would  break  open  their  prison.  Pity 
regards  the  plight,  not  the  cause  of  it ;  mercy  is 
combined  with  reason. 

I  am  aware  that  among  the  ill-informed  the  Stoic 
school  is  unpopular  on  the  ground  that  it  is  excess- 
ively harsh  and  not  at  all  likely  to  give  good  counsel 
to  princes  and  kings  ;  the  criticism  is  made  that  it 
does  not  permit  a  ^nse  man  to  be  pitiful,  does  not 
permit  him  to  pardon.  Such  doctrine,  if  stated  in 
the  abstract,  is  hateful  ;  for,  seemingly,  no  hope  is 
left  to  human  error,  but  all  failures  are  brought  to 
punishment.  And  if  this  is  so,  what  kind  of  a  theory 
is  it  that  bids  us  unlearn  the  lesson  of  humanity,  and 
closes  the  surest  refuge  against  ill-fortune,  the  haven 
of  mutual  help  ?  But  the  fact  is,  no  school  is  more 
kindly  and  gentle,  none  more  full  of  love  to  nian 
and  more  concerned  for  the  common  good,  so  that 
it  is  its  avowed  object  to  be  of  service  and  assistance, 
and  to  regard  not  merely  self-interest,  but  the 
interest  of  each  and  all.  Pity  is  the  sorrow  of  the 
mind  brought  about  by  the  sight  of  the  distress  of 
others,  t)r  sadness  caused  by  the  ills  of  others  which 

439 


SENECA 

credit ;  aegritudo  autem  in  sapientem  virum  non 
cadit  ;  serena  eius  mens  est,  nee  quicquam  incidere 
potest,  quod  illam  obducat.  Nihilque  aeque  ho- 
minem  quam  magnus  animus  decet  ;  non  potest 
5  autem  magnus  esse  idem  ac  maestus.  Maeror  con- 
tundit  mentes,  abicit,  contrahit  ;  hoc  sapienti  ne 
in  suis  quidem  accidet  calamitatibus,  sed  omnem 
fortunae  iram  reverberabit  et  ante  se  franget ; 
eandem  semper  faciem  servabit,  placidam,  incon- 
cussam,  quod  facere  non  posset,  si  tristitiam  reciperet. 

1  6.  Adice,  quod  sapiens  et  providet  et  in  expedito 
consilium  habet  ;  numquam  autem  liquidum  sin- 
cerumque  ex  turbido  venit.  Tristitia  inhabilis  est 
ad  dispiciendas  res,  utilia  excogitanda,  periculosa 
vitanda,   aequa   aestimanda  ;     ergo   non   miseretur, 

2  quia  id  sine  miseria  animi  non  fit.  Cetera  omnia, 
quae,  qui  miserentur,  volo  facere,  libens  et  altus 
animo  faciet  ;  succurret  alienis  lacrimis,  non  accedet  ; 
dabit  manum  naufrago,  exuli  hospitium,  egenti 
stipem,  non  hanc  contumeliosam,  quam  pars  maior 
horum,  qui  misericordes  videri  volunt,  abicit  et 
fastidit,  quos  adiuvat,  contingique  ab  iis  timet,  sed 
ut  homo  homini  ex  communi  dabit  ;  donabit  lacrimis 
maternis  filium  et  catenas  solvi  iubebit  et  ludo 
eximet  et  cadaver  etiam  noxium  sepeliet,  sed  faciet 

3  ista  tranquilla  mente,  vultu  suo.  Ergo  non  misere- 
bitur  sapiens,  sed  succurret,  sed  proderit,  in  com- 


4i0 


ON  MERCY,  II.  V.  4-^^.  3 

it  believes  come  undeservedly.  But  no  sorrow  befalls 
the  wise  man  ;  his  mind  is  serene,  and  nothing  can 
happen  to  becloud  it.  Nothing,  too,  so  much  befits 
a  man  as  superiority*  of  mind  ;  but  the  mind  cannot 
at  the  same  time  be  superior  and  sad.  Sorrow  blunts 
its  powers,  dissipates  and  hampers  them  ;  this  Anil 
not  happen  to  a  \vise  man  even  in  the  case  of  personal 
calamit}',  but  he  \\i\\  beat  back  all  the  rage  of  fortune 
and  crush  it  first  ;  he  A\ill  maintain  always  the  same 
calm,  unshaken  appearance,  and  he  could  not  do  this 
if  he  were  accessible  to  sadness. 

Consider,  further,  that  the  wise  man  uses  foresight, 
and  keeps  in  readiness  a  plan  of  action ;  but  what 
comes  from  a  troubled  source  is  never  clear  and  pure. 
Sorrow  is  not  adapted  to  the  discernment  of  fact,  to 
the  discovery  of  expedients,  to  the  avoidance  of 
dangers,  or  the  weighing  of  justice  ;  he,  consequently, 
Avill  not  suffer  pity,  because  there  cannot  be  pity 
without  mental  suffering.  All  else  which  I  would 
have  those  who  feel  pity  do,  he  \vi\\  do  gladly  and  with 
a  lofty  spirit ;  he  vriW  bring  relief  to  another's  tears, 
but  A^ill  not  add  his  oaati  ;  to  the  shipwTecked  man  he 
will  give  a  hand,  to  the  exile  shelter,  to  the  needy 
alms  ;  he  ^\i\\  not  do  as  most  of  those  who  wish  to 
be  thought  pitiful  do — fling  insultingly  their  alms, 
and  scorn  those  whom  they  help,  and  shrink  from 
contact  Avith  them — but  he  will  give  as  a  man  to  his 
fellow-man  out  of  the  common  store  ;  he  aWII  grant 
to  a  mother's  tears  the  life  of  her  son,  the  captive's 
chains  he  will  order  to  be  broken,  he  will  release  the 
gladiator  from  his  training,  he  will  bury  the  carcass 
even  of  a  criminal,  but  he  will  do  these  things  with  un- 
ruffled mind,  and  a  countenance  under  control.  The 
wise  man,  therefore,  will  not  pity,  but  will  succour, 

441 


SENECA 

mune  auxilium  natus  ac  bonum  publicum,  ex  quo 
dabit  cuique  partem.  Etiam  ad  calamitosos  pro- 
portione  improbandosque  et  emendandos  bonitatem 
suam  permittet ;  adflictis  vero  et  forte  laborantibus 
multo  libentius  subveniet.  Quotiens  poterit,  for- 
tunae  intercedet  ;  ubi  enim  opibus  potius  utetur 
aut  viribus,  quam  ad  restituenda,  quae  casus  impulit  ? 
Vultum  quidem  non  deiciet  nee  animum  ob  crus 
alicuius  aridum  aut  pannosam  maciem  et  innixam 
baculo  senectutem  ;  ceterum  omnibus  dignis  proderit 
et  deorum  more  calamitosos  propitius  respiciet. 

4  Misericordia  vicina  est  miseriae  ;  habet  enim 
aliquid  trahitque  ex  ea.  Imbecillos  oculos  esse  scias, 
qui  ad  alienam  lippitudinem  et  ipsi  subfunduntur, 
tarn  mehercules  quam  morbum  esse,  non  hilaritatem, 
semper  adridere  ridentibus  et  ad  omnium  oscita- 
tionem  ipsum  quoque  os  diducere  ;  misericordia 
vitium  est  animorum  nimis  miseria  paventium,  quam 
si  quis  a  sapiente  exigit,  prope  est,  ut  lamentationem 
exigat  et  in  alienis  funeribus  gemitus. 

1  7.  "  At  quare  non  ignoscet  ?  "  Agedum  con- 
stituamus  nunc  quoque,  quid  sit  venia,  et  sciemus 
dari  illam  a  sapiente  non  debere.  Venia  est  poenae 
meritae  remissio.  Hanc  sapiens  quare  non  debeat 
dare,  reddunt  rationem  diutius,  quibus  hoc  pro- 
positum  est ;  ego  ut  breviter  tamquam  in  alieno 
442 


ON  MERCY,  II.  VI.  3-vii.  1 

will  benefit,  and  since  he  is  born  to  be  of  help  to  all 
and  to  serve  the  common  good,  he  will  give  to  each  his 
share  thereof.  He  will  extend  a  due  measure  of  his 
goodness  even  to  the  unfortunates  who  deserve  to  be 
censured  and  disciphned  ;  but  much  more  gladly 
will  he  come  to  the  rescue  of  the  distressed  and  those 
strugghng  with  mishap.  Whenever  he  can,  he  will 
parry  Fortune's  stroke :  for  in  what  way  will  he 
make  better  use  of  his  resources  or  his  strength 
than  in  restoring  what  chance  has  overthrown  ? 
And,  too,  he  will  not  avert  his  countenance  or  his 
sympathy  from  any  one  because  he  has  a  withered 
leg,  or  is  emaciated  and  in  rags,  and  is  old  and 
leans  upon  a  staff ;  but  all  the  worthy  he  will  aid, 
and  will,  like  a  god,  look  graciously  upon  the  un- 
fortunate. 

Pity  is  akin  to  wretchedness  ;  for  it  is  partly  com- 
posed of  it  and  partly  derived  from  it.  One  knows 
that  his  eyes  are  weak  if  they  too  are  suffused  at  the 
sight  of  another's  blear  eyes,  just  as  always  to  laugh 
when  other  people  laugh  is,  in  faith,  not  merriment, 
but  a  disease,  and  for  one  to  stretch  his  jaws  too  when 
everybody  else  yawns  is  a  disease.  Pity  is  a  weakness 
of  the  mind  that  is  over-much  perturbed  by  suffering, 
and  if  any  one  requires  it  from  a  wise  man,  that  is 
very  much  like  requiring  him  to  wail  and  moan  at 
the  funerals  of  strangers. 

"  But,"  you  ask,  "  why  Avill  he  not  pardon  ?  " 
Come  then,  let  us  now  also  decide  what  pardon  is, 
and  we  shall  perceive  that  the  wise  man  ought  not 
to  grant  it.  Pardon  is  the  remission  of  a  deserved 
punishment.  Why  a  wise  man  ought  not  to  give 
this  is  explained  more  at  length  by  those  who  make  a 
point  of  the  doctrine  ;   I,  to  speak  briefly  as  if  giving 

443 


SENECA 

iudicio  dicam  :  "  Ei  ignoscitur,  qui  puniri  debuit ; 
sapiens  autem  nihil  facit,  quod  non  debet,  nihil 
praetermittit,  quod  debet ;    itaque  poenam,  quam 

2  exigere  debet,  non  donat.  Sed  illud,  quod  ex  venia 
consequi  vis,  honestiore  tibi  via  tribuet  ;  parcet 
enim  sapiens,  consulet  et  corriget ;  idem  faciet, 
quod,  si  ignosceret,  nee  ignoscet,  quoniam,  qui 
ignoscit,  fatetur  aliquid  se,  quod  fieri  debuit,  omisisse. 
Aliquem  verbis  tantum  admonebit,  poena  non 
adficiet  aetatem  eius  emendabilem  intuens  ;  ali- 
quem invidia  criminis  manifeste  laborantem  iubebit 
incolumem  esse,  quia  deceptus  est,  quia  per  vinum 
lapsus  ;  hostes  dimittet  salvos,  aliquando  etiam 
laudatos,   si   honestis   causis  pro   fide,   pro  foedere, 

3  pro  libertate  in  bellum  acciti  sunt.  Haec  omnia 
non  veniae,  sed  clementiae  opera  sunt,  dementia 
liberum  arbitrium  habet ;  non  sub  formula,  sed  ex 
aequo  et  bono  iudicat ;  et  absolvere  illi  licet  et, 
quanti  vult,  taxare  litem.  Nihil  ex  his  facit,  tam- 
quam  iusto  minus  fecerit,  sed  tamquam  id,  quod 
constituit,  iustissimum  sit.  Ignoscere  autem  est, 
quem  indices  puniendum,  non  punire  ;  venia  debitae 
poenae  remissio  est.  dementia  hoc  primum  prae- 
stat,  ut,  quos  dimittit,  nihil  aliud  illos  pati  debuisse 
pronuntiet  ;    plenior  est  quam  venia,  honestior  est. 


444 


ON  MERCY,  II.  ^^I.  1-3 

another's  opinion,  explain  it  thus  :  "  Pardon  is  given 
to  a  man  who  ought  to  be  punished  ;  but  a  A\-ise  man 
does  nothing  which  he  ought  not  to  do,  omits  to  do 
nothing  which  he  ought  to  do  ;  therefore  he  does  not 
remit  a  punishment  which  he  ought  to  exact.  But 
in  a  more  honourable  way  he  will  bestow  upon  you 
that  which  vou  A\-ish  to  obtain  by  pardon  ;  for  the 
wise  man  will  show  mercy,  be  considerate,  and  rectify; 
he  will  do  the  same  that  he  would  do  if  he  pardoned, 
and  yet  he  will  not  pardon,  since  he  who  pardons 
admits  that  he  has  omitted  to  do  something  which 
he  ought  to  have  done.  To  one  man  he  will  give 
merely  a  reproof  in  words,  and  he  \n\\  not  inflict 
punishment  if  he  sees  that  the  other's  age  \\i]\  permit 
reformation  ;  another  who  is  clearly  suffering  from 
the  odium  of  crime  he  ^\^ll  order  to  go  free,  because 
he  was  misled,  because  ^nne  made  him  fall ;  he 
will  let  his  enemies  go  unharmed,  sometimes  even 
with  praise  if  they  were  stirred  to  fight  by  honour- 
able motives — to  maintain  their  loyalty,  a  treaty,  or 
their  Uberty.  These  are  all  the  operations  of  mercy, 
not  of  forgiveness.  Mercy  has  freedom  in  decision  ; 
it  sentences  not  by  the  letter  of  the  law,  but  in 
accordance  with  what  is  fair  and  good  ;  it  may  acquit 
and  it  may  assess  the  damages  at  any  value  it  pleases. 
It  does  none  of  these  things  as  if  it  were  doing  less 
than  is  just,  but  as  if  the  just  est  thing  were  that 
which  it  has  resolved  upon.  But  to  pardon  is  to  fail 
to  punish  one  whom  you  judge  worthy  of  punish- 
ment ;  pardon  is  the  remission  of  punishment  that 
is  due.  Mercy  is  superior  primarily  in  this,  that  it 
declares  that  those  who  are  let  off  did  not  deserve 
any  different  treatment  ;  it  is  more  complete  than 
pardon,  more  creditable.     In  my  opinion  the  dispute 

445 


SENECA 

4  De  verbo,  ut  mea  fert  opinio,  controversia  est,  de 
re  quidem  convenit.  Sapiens  multa  remittet,  multos 
parum  sani,  sed  sanabilis  ingenii  servabit.  Agricolas 
bonos  imitabitur,  qui  non  tantum  rectas  procerasque 
arbor es  colunt  ;  illis  quoque,  quas  aliqua  depravavit 
causa,  adminicula,  quibus  derigantur,  applicant ; 
alias  circumcidunt,  ne  proceritatem  rami  premant, 
quasdam    infirmas    vitio    loci    nutriunt,    quibusdam 

5  aliena  umbra  laborantibus  caelum  aperiunt.  Videbit, 
quod  ingenium  qua  ratione  tractandum  sit,  quo  modo 
in  rectum  prava  flectantur."  .  .  . 

"  The  rest  of  the  essay  is  lost.  It  had  apparently  three 
books  corresponding  to  the  three  divisions  of  the  subject 
indicated  in  i.  3.  1. 


446 


ON  MERCY,  II.  VII.  4-5 

is  about  words,  but  concerning  the  fact  there  is 
agreement.  The  wise  man  ■will  remit  many  punish- 
ments, he  will  save  many  whose  character  though 
unsound  can  yet  be  freed  from  unsoundness.  He 
>vill  be  like  the  good  husbandman  who  tends,  not 
merely  the  trees  that  are  straight  and  tall,  but  also 
apphes  props  to  those  that  for  some  reason  have 
grown  crooked  in  order  that  they  may  be  straightened; 
others  he  will  trim,  in  order  that  their  branching 
may  not  hamper  their  height ;  some  that  are  weak 
because  set  in  poor  soil  he  will  fertilize ;  to  some 
suffering  from  the  shade  of  the  others  he  will  open 
up  the  sky.  So  the  ^vise  man  will  see  what  method 
of  treatment  a  given  character  should  have,  how 
the  crooked  may  be  made  straight."  .  .  .<* 


447 


SENECA 


Hildehertus  Cenomanensis  ep.  i.3  (cLXxi.  145  Mign.)  : 
De  dementia  quoque  compendiosa  principibus  capitula 
Seneca  evigilavit,  i?i  quibus  ideo  hrevitatem  dilexit  non 
obscuram,  ut  magnis  occupatos  legere  non  taederet.  Ea 
igitur  pro  ie  et  ad  te  suscepta  suscipe  atque  recordare, 
quae  dudum  didiceris  ex  te  et  per  ie.     Pauca  ea  sunt  : 

Clementiae  est  aliquid  ultrici  detrahere  sententiae. 
Quisquis  nihil  reatus  impunitum  relinquit,  delinquit. 
Culpa  est  totam  persequi  culpam.  Immisericordem 
profitetur,  cui  quiequid  licet,  libet. 

Item  :  Gloriosa  virtus  est  in  principe  citra  punire 
quam  liceat.  Virtus  est  ad  vindictam  necessitate 
trahi,  non  voluntate  venire.  Magnum  quid  et 
divinum  sapit  offensus  clemens. 

Item  :  Bonus  princeps  neminem  sine  poena  punit, 
neminem  sine  dolore  proscribit.  Bonus  princeps  ita 
crimen  insequitur,  ut  quem  punit,  hominem  re- 
miniscatur. 

Item  :  Bonus  princeps  sibi  dominatur,  populo 
servit,  nullius  sanguinem  contemnit  :  inimici  est, 
sed  eius,  qui  amicus  fieri  potest  ;  nocentis  est,  sed 
hominis.  Cuiuscumque  sit,  quia  non  potuit  dare, 
crimen  putat  auferre.  Ideo  quotiens  funditur, 
confunditur. 


448 


ON  MERCY  :   FRAGMENTS 


Extracts  from  the  treatise  "  On  Mercy  "preserved 
in  a  letter  by  Hildebert  of  Tours 

It  is  the  part  of  mercy  to  cause  some  abatement  of 
a  sentence  that  aims  at  revenge.  He  who  does  not 
remit  the  punishment  of  wTong-doing  is  a  -wTong-doer. 
It  is  a  fault  to  punish  a  fault  in  full.  He  shows  himself 
merciless  whose  might  is  his  deHght. 

It  is  a  shining  \'irtue  for  a  prince  to  punish  less 
than  he  might.  It  is  a  virtue  to  be  forced  by  neces- 
sity to  take  vengeance,  not  to  vTsit  it  voluntarily. 
The  merciful  man  when  injured  savours  of  something 
great  and  godUke. 

A  good  prince  punishes  no  one  without  being 
punished,  proscribes  no  one  "without  suffering.  A 
good  prince  follows  up  crime,  yet  keeps  in  mind  the 
man  whom  he  is  punishing. 

A  good  prince  masters  himself,  serves  his  people, 
esteems  lightly  the  hfe-blood  of  no  man  ;  if  it  is  an 
enemy's,  yet  it  is  of  one  who  may  become  a  friend ;  if 
it  is  a  criminal's,  yet  it  is  a  human  being's  ;  whose- 
ever  it  may  be,  because  he  could  not  give  it,  he 
considers  it  a  crime  to  take  it  away.  Therefore  its 
effusion  is  ever  his  confusion. 


2g  449 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 

{The  references  are  to  the  pages  of  the  English  translation.) 


Achillas  (assassin  of  Poinpey),  171 

Actium  (promontory  in  Acarnania 
otf  wliich  Octa^ian  defeated 
Antony  and  Cleopatra,  31  b.c.)> 
391 

Africa,  135 

Ajax  (legendary  liero  of  Greece ; 
defeated  by  Odysseus  in  a  con- 
test for  the  arms  of  Achilles,  he 
went  mad  and  killed  himself),  251 

Alexander  (the  Great,  king  of 
Macedon,  336-323  b.c.)i  entered 
Babylon,  07  ;  stirred  by  the  flute, 
171;  courage  of,  217;  prone 
to  anger,  217  ;  murdered  Clitus, 
299;  cruelty  of,  313;  threw 
Lysimachus  to  the  lions,  423 

Alps,  crossed  by  Cimbrians  and 
Teutons,  133 

Antigonus  (one  of  the  generals  of 
Alexander  the  Great),  mildness 
of  his  temper,  311 

Antisthenes  (disciple  of  Socrates, 
founder  of  the  Cynic  School), 
self-restraint  of,  103 

Antony,  Mark  (triumvir  with 
Octavian  and  Lepidus),  Cicero 
victim  of,  171 ;  Octavian  seeks 
his  life,  381 ;  his  proscriptions, 
383 

Apollo,  the  archer-god,  291 

Apollodorus  (tyrant  of  Cassandrea 
about  280  B.C.),  type  of  cruelty, 
175 

Appius  (Claudius  Caecus,  a  famous 
Roman,  censor  312  b.c.  ;  began 
the  Via  Appia  and  built  the 
great  Appian  aqueduct),  blind- 
ness of,  35 

450 


Aristotle  (384-322  b.c,  founder  of 
the  Peripatetic  School),  his  de- 
finition of  anger,  115  ;  commends 
anger,  129,  151,  259;  Alexander 
a  follower  of,  299 

Asia,  87,  135,  177 

Asinius  Pollio,  C.  (celebrated 
Roman  politician,  author,  and 
patron  of  letters),  befriends 
Timagenes,  315 ;  follower  of 
Octavian,  387 

Atlienian  despot  (Pisistratus),  283 

Athenians,  their  envoys  to  Philip, 
313 

Attalus  (name  of  several  kings  of 
Pergamon,  famous  for  their 
patronage  of  literature  and  their 
munificence;  in  133  B.C.  the  la.st 
of  the  line  bequeathed  his  king- 
dom to  the  Roman  i)eople),  type 
of  a  rich  man,  87 

August,  the  (honorary  title),  399 

Augustus  (Cae.sar,  first  emperor  of 
Rome,  27  B.C.-14  a. p.),  177,  313, 
315,  349,  3G1,  381,  389,  401 


Babylon,  walls  of,  67 ;  Cyrus  wars 
against,  309 

Baclrians  (inhabitants  of  Bactria, 
a  province  of  the  former  Persian 
empire,  conquered  by  the  Par- 
thians  about  130  b.c),  87 

Bellona  (Roman  goddess  of  war), 
temple  of,  393 

Betilienus  Bassus,  quaestor  under 
Caligula,  303. 

Burrus,  Sextus  Afranius  (prefect 

Lofnthe   praetorian   guard,    who 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


helped  Seneca  to  guide  the  early 
years  of  Xero's  reign),  431 
Busiris  (reputed    king  of  Egypt, 
who  cruelly  sacrificed  strangers 
to  Zeus),  437 


Caelius  (Rufus,  M.,  politician  and 
orator  of  the  Ciceronian  age, 
noted  for  his  sarcasm  and  his 
power  in  invective),  275 

Oaepio,  Fannius,  conspired  against 
Augustus,  383 

Caesar,  C.  lulius  (the  dictator), 
power  of,  13 ;  type  of  power,  23  ; 
Cato  greater  than,  51 ;  merciful 
in  victory,  217  ;  assassins  of,  329 

Caesar  (title  of  the  Roman 
emperors),  Augustus,  313,  315, 
349,  369,  387,  401,  403;  Nero, 
359,  391,  433  ;  Caligula,  241,  305 

Caligula,  nickname  of  Gains  Caesar, 
101 

Cambyses  (king  of  Persia,  529-522 
B.C.,  son  and  successor  of  Cyrus 
the  Great;,  addicted  to  wine,  289 ; 
rage  of,  307 

Campus  Martins,  83 

Cannae  (scene  of  Hannibal's  great 
victory  over  the  Romans  in  216 
B.C.),  171,  177 

Capitol  (ancient  temple  on'  the 
Tarpeian  Rock,  sacred  to  Jupiter, 
Juno,  and  Minerva,  symbol  of 
the  eternity  of  Rome),  67 

Carthage,  67,  135,  177 

Carthaginian  array,  135 

Castor,  temple  of,  87 

Catiline,  Lucius  Sergius,  instru- 
ment of  Sulla,  301 

Cato,  M.  Porcius  (the  Younger,  an 
ardent  and  high-minded  Stoic, 
supporter  of  Pompey's  cause, 
who  committed  suicide  after 
Caesar's  victory  at  Thapsus,  46 
Rc),  noble  death  of,  ll",  13,  17  ; 
struggles  of,  23,  25 ;  unappreci- 
ated by  his  age,  51,  53  ;  greatness 
of,  69,  91,  237,  239,  345 

Catulus,  Quintiis  (colleague  of 
Marius  in  the  consulship,  but 
later  condemned  to  death  by 
him),  tomb  of,  301 

Chaerea,  Cassius  (tribune  of  the 


praetorian  guards  and  assassin 
of  Caligula),  101 

Chrysippus  (Stoic  philosopher  of 
Soli  in  Cilicia,  successor  of 
Clean  thes  and  third  head  of  the 
Stoic  School),  quoted,  97 

Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius(the  famous 
orator,  106-43  b.c.),  wit  of,  97  ; 
banishment  of,  171  ;  poetry  of, 
343 

Cicero,  Marcus  Tullius  (son  of  the 
orator,  after  the  death  of  Caesar 
a  partisan  of  Brutus  and  later 
of  Sextus  Pompeius),  Augustus 
showed  mercy  to,  387 

Cimbrians,  invasion  of,  133 

Cinna,  Lucius,  plots  against  Augus- 
tus, 381,  383,  385,  387 

Circus  (Maximus),  181 

Clitus,  killed  by  Alexander,  299 

Clodius,  Publius  (Roman  dema- 
gogue and  enemy  of  Cicero), 
corruptness  of,  51 ;  banishes 
Cicero,  171 

Cocceius  ( Jf erva,  M.,  consul  36  bc, 
a  partisan  of  Anthony),  spared 
by  Augustus,  387 

Corbulo,  Cn.  Domitius  (Roman 
general,  distinguished  by  his 
campaigns  against  the  Germans 
and  the  Parthians  under  Claudius 
and  Xero),  97 

Cornelian  Law,  21 

Cornelius  Fidus,  son-in-law  of 
Ovid,  97 

Cossi,  a  noble  family,  387 

Cras.sus,  M.  Licinius  (triumvir  with 
Caesar  and  Pompey),  23 

Cyrus  (the  Great,  king  of  Persia), 
rages  against  the  river  Gyndes, 
309 

Danube,  33 

Darius  (king  of  Persia),  297 

Deillius,     Quintus     (follower     of 

Antony,  who  shortly  before  the 

battle  of  Actium  joined  the  side 

of  Octavian),  387 
Demetrius  (Cynic  philosopher,  who 

taught    at     Rome    during    the 

reign  of  Caligula),  saying  of,  17, 

37 
Demetrius   (Poliorcetes,  liberator 

of  Athens  and  Megsra,  307  B.  c. ),  63 

451 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


Demochares  (Athenian  orator, 
neplifiw  of  Demosthenes),  313 

Democritus  (Greek  philosopher, 
born  about  460  B.C.,  early  ex- 
ponent of  the  atomistic  theory), 
despises  riches,  43;  the  "laugh- 
ing philosopher,"  187;  teaches 
tranquillity,  269 

Diogenes  (Stoic  philosopher,  pupil 
of  Chrysippus),  self-control  of, 
345 

Dionysius  (the  Elder,  tyrant  of 
Syracuse,  405-367  B.C.),  praise  of. 
393 

Domitius(Ahenobarbus,Cn.,  great- 
grandfather of  the  emperor 
Nero ;  in  the  civil  struggle  he 
was  a  follower  of  Antony,  but 
deserted  to  the  side  of  Octavian 
shortly  before  the  battle  of 
Actium),  387 

Egnatius   (Rufus,   M.),    conspired 

against  Augustus,  383 
Elius,  a  panderer,  3,5 
Bnnius,    Quintus  (the   "  father   of 

Roman    poetry,"    239-169    B.c.), 

343 
Epicurus    (Greek    vhilosopher    of 

Samos,  341-270  B.C.),  advocate  of 

inaction,  93 ;  indulged  the  fle.sh,  95 
Ethiopians,     long     life     of,     307 ; 

colour  of,  321 

Fabius,  Arch  of  (erected  by  Q. 
Fabius  Maximus  Allobrogicus  to 
celebrate  his  victory  over  the 
AUobroges  in  121  b  c),  51 

Fabius  (Maximus,  Q.,  see  note, 
p.  134),  dilatory  policy  of,  135; 
saying  of,  235 

Fabius  Maximus  (descendant  of  the 
dictator),  representative  of  a 
noble  house,  387 

Fabricius  (Luscinus  C,  prominent 
general  in  the  war  against 
Pyrrhus,  a  stock  type  of  Roman 
Integrity  and  simplicity),  tried 
by  poverty,  17,  19 

Father  of  his  Country  (honorary 
title  bestowed  upon  Augustus 
and  some  of  his  successors),  399 

Fortunate,  the  (title  assumed  by 
Sulla),  399 

452 


Gains  Caesar  (Caligula,  emperor  of 

Rome,  37-41  a.d.),  99,  163,  239, 

301,  309 
Gains,  see  Gaius  Caesar 
Gaul,  Augustus  in,  381 
Gauls,  conquerors  of  the  Germans, 

135 
Germans,  uncivilized,  33 ;  courage 

of,  133;   freedom  of,  199;  their 

hairdress,  321 
Great,  the  (honorary  title),  399 
Greek  (language),  177,  433 
Greeks,  117,  257,  311 
Gyndes  (tributary  of  the  Tigris), 

Cyrus  at  the,  309 

Hannibal,  policy  of  Fabius  and 
Scipio  towai-d,  135;  before 
Rome,  171 ;  .saying  of,  177 

Harpagus  (a  noble  Mfde,  preserver 
of  the  infant  Cyrus  and  later  one 
of  his  generals),  made  to  feast 
upon  the  flesh  of  his  children, 
293 

Heaven,  Lord  of  (Jupiter),  11 

Heraclitus  (Greek  philosopher  of 
Ephesus,  who  lived  about  535- 
475  B.C.),  weakness  of,  187 

Herculaneum  (city  in  Campania), 
villa  at,  309 

Hercules,  type  of  wise  man,  51 

Herennius  "  Macer  (unknown), 
offends  Caligula,  101 

Hieronymus  (of  Rhodes,  Peripa- 
tetic philosopher  and  disciple  of 
Aristotle),  quoted,  157 

Hippias  (son  of  Pisistratus,  whom 
he  succeeded  as  tyrant  of 
Athens  in  527  B.C.),  cruelty  of, 
215 

Homer,  words  of,  165 

Hortensius,  Quintus  (celebrated 
orator,  rival  of  Cicero  and  ex- 
ponent of  the  Asiatic  manner), 
speeches  of,  343 

Ida,  Mount  (see  note   p.  102),  103 

Juba  (king  of  Numidia;  see  note, 

p.  12),  13 
Julius,  see  Caesar 

Laberius,  Df'cimus  (Roman  knight 
born  about  107  B.C.,  famed   for 


f 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


his  talent  in  writing  mimes), 
famous  line  of,  191 

Lacedaemonians,  discipline  of, 
31 

Land-of-the-stmnp-nosed  (Syria), 
307 

Lentulus  (probably  P.  Cornelius 
Lentulns  Sura,  chief  among  the 
Catilinarian  conspirators),  insults 
Cato,  345 

Lepidus,  M.  Aemilius  (the  trium- 
vir ;  though  subdued  by  Octavian 
in  36  B.C.  and  stripped  of  power, 
he  lived  until  13  B.C.),  clemency 
of  Augustus  to,  387 

Lepidus,  M.  Aemilius  (son  of  the 
triumvir),  conspired  against 
Augustus,  383 

Livia  (Drusilla,  second  wife  of 
Augustus  and  mother  of  the 
emperor  Tiberius),  counsels 
Augustus,  383 

Livius,  Titus  (ihe  most  popular  of 
Roman  historians,  59  B.C. -17 
A.D.),  saying  of,  1>53 

Longevals,  appellation  of  the 
Ethiopians,  307 

Lucilius  (friend  of  Seneca,  Roman 
knight  and  procurator  of  Sicily, 
see  Introd.,  p.  xi),  3 

Lysimachus  (one  of  Alexander's 
generals,  who  having  escaped 
death  at  the  hands  of  Alexander 
became  king  of  Macedonia), 
thrown  to  a  lion,  299,  423 


Macedonian,  209 

Maecenas,  Gains  Cilnins  (Roman 
statesman,  courtier,  and  patron 
of  literature  in  the  reign  of 
Augustus^  felicity  of,  21,  23 

Marias,  Gaius  (leader  of  the  demo- 
crats in  the  struggle  against 
Sulla,  consul  for  the  seventh 
time  86  b.c),  violence  of  con- 
demned, 171 

Marias,  Marcus  (nephew,  by  adop- 
tion, of  Gaius  Marius),  tortured 
by  Sulla,  301 

Marseilles,  place  of  exile,  401 

Medes,  subjects  of  Parthia,  87 ; 
king  of  the,  87 

Megara  (capital  of  the  Megarid,  a 


district  north  of  Corinth),  cap- 
tured by  Demetrius,  63 

Messala  (CorAinus,  M.  Valerius, 
famous  orator  and  piatron  of 
letters;  pardoned  by  the  trium- 
virs after  Philippi,  he  became 
one  of  the  chief  friends  of 
Augustus),  spared  by  Augustus, 
387 

Metellus,  L.  Caecilius  (distin- 
guished general  in  the  First  Punic 
War,  who  is  sai<l  to  have  lost  his 
sight  in  rescuing  the  Palladium 
from  the  burning  Temple  of 
Vesta),  blindness  of,  35 

Mindyrides,  a  Sybarite,  219 

Mucins  (Scaevola,  C,  hero  of  the 
Roman-Ktriiscan  wars ;  having 
stolen  into  the  enemy's  camp 
seeking  the  life  of  Porsena,  the 
Etruscan  king,  he  was  captured 
and  condemned  to  be  burned 
alive,  whereupon  he  contemptu- 
ously thrust  his  right  hand  into 
the  lighted  fire),  tried  by  fire,  17, 
19 

Murena,  A-  Terentins  Varro,  con- 
spired against  Augustus,  383 

Neptune,  god  of  the  sea,  59 

Nero  Caesar  (Roman  emperor,  54- 
68  A.D.X  357,  431 

Novatus  (Seneca's  eldest  brother, 
known  after  his  adoption  as 
Gallio,  see  Introd.  p.  xiiiX  107, 
167,  253,  345 

Numantia  (chief  town  in  the  dis- 
trict of  Celtiberia  in  Spain), 
capture  of,  67  ;  siege  of,  135 

Oeobazus,  cruelty  of   Darius    to, 

297 
Olympic  games,  25 
Ovidius  Naso,  P.  (prominent  poet 

of  the  Augustan  Age),  son-in-law 

of,  97 

Papinius,  Sextus,  tortured  by 
Caligula,  303 

Parrhesiasies  (see  note,  p.  31 2X 
appellation  of  Demochares,  313 

Parthians  (a  Soythic  people  belong- 
ing to  the  Persian  empire  ;  after 
250  B.C,  they  founded  an  inde- 

453 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


pendent  monarchy,  which  lasted 
until  226  a.d.),  87 

Pastor,  a  Roman  knight,  230,  241 

Paulus,  representative  of  a  noble 
house,  387 

Persian  slave,  209 

Persians,  king  of,  203,  305  ;  Darius, 
first  ruler  ot',  297 

Perusia  (city  of  Etruria,  modern 
Perugia,  refuge  of  L.  Antonius, 
brother  of  the  triumvir,  in  the 
Civil  Wars ;  see  note,  p.  390), 
holocaust  of,  391 

Petreius,  Marcus  (see  note,  p.  12), 
13 

Phalaris  (notorious  tyrant  of  Agri- 
gentuni,  made  famous  by  the 
story  of  the  brazen  bull  in  which 
his  victims  were  roasted  alive), 
cruelty  of,  175,  437 

Philip,  physician  of  Alexander, 
217 

Philip  (the  Second,  king  of  Macedon 
and  father  of  Alexander  the 
Great),  his  endurance  of  insults, 
313,  315 

Pisistratus  (tyrant  of  Athens  560- 
527  i).c.),  a  story  about,  283 

Piso,  Gnaeus  (descendant  of  an  old 
and  powerful  house,  appointed 
governor  of  Syria  by  Tiberius, 
and  represented  by  Tacitus  as 
tlie  murderer  of  Germanicus), 
injustice  of,  165 

Plato  (Athenian  philosopher,  428- 
347  B.C.),  condemns  anger,  123  ; 
his  theory  of  punishment,  159  ; 
forbids  wine  for  children,  209 ; 
character  of,  213 ;  controlled 
anger,  285,  287 

Poliorcetes  (appellation  of  Deme- 
trius), 63 

Pollio.  see  Asinius 

Pompeians  (followers  of  Pompey), 
831 

Pompeius  Magnus,  Gnaeus  (formed 
the  so-called  First  Triumvirate 
with  Caesar  and  Crassus  in  60 
B.C.,  later  leader  of  the  senatorial 
party  in  opposition  to  Caesar, 
defeated  at  Pharsalus  in  48  B.C., 
and  murdered  in  Egypt  shortly 
after  the  battle),  member  of  the 
coalition,  23 ;  type  of  greatness, 

454 


51  ;  Caesar's  consideration  for, 
217 ;  his  death,  331 ;  grandson 
of,  383 

Pompey,  see  Pompeins 

Praexaspes,  friend  of  Cambyses, 
289 

Priam  (last  king  of  Troy),  241 

Priapus,  watchword  given  by  Cali- 
gula. 101 

Pyrrhus,  gymnastic  trainer,  199 

Pyrrhus  (a  king  of  Epirus,  who 
invaded  Italy  280  B.C.),  Fabricius 
waged  war  on,  19 

Pythagoras  (Greek  philosopher, 
who  flourished  540-500  B.C.), 
calmed  by  the  lyre,  277 


Regulus,  M.  Atilius  (hero  of  First 
Punic  War ;  captured  by  the 
Carthaginians  and  sent  to  Rome 
to  sue  for  peace,  he  advised  the 
Senate  to  refuse  the  otters  of 
the  enemy,  returned  to  Carthage 
and  died  by  torture),  tried  by 
torture,  17,  21 ;  type  of  misfor- 
tune, 23 

Rhodian  (Telesphorus),  299 

Roman  (citizens),  21,  393  ;  (civil- 
ization), 33 ;  (way.s),  135 ;  (legion), 
135  ;  (hand),  183  ;  (knight),  230  ; 
(father),  241  ;  (people),  i4o,  303, 
361,  385,  389 ;  (senators  and 
knights),  303 ;  (peace),  369 ; 
(blood),  391  ;  (empire),  431 

Romans,  135,  301,  309 

Rome,  19,  67,  171,  361 

Rutilius  (Rufus,  P.,  Roman  states- 
man, forced  into  exile  in  92  B.C. 
because  he  had  repressed  the 
extortions  of  the  tax-collectors 
in  Asia),  tried  by  exile,  17  ;  re- 
called by  Sulla,  19 


Sallustius  (Crispus,  C,  grand- 
nephew  and  heir  of  Sallust  the 
historian,  after  the  death  of 
Maecenas,  chief  adviser  of  Augus- 
tus), opponent  of  Augustus,  387 

Salvidienus  (Rufus,  Q.,  officer  in 
the  army  of  Octavian,  accused 
in  40  B.C.  of  plotting  against  him 
and  condemned  by  the  Senate), 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


conspired  against  Angustus, 
SS3 

Scipio  (Africanus  Maior,  P.  Cor- 
nelius, conqueror  of  Hannibal 
at  Zama  ■202  bc.)i  his  dilatory 
policy,  135 

Scipio  (Africanus  Minor,  see  note, 
p.  134X  idles  before  Numantia, 
135 

Sc>-thians  (a  nomadic  people  of 
southeastern  Europe),  freedom 
of,  199  ;  Darius  declares  war  on, 
297 

Serenus,  Annaeas  (friend  of  Seneca, 
to  whom  are  addressed  the  De 
Constantia,  De  Otic,  and  Ik  Tran- 
quiUUate  Animi.  See  Introd., 
p.  xii) 

Sen-ilii,  a  noble  family,  387 

Serrilius,  pool  of,  19 

Sextius,  Qiiintus  (an  eclectic  Roman 
philosopher,  who  flourished  under 
the  late  Republic  and  the  early 
Empire),  saying  of,  249  ;  practice 
of,  339 

Sicily  (see  note,  p.  390),  391 

SUenus  (companion  of  Bacchus,  a 
jovial  old  man  with  bald  head 
and  blunt  nose,  gifted  with  pro- 
phetic power),  311 

Socrates  (Athenian  philosopher, 
469-399  B.C.),  poisoning  of,  17, 
23  ;  condemnation  of,  69  ;  self- 
control  of,  103,  145,  179,  283, 
287 

Spaniards,  conquerors  of  the  Ger- 
mans, 135 

Speusippus  (Athenian  philosopher, 
nephew  of  Plato),  287 

Stilbo  (Greek  philosopher  of  the 
fourth  century  B.C.,  skilled  in 
dialectic,  forerunner  of  the  Stoics 
in  his  conception  of  virtue),  say- 
ing of,  63 

Stoic,  55,  93 ;  philosopher,  345  ; 
school,  439 

Stoics,  49,  51,  53,  67 

Sulla,  Lucius  (Roman  dictator, 
died  78  ac),  recalls  Rutilius, 
19 ;  proscription  of,  19,  171  ; 
cruelty  of,  21,  243,  301  ;  times  of, 
161 ;  tyranny  of,  393 

Sun-god  (Phoebus),  41 

Sybaris  (Greek  town  in  Lacania, 


proverbial    for    its  wealth   and 
luxury),  219 
Syria,  135,  307 


Tarios  (Rnfiis,  L.,  a  man  of  hnmble 
origin  who  attained  public  dis- 
tinction and  great  wealth  in  the 
reign  of  Augustus),  401,  403 

Tarpeian  Rock,  149 

Telesphorus,  mutilated  by  Alex- 
ander, 299 

Terentia  (see  note,  p.  22),  23 

Teutons  (see  note,  p.  132),  in- 
vasion of,  133 

Theodotus  (see  note,  p.  170),  171 

Theophrastus  (successor  of  Aris- 
totle as  head  of  the  Peripatetic 
School),  saying  of,  137,  141 

Thersites  (see  note,  p.  312),  313 

Thracian  woman,  103 

Tiberius  Caesar  (emperor  of  Rome, 
14-37  Ji-D.),  27,  361 

Tillius  Ciniber,  L.  (a  favoured 
friend  of  Caesar,  but  subsequently 
one  of  his  enemies),  faithlessness 
of,  331 

Tiraagenes  (Alexandrinns,  historian 
and  rhetorician  at  Rome  in  the 
reign  of  Augustus),  unfriendly  to 
Augustas,  313;  burned  his  record 
of  the  acts  of  Augustus,  314 

Tiasuniennus  (lake  in  Etroria, 
memorable  for  the  victory  of 
Hannibal  over  the  Romans  in 
217  B.C.),  177 

Tricho,  a  Roman  knight,  401 

Triumphus,  a  gladiator,  27 


Ulysses,  type  of  a  wise  man,  51 


Valerius  Asiaticus,  friend  of  Cali- 
gula, 99 

Vatinius,  Publius  (a  political  ad- 
venturer in  the  last  days  of  the 
Republic),  23.  51,  97 

Vedius  Pollio  (Roman  knight,  noted 
for  his  riches  and  his  cruelty), 
349,  409 

Venus,  watchword  given  by  Cali- 
gula, 101 

VolesQS,  L.  Valerius  Messala  (con- 

455 


INDEX  OF  NAMES 


sul  in  A.D.  5  and  several  years 
later  pro-consul  of  Asia),  his 
cruelty,  177 

War-god  (Mars),  139,  171 

Xanthippe  (shrewish  wife  of   So- 
crates), 103 


Xenophantus,  flutist  of  Alexander, 

171 
Xerxes  (king  of  Persia  485-465  b.c.)i 

cruelty  of,  299 


Zeno  (probably  the  founder  of  the 
Stoic  School,  flourished  about 
300  B.C.),  saying  of,  149 


Printed  in  Great  Britain  by  R.  &  R.  Ci.ark",  Limited,  Edinburgh. 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL 
LIBRARY. 

VOLUMES  ALREADY  PUBLISHED. 

LATIN  AUTHORS. 


APULEIUS.     THE  GOLDEN   ASS  (METAMORPHO- 
SES).    Trans,  by  W.  Adlington  (1566).     Revised  by 
S.  Gaselee.     (3rd  Impression^ 
AULUS  GELLIUS.     Trars.  by  J.  C.  Rolfe.    3  Vols. 
AUSONIUS.    Trans,  by  H.  G.  Evelyn  White.     2  Vols. 
BOETHIUS:      TRACTS    and    DE    CONSOLATIONE 

PHILOSOPHIAE.     Trans,  by  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Stewart 

and  E.  K.  Rand.     {2nd  Impression.) 
CAESAR:    CIVIL   WARS.     Trans,   by   A.    G.   Peskett. 

{2nd  Impression.) 
CAESAR  :    GALLIC  WAR.     Trans,  by  H.  J.  Edwards. 

{4th  Impression.) 
CATULLUS.     Trans,    by    F.    W.    Cornish ;  TIBULLUS. 

Trans,  by  J.  P.  Postgate ;  PERVIGILIUM  VENERIS. 

Trans,  by  J.  W.  Mackail.     {7th  Impression.) 
CICERO  :  DE  FINIBUS.     Trans,  by  H.  Rackham.     {2nd 

Impression.) 
CICERO  :  DE  OFFICIIS.    Trans,  by  Walter  Miller.    {2nd 

Impression.) 
CICERO  :  DE  REPUBLICA  and  DE  LEGIBUS.     Trans. 

by  Clinton  Keyes. 
CICERO:     DE    SENECTUTE,    DE    AMICITIA,    DE 

DIVINATIONE.    Trans,    by    W.    A.    Falconer.     {2nd 

Impression.) 
CICERO:  LETTERS  TO  ATTICUS.     Trans,  by  E.  O. 

Winstedt.      3  Vols.     (Vol.    I.   4ith   Impression,    II.   and 

III.  2nd  Impression.) 
CICERO:  LETTERS    TO    HIS    FRIENDS.     Trans,    by 

W.  Glynn  WiUiams.    3  Vols.     Vol.  I. 
CICERO  :  PHILIPPICS.     Trans,  by  W.  C.  A.  Ker. 
CICERO  :  PRO  ARCHIA  POETA,  POST  REDITUM  IN 
SENATU,    POST    REDITUM    AD    QUIRITES,    DE 
DOMO  SUA,  DE  HARUSPICUM  RESPONSIS,  PRO 
PLANCIO.     Trans,  by  N.  H.  Watts. 
1 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

CICERO :  PRO  CAECINA,  PRO  LEGE  MANILIA, 
PRO  CLUENTIO,  PRO  RABIRIO.  Trans,  by  H. 
Grose  Hodge. 

CICERO:  TUSCULAN    DISPUTATIONS.     Trans,    by 

J.  E.  King. 
CLAUDIAN.     Trans,  by  M.  Platnauer.     2  Vols. 
CONFESSIONS  OF  ST.  AUGUSTINE.     Trans,  by  W. 

Watts  (1631).     2  Vols.     {3rd  Impression.) 
FRONTINUS  :    STRATAGEMS     and     AQUEDUCTS. 

Trans,  by  C.  E.  Bennett. 
FRONTO  :    CORRESPONDENCE.      Trans,    by    C.    R. 

Haines.     2  Vols. 
HORACE:  ODES    and    ERODES.     Trans,    by    C.    E. 

Bennett.     {7th  Impression.) 
HORACE:    SATIRES,     EPISTLES,     ARS     POETICA. 

Trans,  by  H.  R.  Fairclough. 
JUVENAL  AND   PERSIUS.     Trans,  by  G.   G.   Ramsay. 

{'ith  Impression.) 
LIVY.     Trans,  by  B.  O.  Foster.     13  Vols.     Vols.  I.-IV. 

(Vol.  I.  2nd  Impression.) 
LUCRETIUS.     Trans,  by  W.  H.  D.  Rouse. 
MARTIAL.     Trans,    by   W.    C.    A.    Ker.     2    Vols,     {2nd 

Impression.) 
OVID  :  HEROIDES,  AMORES.  Trans,  by  Grant  Shower- 
man.     {2nd  Impression.) 
OVID:  METAMORPHOSES.     Trans,   by   F.   J.    Miller, 

2  Vols.     (Vol.  I.  Uh  Impression,  II.  Srd  Impression.) 
OVID :  TRISTIA   and   EX   PONTO.     Trans,   by   A.   L, 

Wheeler, 
PETRONIUS.      Trans,     by     M,     Heseltine  ;   SENECA  : 

APOCOLOCYNTOSIS.     Trans,  by  W.   H.  D.   Rouse. 

{5th  Impression.) 
PLAUTUS.     Trans,  by  Paul  Nixon.    5  Vols.     Vols.  I.-III. 

(Vol.  I.  Srd  Impression.) 
PLINY:  LETTERS,     Melmoth's    translation    revised    by 

W.  M,  L.  Hutchinson,     2  Vols.     {Srd  Impression.) 
PROPERTIUS.     Trans,  by  H.  E.  Butler.     {3rd  Impression.) 
QUINTILIAN.     Trans,  by  H.  E.  Butler.     4  Vols. 
SALLUST.     Trans,  by  J.  C.  Rolfe. 
2 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

SCRIPTORES    HISTORIAE    AUGUSTAE.     Trans,    by 

D.  Magie.     3  Vols.     Vols.  I.  and  II, 
SENECA  :   EPISTULAE  MORALES.     Trans,  by  R.  M. 

Gummere.     3  Vols.     (Vol.  I.  2nd  Impression.) 
SENECA  :    MORAL  ESSAYS.     Trans,  by  J.  W.  Basore. 

3  Vols,     ^'ol.  I. 
SENECA:      TRAGEDIES.     Trans,     by    F.    J.     MiUer 

2  Vols.     {2nd  Impression.) 
STATIUS.     Trans,  by  J.  H.  Mozley.    2  Vols. 
SUETONIUS.    Trans,    by   J.    C.    Rolfe.     2    Vols.     (3rd 

Impression.) 
TACITUS  :    DIALOGUS.     Trans,  by  Sir  Wm.  Peterson  ; 

and  AGRICOLA  axd  GERMAXIA.    Trans,  by  Maurice 

Hutton.     {Srd  Impression.) 
TACITUS  :  HISTORIES.     Trans,  by  C.  H.  Moore.  2  Vols. 

Vol.  I. 
TERENCE.     Trans,    by    John    Sargeaunt     2  Vols.     {5th 

Impression.) 
VELLEIUS  PATERCULUS  and  RES  GESTAE  DIVI 

AUGUSTI.     Trans,  by  F.  W.  Shipley. 
VIRGIL.     Trans,  by  H.  R.  Fairclough.     2  Vols.     (Vol.  I. 

6th  Impression,  II.  Srd  Impression.) 


GREEK    AUTHORS. 


ACHILLES  TATIUS.    Trans,  by  S.  Gaselee. 

AENEAS  TACTIC  US,   ASCLEPIODOTUS   and    ONA- 

SANDER.     Trans,  by  The  Illinois  Greek  Club. 
AESCHINES.     Trans,  by  C.  D.  Adams. 
AESCHYLUS.     Trans,    by    H.    Weir    Smytb.     2    Vols. 

(Vol.  I.  2nd  Impression.) 
APOLLODORUS.     Trans,  by  Sir  James  G.  Frazer.  2  Vols. 
APOLLONIUS    RHODIUS.'    Trans,   by    R.    C.    Seaton. 

(3rd  Impression.) 
THE  APOSTOLIC  FATHERS.     Trans,  by  Kirsopp  Lake. 

2  Vols.     (Vol.  I.  ■ith  Impression,  II.  3rd  Impression.) 
APPIAN'S     ROMAN    HISTORY.    Trans,    by    Horace 

White.    4  Vols.     (Vol.  IV.  2nd  Impression.) 
3 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

ARISTOPHANES,     Trans,  by  Benjamin  Bickley  Rogers. 

3  Vols.     (Verse  translation.)     {2nd  Impression.) 
ARISTOTLE  :  THE  "  ART  "  OF  RHETORIC.     Trans. 

by  J.  H.  Freese. 
ARISTOTLE  :  THE  NICOMACHEAN  ETHICS.    Trans. 

by  H.  Rackham. 
ARISTOTLE  :  POETICS  ;  "  LONGINUS  "  :  ON     THE 

SUBLIME.     Trans,   by   W.   Hamilton   Fyfe,   and   DE- 
METRIUS :  ON  STYLE.     Trans,  by  W.  Rhys  Roberts. 
ATHENAEUS:    THE   DEIPNOSOPHISTS.     Trans,   by 

C.  B.  Gulick.     7  Vols.     Vols.  I.  and  II. 
CALLIMACHUS  and  LYCOPHRON.     Trans,  by  A.  W. 

Mair,  and  ARATUS,  trans,  by  G.  R.  Mair. 
CLEMENT   OF   ALEXANDRIA.     Trans,    by   the    Rev. 

G.  W.  Butterworth. 
DAPHNIS  AND  CHLOE.     Thornley's  translation  revised 

by  J.   M.  Edmonds:  and  PARTHENIUS.     Trans,  by 

S.  Gaselee.     {2nd  Impression.)  I 

DEMOSTHENES:     DE    CORONA    and    DE    FALSA ' 

LEGATIONE.    Trans,  by  C.  A.  Vince  and  J.  H.  Vince. 
DIOCASSIUS:  ROMAN  HISTORY.    Trans,  by  E.  Cary. 

9  Vols. 
DIOGENES  LAERTI US.     Trans,  by  R.  D.  Hicks.    2  Vols. 
EPICTETUS.    Trans,  by  W.  A.  Oldfather.    2  Vols.    Vol.1. 
EURIPIDES.     Trans,   by   A.    S.   Way.     4   Vols.     (Verse 

translation.)     (Vols.  I.  and   IV,   3rd,   II.   4<A,   III.   2nd 

Impression.) 
EUSEBIUS:    ECCLESIASTICAL   HISTORY.      Trans. 

by  Kirsopp  Lake,     2  Vols.     Vol,  I, 
GALEN:  ON  THE  NATURAL  FACULTIES.    Trans. by 

A.  J.  Brock.     {2nd  Impression.) 
THE  GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.     Trans,  by  W.  R.  Paton, 

3  Vols.     (Vol.  I.  Srd,  II.  2nd  Impression.) 
THE     GREEK     BUCOLIC     POETS     (THEOCRITUS, 

BION,     MOSCHUS).     Trans,     by    J.     M.     Edmonds. 

{4th  Impression.) 
HERODOTUS.     Trans,  by  A.  D.  Godley.     4  Vols.     (Vols. 

I,  and  II.  2nd  Impression.) 
4 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

HESIOD    AND    THE    HOMERIC    HYMNS.     Trans,    by 

H.  G.  Evelyn  White.     (3rd  Impression.) 
HIPPOCRATES.     Trans,  bv  W.  H.  S.  Jones  and  E.  T. 

Withington.     4  Vols.     Vols.  I.-III. 
HOMER:    ILIAD.     Trans,  by  A.  T.   Murray.     2  Vols. 

(Vol.  I.  2nd  Impression.) 
HOMER :  ODYSSEY.     Trans,  by  A.  T.  Murray.    2  Vols. 

(\'ol.  I.  ith,  II.  2nd  Impression.) 
ISAEUS.     Trans,  by  E.  S.  lorster. 
ISOCRATES.     Trans,  by  G.  NorUn.     3  Vols.    Vol.  I. 
JOSEPHUS.     Trans,  by  H.  St.  J.  Thackeray.     8  Vols. 

Vols.  I.-III. 
JULIAN.     Trans,  by  Wilmer  Cave  Wright     3  Vols. 
LUCIAN.     Trans,  by  A.  M.Harmon.     8  Vols.     Vols.  I.-IV. 

(Vol.  I.  3rd,  II.  2nd  Impression.) 
LYRA  GRAECA.     Trans,  by  J.   M.  Edmonds.     3  Vols. 

(Vol.  I.  2nd  Edition.) 
MARCUS  AURELIUS.     Trans,  by  C.  R.  Haines.     {2nd 

Impression.) 
MENANDER.    Trans,  by  F.  G.  Allinson. 
OPPIAN,  COLLUTHUS  and  TRYPHIODORUS.    Trans. 

by  A.  W.  Mair. 
PAUSANIAS  :    DESCRIPTION  OF  GREECE.     Trans. 

by  W.  H.  S.  Jones.     5  Vols,  and  Companion  Vol.     Vols. 

I.  and  II. 
PHILOSTRATUS  :    THE  LIFE  OF  APOLLONIUS  OF 

TYANA.     Trans,  by  F.  C.  Conybeare.     2  Vols.     (Vol.  I. 

3rd,  II.  2nd  Impression.) 
PHILOSTRATUS  and  EUNAPIUS  :    LIVES  OF  THE 

SOPHISTS.     Trans,  by  Wibner  Cave  Wright. 
PINDAR.     Trans,  by  Sir  J.  E.  Sandys,     {ith  Impression.) 
PLATO :  CHARMIDES,     ALCIBIADES     I.     and     II., 

HIPPARCHUS,  THE  LOVERS,  THE  AGES.  MINOS. 

EPINOMIS.     Trans,  by  W.  R.  M.  Lamb. 
PLATO  :  CRATYLUS.  P.\RMENIDES,  GREATER  and 

LESSER  HIPPIAS.     Trans,  by  H.  N.  Fowler. 
PLATO:  EUTIFk'PHRO.  APOLOGY,  CRITO,  PHAEDO, 

PHAEDRUS.    Trans,  by  H.  N.  Fowler.  {5th  Impression.) 
5 


a 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 

PLATO:  LACHES,  PROTAGORAS,  MENO,  EUTHY- 

DEMUS.     Trans,  by  W.  R.  M.  Lamb. 
PLATO  :  LAWS.     Trans,  by  Rev.  R.  G.  Bury.     2  Vols. 
PLATO  :  LYSIS,  SYMPOSIUM,  GORGIAS.     Trans,  by 

W.  R.  M.  Lamb. 
PLATO  :  STATESMAN,  PHILEBUS.     Trans,  by  H.  N. 

Fowler  ;  ION.     Trans,  by  W.  R.  M.  Lamb. 
PLATO  :  THEAETETUS,  SOPHIST.     Trans,  by  H.  X. 

Fowler. 
PLUTARCH :  THE     PARALLEL    LIVES.     Trans,     by 

B.  Perrin.   1 1  Vols.  (Vols.  I.,  II.  and  VII.  2nd  Impression.) 
PLUTARCH:  MORALIA.     Trans,    by    F.    C.    Babbitt. 

14  Vols.     Vol.  I. 
POLYBIUS.     Trans,  by  W.  R.  Paton.     6  Vols. 
PROCOPIUS  ;  HISTORY  OF  THE  WARS.     Trans,  by^ 

H.  B.  Dewing.     7  Vols.     Vols.  I. -IV.  « 

QUINTUS  SMYRNAEUS.    Trans,  by  A.  S.  Way.  (Verse  , 

translation.) 
ST.  BASIL :  THE  LETTERS.     Trans,  by  R.  Deferrari. 

4  Vols.     Vol.  I.  vi 

ST.  JOHN  DAMASCENE  :  BARLAAM  AND  I0ASAPH.4 

Trans,  by  the  Rev.  G.  R.  Woodward  and  Harold  Mattingly. 
SOPHOCLES.     Trans,  by  F.  Storr.     2  Vols.  (Verse  trans- 
lation.)    (Vol.  I.  Uh  Impression,  II.  Srd  Impression.) 
STRABO  :  GEOGRAPHY.     Trans,  by  Horace  L.  Jones. 

8  Vols.     Vols.  I.-V. 
THEOPHRASTUS  :  ENQUIRY  INTO  PLANTS.    Trans. 

by  Sir  Arthur  Hort,  Bart.     2  Vols. 
THUCYDIDES.     Trans,  by  C.  F.  Smith.    4  Vols.    (Vol.  I. 

2wd  Impression.) 
XENOPHON  :  CYROPAEDIA.     Trans,  by  Walter  Miller. 

2  Vols.     (Vol.  I.  2nd  Impression.) 
XENOPHON  :  HELLENICA,  ANABASIS,  APOLOGY. 

AND   SYMPOSIUM.     Trans,   by   C.   L.   Brownson  and 

O.  J.  Todd.     3  Vols. 
XENOPHON  :  MEMORABILIA  and  OECONOMICUS. 

Trans,  by  E.  C.  Marchant. 
XENOPHON  :  SCRIPTA   MINORA.     Trans,   by  E.   C. 

Marchant. 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 


VOLUMES  IN  PREPARATION. 


GREEK    AUTHORS. 


;  STOTLE  :  ORGANON,  W.  M.  L.  Hutchinson. 
ISTOTLE  :  PHYSICS,  the  Rev.  P.  Wicksteed. 
ARISTOTLE:  POLITICS   axd   ATHENIAN   CONSTI- 
TUTION, Edward  Capps. 

RRIAN  :  HISTORY  OF  ALEXANDER  asd  INDICA, 

the  Rev.  E.  Iliffe  Robson.     2  \'ols. 
)EMOSTHENES  :  MEIDIAS,  ANDROTION,  ARISTO- 

CRATES,  TIMOCRATES,  J.  H.  Vince. 
»EMOSTHENES  :  OLYNTHIACS,  PHILIPPICS,  LEP- 

TINES,  MINOR  SPEECHES,  J.  H.  Vince. 
jEMOSTHENES  :     PRIVATE     ORATIONS,     G.    M. 

Calhoun. 
)IO  CHRYSOSTOM,  W.  E.  Waters. 
^REEK  IAMBIC  AND  ELEGIAC  POETS. 

YSIAS,  W.  R.  M.  Lamb. 

lANETHO,  S.  de  Ricci. 

•APYRI,  A.  S.  Hunt 

'HILO,  F.  M.  Colson  and  Rev.  G.  H.  Whitaker. 

'HILOSTRATUS  :  IMAGINES,  Arthur  Fairbanks. 

^LATO  :  REPUBLIC,  Paul  Shorev. 

'LATO:   TIMAEUS,   CRITIAS,  CLITOPHO,    MENE- 

XENUS,  EPISTUL.\E,  the  Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. 
EXTUS  EMPIRICUS,  the  Rev.  R.  G.  Bury. ' 
HEOPHRASTUS :  CHARACTERS,   J.    M.   Edmonds; 

HERODES  ;  CERCID.\S,  etc.,  A.  D.  Knox. 

LATIN    AUTHORS. 


5EDE  :  ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY. 
ICERO  :  CATILINE  ORATIONS,  B.  L.  UUman. 
:iCERO  :  DE  NATURA  DEORUM,  H.  Rackham. 
:iCERO  :  DE  ORATORE,  ORATOR,  BRUTUS,  Charles 

Stuttaford. 


THE  LOEB  CLASSICAL  LIBRARY 


CICE^     :  IN  PISONEM,  PRO  SCAURO,  PRO  FON- 

TEIO,  PRO  MILONE,  PRO  RABIRIO  POSTUMO, 

PRO    MARCELLO,    PRO    LIGARIO,    PRO    REGE 

DEIOTARO,  N.  H.  Watts. 
CICERO  :  PRO  SEXTIO,  IN  VATINIUM,  PRO  CAELIO, 

PRO  PROVINCIIS  CONSULARIBUS,  PRO  BALBO, 

D.  Morrah. 
CICERO  :  VERRINE  ORATIONS,  L.  H.  G.  Greenwood, 
ENNIUS,  LUCILIUS,  AND  OTHER  SPECIMENS  OF 

OLD  LATIN,  E.  H.  Warmington. 
FLORUS,  E.  S.  Forster. 
LUCAN,  J.  D.  Duff. 
OVID:    ARS  AMATORIA,  REMEDIA  AMORIS,  etc., 

F.  H.  Mozley. 
OVID  :  FASTI,  Sir  J.  G.  Frazer. 
PLINY:  NATURAL  HISTORY,  W.   H.   S.   Jones  an 

L.  F.  Newman. 
ST.  AUGUSTINE  :  MINOR  WORKS. 
SIDONIUS,  E.  V.  Arnold  and  W.  B.  Anderson. 
TACITUS  :  ANNALS,  John  Jackson. 
VALERIUS  FLACCUS,  A.  F.  Scholfield. 
VITRUVIUS  :  DE  ARCHITECTURA,  F.  Granger. 


DESCRIPTIVE  PROSPECTUS  ON  APPLICATION. 


London 

New  York 


WILLIAM  HEINEMANN  LT 
G.    P.    PUTNAM'S    SON! 


^  1     1 


^u. 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY 


