# OCR of https://archive.org/details/TheSoulTheoryOfTheBuddhistsThStcherbatsky with Tesseract (eng); page markers refer to archive.org page images.

=== [page n9] ===
The Soul theory of the Buddhists.

In that magnificent compendium of Buddhist
doctrine, which the illustrious Vasubandhu compiled
at the close of the V century A. D. under the title of
Abhidharmako§a we find attached to the last chapter,
as a kind of conclusion of the whole work. a special
appendix devoted to the much controverted question
about the Buddhist denial of the existence of Soul!.
The work opens with the statement that in order to
attain Salvation a thorough discrimination of the
Elements (dharma) which are active in the process of
life is indispensable, and then proceeds to make an
exposition of these Elements, their classification and
characteristics (I and II chapters). It then goes on in
the III chapter to enumerate the different kinds of living
beings or worlds produced by the play of the elementary
forces just described. The following two chapters (1V
and V) are devoted to an investigation into the general
cause which brings the world into movement and the
special causes that are feeding the process of life (karma
and anusaya). Thus these five chapters represent what
may be termed the statics and dynamics of the ordinary

1 Its full title is : astamakosasthanasambaddhah pudgalavini-
§cayah.

=== [page n10] ===
Gone)

world process (dukkha and samudaya). The remaining
three chapters are concerned with the purification of
this life or, more precisely, with the pacification of its
movement (nirodha and marga). Chapter VI contains
a picture of the Buddhist Saint (a@ryapudgala) and
the last two chapters (VII and VIII) deal with the
general and the special causes of saintliness, VIZ.
immaculate wisdom (prajfa amala) and transic medita-
tion (samadhi). Among all the analysed elements of
existence no Soul i. e. no permanent principle, repre-
senting some unity between the separate elements of
life, is mentioned. Consciousness (vyfidna), it is true,
occupies a central position, but it is likewise imperma-~
nent, and the final extinction of its working is likewise
aimed at. Some of the elerments necessarily follow upon
one another, some are necessarily coexisting 1. ©.
appearing always simultaneously, this process constitu-
ting their ‘mutually. interdependent origination’?
(pratityasamutpada) or life considered as a play of in-
terdependent elementary forces. In concluding his
exposition Vasubandhu feels himself called upon to
devote, in the special appendix mentioned above, some
considerations to the negative part of the whole system,
viz. the negation of Soul.

Viewed as a step in the evolution of Indian

philosophical thought Buddhism was probably preceded

=== [page n11] ===
( 3 )

by a fully developed form of the Samkhya system in
the elaborate thoroughly consistent shape of an Indian
Science (Sastra). We are not aware of any cogent argu-
ment for submitting to doubt the tradition according to
which Buddha studied systematical philosophy under
the guidance of two celebrated teachers of that doctrine.
From the same traditional source we gather that these
teachers probably had already rejected the doctrine of
the three primary constituents of matter. Buddha’s
denial of Soul was a further step in the same direction
towards a higher degree of consistency. The position of
an eternal passive Soul alongside with an active but
unconscious intellect (buddhi) is indeed a very weak
point in the Samkhya system, a point which invites
criticism. The one eternal matter of the Samkhya whose
manifestations are in a constant process of change
(nityaparindmi) was converted by Buddha into separate
elements which appear into life like momentary Hashings
without being backed by any eternal substance. Both
doctrines are sometimes called radical systems (ekania-
darsana), because the one adheres to the doctrine of
eternal existence only (sarvam nityam), while the other
maintains universal impermanence (sarvam anityam).
It is out of place here to go into a more detailed
comparison of both systems. Their close affinity has not

escaped the attention of scholars. What I should like

=== [page n12] ===
Cae)

here to insist upon is the fact that a close connexion
may be expressed not only by points of similarity, but
also by opposition, nay by protest. When Buddha calls
the doctrine of an eternal Self ‘ta doctrine of fools’? it
is clear that he is Renting against an established
doctrine. Whenever in his Sermons he comes to speak
about Soullesness or Wrong Personalism (satkdyadrsit)
a sense of opposition or eyen animosity is clearly felt
in his words. This doctrine along with its positive
counterpart—the separate elements that are active in
life and whose activity must gradually be suppressed till
Eternal Repose is attained—is the central point of the
whole bulk of Buddhist teaching and Mrs. Caroline
Rhys Davids rightly remarks, ‘‘how carefully and con-
scientiously this antisubstantialist position had been
cherished and upheld’?. We may add that the whole of
the history of Buddhist philosophy can be described as
a series of attempts to penetrate more deeply into this
original intuition of the Buddha, what he himself

believed to be his great discovery.

When considering the general lines of the later
evolution of Buddhist philosophy one is involuntarily
reminded of what has been said by one of the leaders
of modern thought with respect to philosophy in
general. “The more we try to penetrate into the main
idea of a philosopher... ... we feel that it imperceptibly

=== [page n13] ===
(BO)

becomes transfigurated at our hands’’. The original
intuition of a philosopher may be very simple, but he
spends the whole of his life in bringing it into a clear
formula. No sooner has he expressed what he had in
his mind than he feels himself obliged to correct his
formula, then to correct this correction and so on. “‘All
the complexity of his doctrine which thus is capable of
an infinite evolution is nothing else than an incommen-
surability between his primitive intuition and the means
to express it which were at his disposal??!. The oldest
schism in the Congregation had already a bearing upon
these abstruse philosophical questions. The Katha-
vatthu begins its exposition of divergent views by a
long discussion of the question about the possible
reality of Soul. The schools of the Aryasammitiyas and
Vatsiputriyas were inclined to interpret the doctrine of
Soullesness in a sense which admitted some, albeit very
feeble, unity in the elements of a personality. Their
opponents the Sarvastivadins denied even that. They
maintained that separate elements were really existing
in all the three times, i. e. not only were the momentary
flashings of some elements composing the present
moment really existing, but the past and future flashings

were also somehow existent. Soullessness for them was

1 H. Bergson. L’intuition philosophique. Revue de Metaph.

1911, p. 810.

=== [page n14] ===
(a S",)

equal to the whole infinite mass of elements past,
present and future. Nagarjuna made a further step in
erecting this Soullessness or Voidness into an entity suz
generis. The consequence was that the elements whose
interdependence was an acknowledged fact were denied
any real substantial existence (niisvabhava). ‘This
voidness developed (vtvarta) in an inconceivable manner
into the manifoldness of phenomenal life. Asvaghosa?
conceived Soullessness as a kind of general consciousness
(alayavijfdna) of which the separate elements were so
many aspects, thus giving to the primitive teaching an
idealistic interpretation. With Vasubandhu Buddhist
philosophy receives once more an idealistic interpreta-
tion to which the greatest Buddhist philosophers Dignaga
and Dharmakirti adhered with slight modifications.
Soullessness was later on conceived in a pantheistic
sense and personified as the primeval Buddha Vairocana.
The same can be maintained with regard to its theistic
conception personified as Buddha Amitabha whose wor-
ship gave rise to a new religion.

All the different forms in which Buddhism presents

2 The author of Mahayanasgraddhotpadagastra, The chrono-
logical argument which Prof. H. Jacobi and myself have
drawn from the fact that Buddhist Idealism is alluded to in
the Nyayasttras must be corrected, since, as it would seem,
idealistic views emerge in the run of Buddhist philosophy
more than once.

G —

=== [page n15] ===
leit)

itself at present and in the past may be viewed as so
many attempts to reach by sympathetic intuition the
original idea of the Master. An analysis of the elements
of life is presupposed by all of them. Vasubandhu
composed his treatise according not to his own views,
but mainly (prayena) in accordance with the teaching
of the Vaibhasikas of KaSmere. His plan was to
expose his own views in a later work of which he only
succeeded in composing the mnemonic verses. The
appendix mentioned above seems to be a kind of inter-
mediate part, a link between both these works.

It seemed desirable to give a translation of it at
present, without awaiting the time when a translation
of the whole of the Abhidharmako§ga could be carried
through press. It deals with the central point of all
Buddhism and is remarkale for its precision and the
beautiful style for which Vasubandhu is renowned in
the Buddhist world. European scholars will witness
their great Indian predecessor at the same work of
elucidating the difficult points of doctrine to which they
also have devoted many efforts. They will see him
making just the same references to passages in Buddha’s
sermons which they invoked in support of their solu-
tion. They will see that there is no “glaring contradic-
tion” between the scientific doctrine of Soullessness

and what in the popular style of the Sermons appears

=== [page n16] ===
Fe Se")

‘as a transmigration of Souls. They will give credit to
+he universal conviction of learned Buddhists that
the Buddha in his sermons very often had recourse to
figurative speech in order to approach the simple souls
of uneducated people. They will, as I hope, find in the
abhidharma what they were in vain looking for in the
diffuse style of popular sutras—‘“‘la forte structure
d'une théorie autonome, sortant toute armée d’une
speculation maitresse d’elle méme’’!.

The translation is made from the Tibetan text of
the Bstan-hgyur, vol. 63, f. 93109. The figures in
margin refer to the Peking edition of our Asiatic
Museum, the figures in brackets to the Japanese edition
of Hiuen-Thsang’s translation. Some indispensable
explanations and additions have been borrowed from
Yasomitra’s commentary, a literal version is sometimes
added in the notes. Our translation has been carefully
compared with the Chinese translations of Paramartha
and Hiuen-Thsang by the much regretted late prof.
O. O. Rosenberg whose premature demise just at the
beginning of a scientifical career full of the greatest
promise is a heavy blow upon our so much tried
country. In translating the technical terms we have
mainly followed the conclusions of his first and alas! last

work: Problems of Buddhist Philosophy, Petrograd. 1917.

1 E. Senart in Melanges Harlez, p. 281,

cc ll

=== [page n17] ===
G94)

We subjoin a table of the Elements of existence and

their different classifications. This table must always

be present to the mind when dealing with Buddhist
conceptions.

I classification into 5 groups (Skandha) of elements,
the substrates of a personal life: 1. physical elements
2. feelings 3. ideas, 4. volitions 5. general conscious-
ness.

II classification into 12 bases of cognition (Gyatana),
y. e. all things cognizable :

6 perceptive faculties, Their 6 objects,

I, sense of vision 7. colour and shape

2. auditory sense 8. sounds

3. olfactory sense 9. odours

4. sense of taste 10. tastes

D. sense of touch 11. tactile objects

6. intellect 12. the remaining 64 elements
(dharmah).

The elements of matter are included in No. 11.

No. 12 includes 1) 3 eternal elements : space and two

kinds of non-existence, 2) mental faculties : volitions,
feelings, ideas, Passions, virtues etc. 46 in number, 3)
general energies or processes : birth, decay etc. 14 in
number, 4) a special physical element, termed non-in-

timation No.No. 1—5 and 7—11 of this classification

=== [page n18] ===
(710) )

correspond to No. 1 of the former, No. 6 to No. 5,
No. 2—4 of the former are included in No. 12 of the
bases.

III classification in 18 component parts of existence
(dhatu) is the same as the foregoing one with the addi-
tion of 6 kinds of consciousness, viz. 13 visual—, 14
- auditory—, 16 consciousness of taste, 17 tactile—and
18 intellectual i. e. non sensuous or abstract conscious-
ness.

Other current classifications are: 1) mind and body
(ndmarfipa), 2) energies and substances (samskara
dravya), 3) matter, mind and energies (r@pa jnana
cittavt prayuktasamskara).

This makes together 75 elements : 3 eternal ones,
1 consciousness, 46 mental faculties, 14 general forces,

and 11 physical elements.

Other schools give different numbers, the Yogacaras—
100 etc.

AY EQ YF

=== [page n19] ===
( il)

Individuality examined.

Appendix to the VIII chapter of
Vasubandhu’s Abhidharmakofa.
[§ 1. Introductory].
Our Teacher is no more,
Of Universe the Eyes are closed,
Those who have witnessed Him are gone,
And troubled by false reasoning is our Religion |
For the Supreme Lord has entered Final Repose,
Followed by those who faithfully
This Holy Doctrine have maintained.
The World is left without a Guide.
Unchecked Corruption nowadays
Is freely spreading and defeating Virtue.
The times are come
When flooded by the rising tide of Ignorance
Buddha’s Religion seems to breathe its last !
Therefore, if for Salvation you do care,
Do not be heedless !2

[$ 2. Question stated.]

Is there, indeed, no other Salvation than (within
the pale of Buddhism) ?

No, there is none !—Why ?—Because (all other
doctrines) hold to the erroneous view of the real

existence of a Soul. The term ‘Soul’? is not regarded

=== [page n20] ===
(12)

by them as a conventional term applied to What is
only a flux of elements’. They maintain instead that
the Soul is a Reality quite independent from (the
elements). This idea of a Self is at the root of every evil
passion (and through its action Salvation becomes

impossible).?

But how can it be proved that the (various) terms
which are used to designate a Soul refer to a flux of
elements only and that there is no other (reality)
denoted by them ?

This is deduced from the fact that there neither is
a direct perception nor an inference (in favour of the
existence of the Soul). Elements really existing, when
present, are subject to direct perception, as f. i. the six
kinds of objects: (colours, sounds, smells etc.) and
intellect (itself, in the preceding moment)*. Otherwise
their existence may be inferred as f. i. the five senses-
(sight etc.). The (existence) of the latter is inferred as
follows :

General proposition. (Experience) shows, that although
the (general) causes be present, the effect is not produced
in absence of its special cause, but it is produced, when
the latter in (also) present.

Example. As f. i. a plant (is produced from its special
cause—the seed).

=== [page n21] ===
(C3 ae)

Application. Experience shows that although the
object be present and attention aroused, (it nevertheless

sometimes happens) that perception is not produced,
while (in other cases) it is produced.

_ Example. With the blind, the deaf etc. ‘it is not—)

and with those not blind, not deaf etc. (it is produced’.

Conclusion. Therefore it is established beyond any
doubt that here also a special cause is either absent or
present. This special cause is the sense faculty (of sight
étc.)?. This is (a valid) inference. But with regard to

the Soul no such (inference is possible). Consequently
there is no Soul.

But then the ‘‘Individual’:® the existence of which

‘is admitted by the school of the Vatsiputriyas? what
‘does it represent ?

First of all we must examine the question, whether
they admit (the existence of the Individual) asa reality
Or as an existence merely nominal ?
Vatsiputriya. What is an actual, and what a nominal
existence ?
~ Vasubandhu. If something exists by itself (as a
‘separate element), it has an actual existence, as f. i.
colour and other (ultimate elements of matter and

mind,®. But if something represents a combination (of
such elements) it is a nominal existence, as f. i. milk,

=== [page n22] ===
C)44)

Vatsiputriya. (So far I do not object). But what
follows from this ?

Vasubandhu. It follows first of all, that if Soul is an
actual existence, it must have an essence of its own and
must be something different from the elements of a
personal life, (just as these elements differ from one
another). Secondly you must indicate its cause, for
otherwise it would be an existence uncaused, (an eternal
being), and you would thus become guilty of professing
an heretical view, (which is contrary to your Own
system). Moreover (such an eternal, uncaused and
unchanging being) would be without any practical
efficiency,® (as if unexisting’. But if on the contrary you
admit it to be a nominal existence, (as a current
designation for the elements of a personal life), I too
will admit it, and say ‘‘so it is !”

Vatsiputriya. We do not maintain that it is an
absolute reality, but we neither accept it to be a
nominal one. ;

Vasubandhu. What is it then ?

Vatsi putriya. We give the name of an Individual to
something conditioned by the elements (as far as they

are organized) at a given moment in a personal lifel®.

Vasubandhu. These words are so to say blind ! As

long as their meaning is not disclosed, I do not under-

=== [page n23] ===
( 15 )

stand them ! What does it mean to be “‘conditioned’? ?
(Does it mean conditioned by perception or conditioned
by existence ?) In the first case the meaning would be:
having perceived some elements (I call them an
Individual). Then an Individual would be only another
name for the elements. Just as when I perceive a liquid
of a definite colour (smell, taste etc.), I call it milk,
though it is nothing else than these elements only. But
if ‘conditioned’ means that (the use of the term In-
dividual) is founded on (the existence) of elements, then
these elements would represent the cause for our using

this term. The difficulty remains the same.

L§ 3. The relation of the Individual to tts elements,
exempltfied by the relation of fire to fuel].

V tsi putriya. We donot use the term (“conditioned”)
in that sense.

Vasubandhu. In what sense then ?

Vatstputriya. (We use it) just as we use the word
“fire”, (in applying it to something) conditioned by the
presence of burning fuel. |

Vasubandhu. And what does it mean that the use of
the word fire is conditioned by burning fuel ?

Vatstputriya. If there is no fuel, neither (is there

anything) we can apply the name of fire to. Neverthe-
less we neither can maintain that fire is something

=== [page n24] ===
CaveO".’)

different from burning fuel nor can we assert that it is
the same. Were it altogether different, fuel could not
contain any caloric element, (which we know it always
does contain)!1, But if there were no difference at all,
then the substance that burns and the something that
singes would be (one and the same substance). This
illustrates (the relation between the Individual and its
elements). If the elements of a personal life are absent,
we do not use the term Individual. Nevertheless we
neither can maintain that the Individual is something
different from its component elements, nor can we
assert that they are identical. (In the first case) the
consequence would be an eternal (Soul), (in the second)
its total absence.

Vasubandhu. Indeed ! Then please explain what in
‘your opinion is fuel and what is fire ? Thereupon I
should like you to explain, what it does mean that the
name fire is applied to something ‘‘conditioned’’ by the
presence of burning fuel ? |

Vatsiputriya. This requires no explanation ! Fuel is
the matter that burns and fire is that which singes. That
-4s all}

Vasubandhu. This is just the thing I should like you
to explain : what is the matter that is consumed by fire,
-and what is it that consumes it ?

Vatsiputriya. Now, as used in common life (these

aaa lll tac aig ie ila alae ou

ee ee

=== [page n25] ===
Gai)

terms have the meaning of wood and flames). When
wood or any other fuel is bursting into flames, people
Say: “‘this is fuel’, “it is burning’, With regard to the
flames they Say: ‘‘this is fire’’, ‘it singes??. Flames and
intense heat are the agency which burns i. e. destroys
fuel in that sense that the continuity of its existence
undergoes a change, (it is turned into ashes). But (from
the scientific point of view), both fuel and fire are
composed of (exactly the same set) of eight primary
constituents (the sole difference consisting in the circums-
tance that in fire the caloric element is more prominent
than in fuel)!!, If the production of fire is conditioned
by the presence of fuel, it is just as the production of
curds which is conditioned (by the previous existence

of milk), or the milk’s sour taste which is conditioned
by its previous sweet taste.

Vasubandhu. But then, if the expression ‘‘conditioned
by the existence of fuel» has this meaning, fuel and fire
are altogether different things, because they are produ-
ced at different moments. If you mean that the produc-
tion of an Individual is conditioned by its component
elements in the same way, then it must be something
different from them and at the same time something
non-permanent, (since it has a cause. But if you
understand the caloric element in the burning fuel to

represent alone the fire, and the other three constituents

2

=== [page n26] ===
@ us |)

of matter—which are inseparable from this element—
to represent the fuel, then indeed it is established that
they must be different, since they differ in substance’?.
But then how can the name of such a fire be applied to
something ‘‘conditioned” by the presence of such fuel !
Once more you are bound to explain the meaning you
attach to the term ‘‘conditioned”? ? This (fuel) is not the
cause producing fire, not is it the cause of using the
name “‘fire’’. For fire itself is here the cause for applying
to it this name.

Vatsiputriya. The term ‘conditioned’ may here be
accepted in the sense of a support, or necessarily
coexisting element ?

Vasubandhu. But if you suppose the elements of a
personal life to “support”? the Individual, or to be
coexisting with him in the same sense (in which the
primary constituents of matter are coexisting (or suppor-
ting one another), you evidently are admitting a
difference between them. (Then indeed it would follow
that) no Individual can exist in the absence of its
component elements, just as well as no fire can exist in
the absence of fuel. |

V atst putriya. To this we have already answered, that
if fire be altogether different from fuel, the latter could
not contain any element of heat, (which it always does
contain ).

ad

=== [page n27] ===
(Peltor)

Vasubandhu. (Yes, you did say so), but what do you
understand by heat ? If it is the caloric element fuel
never will be the same as heat, since it is (in this case)
represented by the other constituents of matter. (They
will be as different as one constituent differs from the
Others).

Vatsi putriya. But then the other coexisting elements
may be possessed of heat. In this case it will be
established, that they are different from fire, as far as
the latter is represented by the caloric element, but they
nevertheless will represent heat also, in as much as
they will be pregnant with heat. Hence there is no fault
in them being different substances, (since they are thus
united),

Vasubandhu. You suppose burning wood etc. to
represent at the same time the fuel as well as the fire !
Again you are obliged to explain what in this case will
be the meaning attached to the term “conditioned”
And besides, since there is nothing but the elements to
Tepresent the Individual you cannot possibly escape the
conclusion that the latter is nothing different (from the
elements). Therefore you have not proved that the
name Individual is applied to something conditioned by
the presence of its elements in the same sense in which
the name fire is applied to something conditioned by
.the presence of fuel.

=== [page n28] ===
(ir 20r ” )

[§ 4. The Individual not included in the table of the
Elements].

Vasubandhu. Further, if the Individual is included
as a separate element among the elements of a personal
life, then we must admit the existence of anew category
of congnizable elements, a fifth category. For the
cognizable elements are either impermanent— past,
present and future—, or permanent. (That makes four
categories). Now if your Individual is an existemce
neither constantly changing, nor eternal, it will consti-
tute a fifth, intermediate category—an existence neither

momentary, nor eternal.}

Vatsiputriya. This cannot be maintained.

Vasubandhu. What is it then °

Vatsiputriya. It is undefinable : it neither does nor

does not constitute any fifth category.

Vasubandhu. When we are applying to an idea the
name ‘‘an Individual’, what is the corresponding
object ? Is it the elements of a personal life, or is it a
(real Individual ? In the first case we are applying the
name to the elements only, since there is no (real) object
so called. In the second, why should this name be
conditioned by the elements, since it is conditioned by
the real Individual itself ?

Vatsi putriya. We maintain that in the presence of all

=== [page n29] ===
(ap 2i =)

the elements of a personal life we perceive the object
called Individual. Therefore we use this name as

conditioned by the elements.

Vasubandhu. But colour too is perceived under the
condition that the sense of vision, aroused attention and
light be present. Hence you must maintain that it is
‘conditioned’? by them and therefore nominal. (There

will be no unconditioned existence altogether).
L§ 5. How is the Individual’s existence cognizez].

Vasubandhu. Now I should like you to answer the
following question. There are six kinds of cognition,
(five sense-perceptions, according to the number of
senses, and one purely mental). By which of them is the
Individual cognized ?

Vatst putriya. We answer : by all the six !

Vasubandu. How is that to be understood ?

Vatsiputriya. If we have a visual perception of some
coloured shape!3, and if we thereby indirectly cognize
the presence of a human Individual, we may maintain
that he is cognized by sight. But we neither can admit
that he himself is this colour and this shape, nor can
we deny it. The same applies (to all the other material
elements, voice etc. and also to the mental phenomenal.
If we have a perception of some mental phenomena
through the intellect, and if thereby the idea of an in-

=== [page n30] ===
( 22 )

telligent being presents itself to our mind, we may
maintain that this Individual is cognized by a percep-
tion purely mental; but we neither can admit that he
himself represents those mental phenomena, nor can we
(absolutely) deny it.

Vasubandhu. But if that be true, the same argument
may be applied to the cognition of milk and other
(composite substances. They include elements of colour,
of smell, taste and touch). If we have a direct visual
perception of a definite colour (and flat surface), and
through it the idea of milk or of water presents itself to
our mind, we may maintain that this milk and this
water is cognized by sight. But we neither can admit
that they themselves are this colour and shape, nor can
we absolutely deny it. The same might be said about
their elements cognized by smell, taste and touch. We
may have a direct perception of these substances
through the sense of touch, but we neither can admit
that they are themselves this touch nor can we
absolutely deny it. Because (if these colour, smell, taste
and touch were each of them milk itself or water itself),
we should have four different kinds of milk or water.
We arrive at the following conclusion: just as milk and
water are conventional names (for a set of independent
elements), for some colour, (smell, taste and touch)

taken together, so is the designation ‘Individual’? but

Ee —————————— Cw!

7. =

=== [page n31] ===
( 23 )

‘a common name for the different elements, which it is
composed of. But (let us consider the argument more
closely). You have said: ‘‘if we have a visual perception
of some colour and shape, and if we thereby indirectly
cognize the presence of a human Individual’ etc. Now,
what is the meaning of these words ? Does it mean that
the cognition of the Individual is caused by its visible
element, or does it mean that both are cognized simul-
taneously ?

(Vaitsiputriya. What is the difference between these
two possibilities ?)

Vasubandhu. If the visible element is the cause
producing the cognition of the Individual, and at the
same time we are told, that the latter does not differ
from the former, (this must be true of all the other
causes too), and since they are not different from the
Individual, there neither can be any difference between
themselves. Hence we arrive at the absurd conclusion,
that the visible element in its turn does not differ from
sight, light and attention, since these all are the causes
of a visual perception. Now, (take the other possibility) :
the cognition of the Individual appears at the same time
with the cognition of the visible element. The question
arises: do we perceive the Individual by that very
perception, by which we perceive the visible form, or

by another one ? In the first case the Individual would

=== [page n32] ===
C22.)

be essentially the same as the visible form, in other
words, it would be the name for some visible element
only But then how could we make a distinction between
them ? How could we tell: ‘‘this is the bodily frame’?
and ‘“‘this is the Individual itself’? Or how indeed could
we surmise that the individual is something as really
existing, as the visible element is, if there altogether
be no distinction between them ? We can assume
existence only on the basis of some cognition. What is
here said about the visible element, might be extended
to all the other elements, mental phenomena included.
But supposing the Individual to be cognized by a
separate act of perceptive knowledge, then it should be
something quite different from the visible element, as
both are cognized at different moments, just as blue
differs from yellow, or just as two moments (in the
existence of the same object) differ from one another.
This might also be extended to all other elements,
mental phenomena included.

Vatstputriya. But (there is still another possibility) :
just as we maintain that the Individual and the visible
element are neither different, nor are they identical, we
shall extend (the same principle) to their cognitions:
they are neither different, nor are they identical !

Vasubandhu. Well (if you go on in this way with the

relation of neither different nor identical), you neither

=== [page n33] ===
Bs OO

will be capable even of maintaining that (this cognition
of an Individual) is a passing phenomenon and this will
mean giving up your own tenet, (namely that cognitions
are always phenomenal).

Further if you are in the right and this Individual)
really exists, but is neither identical nor different from
the visible element, why then has the Lord (expressly
denied it), declaring that ‘‘neither the visible element is
the Self nor any other element, consciousness included”?
And if the Individual is perceived through sight, what
is the objective cause producing such perception ? Is it
the visible frame, or is it the Individual, or both toge-
ther ? If it is the visible object it cannot possibly be
a perception of the Individual, no more than it can be
perception of his voice or the like. Because the objective
cause of every perception belongs necessarily to its own
special field, (a visual perception can be of colour or
form only). And if you suppose it to be the Individual
itself or the Individual and the body together, you will
be contradicted!5 by Scripture, because Scripture lays
a stress upon the point that there are only two causes
producive of perception. Thus it is declared: “O Bro-
ther ! when a visual perception is produced, the first
cause of it is the faculty of sight, the second a visible

object. Why is that? Because the production of all visual
perceptions, whatever they may be, is conditioned by

=== [page n34] ===
(oe)

the existence of the faculty of sight and of a visible
object.’? In that case it would likewise follow, that the
Individual, (did it exist), would be something changing
every moment, for Scripture declares, that ‘‘whatever
be the active cause or the object of a visual perception,
is €O ipsO a momentary existence’. Now if your
Individual is not a visible object, it never will be
cognized by sight. As to your theory that the Individual
may be cognized by all the six kinds of perception. (we
must observe, that) if it can be cognized by audition,
it must be something quite different from the visible
element, as different as sound is from colour. On the
other hand if it is cognized by sight it must be some-
thing quite different from the voice, as different as colour
is from sound. The same argument may be extended to
the other sources of cognition. Moreover your theory is
in contradiction with the following Scriptural passage :
“OQ, Brahmin ! each of these five sense faculties has its
own separate field of action and its own objects because
each one experiences its own objects in its own special
field!®. One faculty cannot act in the domain of another,
or experience objects belonging to it. Thus we have the
faculties of sight, of audition, of smell, of taste, of touch
and of the intellect. The first five have their proper
domain and their own objects each, the faculty of the

intellect being the common resort for all.2? The con-

=== [page n35] ===
( 27 )

sequence of this would be that there is altogether no
such object as an Individual, and if it does not consti-
tute an object of cognition, it will follow that it cannot

be cognized at all.

Vatsiputriya. If this would be the case, then the
Individual could not be cognized even by the intellect.
(But in its turn this is contradicted by Scripture). It is
declared in the Parable of the Six Animals: ‘‘the six
faculties have each of them a separate field of action,
each has a natural propensity towards a special domain
of its own and its own special objects.” (This propensity
belongs to intellect alone, hence we understand this
passage to indicate that the faculty of the intellect may
cognize every object).

Vasubandhu. This passage does not mention the
cognitive faculties in the current sense of the six cogni-
tive faculties, (because it mentions their propensity i. e.
a conscious choice). Now the five senses and the
(indefinite) consciousness produced by them cannot
have any propensity towards visual or other perception.
But by their influence mind is attracted and they are
followed by definite mental cognitions which are referred
‘to in the above passage under the name of cognitive
faculties. As to cognitions (purely) mental which are
consequent on the action of the intellect alone, (indepen-

dently of any influence by the senses, they have their

=== [page n36] ===
( 28 )

own special objects and) cannot have any inclination
towards a domain which is essentially different from
their own. (There can be no common object for all
cognitive faculties; the Individual being no special
object of any separate faculty cannot be cognized
altogether). Therefore your objection is not valid, (your
reference to the meaning of the passage in question does
not improve your position). And besides Buddha (has
given the full list of all existing elements without men-
tioning any Individual). «‘O Brethren ! has he declared,
I will expose to you the list of all elements which must
be well known, thoroughly known. Well known, thoro-
ughly known must be the faculty of vision, its object, its
apprehension, its sensation and the feeling whether
pleasant, unpleasant or indifferent caused by the sensa-
tion of a visual contact’? and so on, he goes on
enumerating the elements and) concludes with ‘the
feeling arising from a purely mental sensation. This is
the list of all the elements of existence that must be well

known, that must be thoroughly known”.

(Vatsiputriya. Buddha speaks in this passage about
thorough knowledge. But to apprehend the mere
existence of something is not the same as to know
thoroughly.)

Vasubandhu. It is clearly stated in the above passage

that the elements to be well known, and thoroughly

a

=== [page n37] ===
( 29 )

known are so many and no more. There is no Individual
among them. Therefore neither its mere existence can
be apprehended, since the indefinite apprehension of an
object’s mere existence and its subsequent definite
cognition always refer to just the same object. This idea
of yours that there is an existing Self who through the
opening of his eyes contemplates other Selves—this idea

it is which is called Wrong Personalism.’%

[$ 6. Scriptural passages discussed].

Vasubandhu. In his sermons Buddha lays a stress
upon the point, that what is called an Individual is
nothing else than the component elements (of a personal
life). So it is declared in the Ajita-“Sermon : “‘a visual
consciousness depends upon the organ of sight and a
visible object. When these three: (object, sense organ
and consciousness) combine, a sensation is produced. It
is accompanied by a fecling, a representation and a
volition. Thus we have four elements that are mental
(Sensation i. e. indefinite consciousness, feeling, repre-
sentation and volition), and one, the organ of sight,
that is physical. Only so much is meant, when we are
speaking of a human being. To these (five sets of
elements) different names are being given, such asa
sentient being, a man, Manu’s progeny, a son of Manu,
a child, an Individual, a life, a Soul. If with respect to

them the expression is used ‘‘he sees this object with his

=== [page n38] ===
«De,

own eyes” it is false imputation, (there being in reality
nobody possessing eyes of his own). In common life with
respect to them such expressions are current as: ‘‘that
is the name of this venerable man, he belongs to such
a caste and such a family, he eats such food, this pleases
him, he has reached such an age, he has lived so many
years, he has died at such an age’? These O Brethren !
accordingly are mere words, mere conventional designa-
tions.

“Expression are they, (but not truth) !

Real elements have no duration,

Vitality makes them combine,

In mutually dependent apparitions??.

Moreover Buddha has declared that one must hold

to the definite (direct, technical) meaning of his words.
Therefore this their meaning must be examined over and
over again. Thus, when it is said: ““O Brahmins ! every
thing exists”, (one must bear in mind) that it likewise
has been said, “this refers only to (the elements of exis-
tence classified as) the twelve “bases of cognition’?’. Now
if this Individual is not to be found among the bases
of cognition, it is (eo ipso) proved that it does not exist
altogether. If, on the contrary, it is included in them,
then it is not admissible to maintain that the Individual
is something indefinite, (neither identical nor different

from the elements, since the elements and bases are

ee

=== [page n39] ===
(. Sai)

something definite). Again in one sermon according to
the (VAatsiputriyas) themselves, there is a passage runn-
ing thus: “all the organs of sight that may exist and
all the visible objects, that may exist etc. etc.’’—follows
the enumeration of all the twelve bases of cognition —
“the Buddha has declared that here (in the twelve
bases) they are contained, all without exception; and
he declares that these are the only elements really exXis-
ting’. Among them there is no Individual. Therefore
how can the VAatsiputriyas maintain that the Individual
is something real ? (They contradict their own Scriptu-
res!) Again in the Bimbisara-Sermon it is declared :
“O Brethren ! (the notion) of ‘“‘myself and of ‘mine’? is
a childish notion of simple uneducated people, who are
misled by current expressions!’. There is no Self, no-
thing mine, nothing except the separate elements of the
trouble of life in their vanishing apparitions’!®. And
the holy nun Sila!9—Mara having started the discu-
ssion 2° —gives the following answer :

‘A sentient being does exist, you think, O Mara?

You are misled by false conception.

This bundle of elements is void of Self,
In it there is no sentient being,

Just as a set of wooden parts

Receives the name of carriage,

So do we give to elements

The name of fancied being?**!.

=== [page n40] ===
Tans 2)

Further, we find in the “Scriptural Chips 22 Buddha
addressing the Brahmin Badarayana in the following
terms : ‘‘Listen thou, O Badarayana ! I shall explain to
you all bonds of life which are the vanishing elements.
On consciousness (they do depend, with it) are they
defiled, with it they become purified?3, But a Self in
the sense of the real Self does not exist. By false
(imputation the element of consciousness) is fancied (to
represent a Self). There is here neither a Self nora
sentient Being. ‘There are elements which depend (upon
other elements acting as) causes. Life revolves in twelve
successive stages, (but it contains nothing else except the
elements, differently classified as) the five aggregates
(the substrates of an individual life), or the twelve bases
of cognition, or the eighteen component parts of exis-
tence. If we carefully examine them, we do not find
among all of them any Individual. Behold the elements
of inward life ! they are void (of a Self) Behold those
lying to the outward ! they also are void?4. And even
he who is plunged in deep meditation about this (two-
fold) voidness, whosoever he may be, he is not found
(among the elements of real existence) !?? Andit is like-
wise declared (in the same collection) : ‘““There are five
draw-backs in this idea of a Soul: 1) a false dogma of
a Soul, of an intelligent being, or aliving creature26, 2)

a coincidence whith heretics, 3) a wrong path to Salva-

=== [page n41] ===
(f 83) ")

tion, 4) a disinclination towards the idea of (Self-)
voidness, a disbelief, a want of steadiness, want of
devotion to it2?, 5) the elements of saintliness do not
appear in their (genuine) purity”.

Vatsiputriya. For the (Vatsiputriyas) these texts are
of no authority !

Vasubandhu. Why ?

Vatsiputriya. Because they maintain that in their
Collection of Sermons they are not to be found.

Vasubandhu. But are their Collections the only
authority (they bow to), or is the word of Buddha their
authority ? If their Collections are the only authority,
then Buddha is not their Teacher and they are not the
sons of the $akya-Hermit. But if the word of Buddha
is their authority, why then should these texts not be
authoritative ?

Vatsiputriya, They are not the (true) Words of
Buddha.

Vasubandhu. And why ?

VGisiputriya. Because the (Vatsiputriyas) are known
tO maintain that they are not to be found in their
Collections?8,

Vasubandhu. This is inadmissible !

Vadisi putriya. What is inadmissible ?

Vasubandhu. To declare a text spurious because it is

omitted in their collection, a text which is found in all

3

=== [page n42] ===
( 34 )

other collections, a text which neither disagrees with
Scripture nor with the theory of Elements2°, this is a
quite arbitrary proceeding and nothing more! And then,
the (well-known) passage ‘“‘the elements contain no

Self, is it likewise omitted (in their own Collections)?

Vatsiputrzya. But in our opinion it means that the
Individual is neither one of the elements nor is it some-
thing outside the elements, (as stated above).

Vasubandhu. In this case (if nothing corresponds to
it) the Individual would never have existed (even) as a
mental idea®°, (since every idea must have something
for its objective source). It is expressly stated in Scrip
ture, that there are always two causes for every cogni-
tion (a receptive faculty and an apprehended object).

(Vatsiputr ya. And how do you explain the fact that
in the absence of a Self there nevertheless arises an idea
of a Self ?)

Vasubandhu. It is stated (in other texts) that ‘‘the
Self corresponds to a non-Self, (to something existing,
but not to a real Self). It is a wrong idea, a wrong
apprehension and a wrong doctrine.

Vatsiputrzya. How indeed did you corne to know
that the false idea of a Self corresponds not to a Self,
but to a non-Self ?

Vasubandhu. And what in your opinion) does the

expression “‘non-Self? mean (in Scripture) ?

=== [page n43] ===
(SS 1)

Vatsiputriya. (It is meant to designate all the
elements of phenomenal existence, classified as they are
in five aggregates, the substrates of a personal life), or
in twelve bases of cognition, or in eighteen component
parts of existence.

Vasubandhu. Well, (f. i. the bodily frame being an
element must be designated as a non-Self, and it follows
that you are contradicting your own statement made
above), the statement namely that the Individual is
neither identical with the bodily frame, nor is it some-
thing different3!. (If the bodily element does not differ

from the Self, it cannot represent the non-Seif).

In anothér Sermon it is declared : ‘‘O Brethren !
some Buddhists as well as some Brahmins entertain the
idea of a Self. But you must know that all such ideas
refer exclusively to the five mundane groups (of ele-
ments, the substrates of a person’s phenomenal life: its
bodily frame, its feelings, its notions, its will, and its
general consciousness)’?. Therefore all such cognitions

of a Self invariably refer to the non-Self.
[§ 7. Is the Buddha a real personality].

Vasubandhu. Accordingly Scripture declares: ‘‘(there
are saints, who can) remember their various previous
existences, but in doing so, all that they did remember,

all they are remembering or will remember about in

=== [page n44] ===
C36 ™)

future refers simply to these five groups of mundane

elements.

Vatstputriya. If such be the import of this text, why

then does Buddha declare (in his Sermons): ‘‘in a
former existence I have had such a bodily frame’.
(Using the term ‘I’? implies the extstence of a

Self).

Vasubandhu. He alludes in these words to the fact
which has been expressed in the (just cited) passage
‘there are saints who can remember their various pre-
vious existences etc.’? (The saints who remember their
previous births remember them in this form, namely in
the form: ‘‘I”? have had such a bodily frame)’. If the
import of these words had been (as you conceive it)
that there is a (real) Individual, which (in former
births) possessed an (other) body, it would follow, that
you are professing the heresy of Wrong Personalism, and
then the only possible escape (for you not to be accused
of this heresy) would be to declare spurious (all the
Sermons where Buddha speaks of his previous births)??.
Therefore it is clear that in those Sermons Buddha
speaks about his person in the common, conventional
sense, just as we use the expression ‘a collection”?
(meaning its separate parts), or ‘‘a continuity?? (mea-
ning its separate moments. In one moment we have a

collection of the elements of a personality existing

=== [page n45] ===
amo tr)

Simultaneously, in the continuity of life through many

births a collection of such successive moments).

Vatsiputriya. In this case it would follow that
Buddha is not omniscient. Since consciousness as well
as the mental states are but separate moments, there is
not the slightest possibility (for one of such moments)
to know every thing (i. e. the arising and disappearing
of all elements in every moment). But for a real per-

sonality such (universal) knowledge becomes possible.

Vasubandhu. But then you admit the existence of a
Self which does not vanish at the moment when con-
sciousness vanishes, therefore you must admit the exis-
tence of an eternal Soul, (an unchanging Self along with
a changing consciousness, and that would be a contra-
diction to your own doctrine). As to us, we by no means
Maintain that the Buddha has an immediate direct
knowledge of all (moments) and that this is the reason

of his being called ‘‘the Omniscient”.
V dist putriya. How is it then ?

Vasubandhu. He is possessed of the gift of omniscience
in the sense that the continuity of life which is called
“the Buddha’? has the force of producing the right
knowledge of any object he may like to know by

simply directing his attention towards it. It has been
said ¢

=== [page n46] ===
(SESS om)

‘‘Not in the sense of ‘‘all at once”?
Admit we omniscience,
But gradually it operates
Like fire every thing consuming !°
Vatsiputriya. How can it be proved (that the
Buddha is no permanent personality, but a stream of
changing elements) ?

Vasubandhu. \t follows from the fact that there are
past, future and present Buddhas), as stated in Scripture.

Vatsiputriya. (Where has it been declared ?)

_ Vasubandhu. There is ‘a verse in Scripture) running
thus :
‘Be it the Buddhas of the past
Be it the Buddhas of the future
Be it the Buddhas of the present
They all remove the suffering
Of many sensient beings’’.

Since you yourself are likewise maintaining that
what appears in the three times is elements only and
no permanent personality, (therefore it is clear that
there is no Ego outside the elements, nor is there any
Omniscient Ego, because this would be irreconcilable

with the temporary character of these elements).

[§ 8. Examination of the parable of the burden and
the carrver.|
Vatstputriya. If the Individual is nothing else but

=== [page n47] ===
( Sey

the elements (it is composed of), what for then has it
been declared by Buddha: ‘‘O, Brethren ! I shall explain
unto you the burden (of life) and moreover I will
explain the taking up of the burden, the laying aside of
it and who the carrier is !?? (‘Listen well, listen
attentively and inculcate it in your minds! I am going
to explain! What is the burden? All the five aggregates
of elements, the substrates of personal life. What is
meant by the taking up of the burden ? The Force of
Craving for a continous life, accompanied by passionate
desires, the rejoicing at many an object. What is the
laying aside of the burden ? It is the wholesale rejection
of this Craving for a continuation of life, accompanied
as it is by passionate desires and rejoicings at many an
object, the getting rid of it in every circumstance,
its extinction, its end, its supression, an aversion
towards it, its restraint, its disappearance. Who is the
carrier ? We must answer: it is the Individual i.e. ‘‘this
venerable man, having this name, of such a caste, of
such family, eating such food, finding pleasure or dis-
pleasure at such things, of such an age, the man who
after a life of such length, will pass away having reached
such an age”. (What for did Buddha declare this ?)

Vasubandhu. Why should he not ?

Vatstputriya. (The burden is explained to represent

all the elements of life and the carrier i. e. the Indivi-

=== [page n48] ===
Gio) ’)

dual, if not different from them, must be included in
the same). Now the burden and the carrier of the burden

cannot possibly be the same thing??.

Vasubandhu. Why ?

Vatsiputriya. Because (experience teaches) that this
never happens.

Vasubandhu. But to say (as you do) that an Indivi-
dual is something undefinable, (neither identical nor
different from the elements it is composed of) is likewise
inadmissible! And why ? (For the same reason !) Because
such a thing has never been witnessed ! Moreover (if the
carrier of the burden be taken to represent something
different from the elements), the consequence would be
that neither “the taking up of the burden” (i. e. the
Force of assuming new elements by birth) could be in-
cluded among these elements (which we know it is,
under the name of the Force of Craving for Life)?°. The
carrier of the burden has been pointed to by Buddha
with the express purpose to show that only so much can
be known of him: ‘the is a venerable man, named so
and so” and other (common life) particulars ending with
‘“‘after so long a life he will die at such an age”, but he
must not be misunderstood to represent some eternal
(Soul) or some (real) Individual. (In reality nothing
exists but momentary sets of elements), the elements of

the former moment exercising (as it were) a pressure

2 ee eee

=== [page n49] ===
( 41)

upon the elements of the following one. Hence the
preceding moment has been conventionally called the
burden and the following one—the carrier of the
burden®?,

[§ 9. Further arguments of the Vaistputriyas in favour
of the existence of some kind of Individual, stated and
answered].

V dist putrzya. Some Individual necessarily must exist,
(because there are apparitional spontaneous self-birth®>,
‘The denial of spontaneous births has been (condemned
in Scripture, as one of) the wrong views.

Vasubandhu. Who has ever denied spontaneous
births ! In conformity with the explanation given by
Buddha, we maintain that they do exist. (Buddha has
said, namely, that if the elements develop into a new life
spontaneously, the result is a self-born apparition’.
Hence what has been condemned as a wrong view is (the
denial of this explanation,) the denial of the fact that
such an apparition in a new existence isa (mere) trans-
formation in an unbroken chain of appearing elements,
because an apparition consists of elements®®, But
supposing you were in the right, and I am really guilty
of the fault you are imputing tome, namely the heresy
of denying the existence of an Individual®?, what would
happen ? I never could get rid of it! For only two ways

are taught towards perfection : insight into the four

=== [page n50] ===
(we)

Truths of Perfection and Ecstasy or the practice of the
Holy Path. Neither will be applicable in my case. In-
sight into the Truths will not do, because such an heresy
is not mentioned in them, on the contrary we find the
opposite view—the heresy of Wrong Personalism—men-
tioned, And as to the way of practice it is not capable
of clearing up wrong views altogether ®®.

Vatsiputriya. But the Individual cannot be identical
with the elements of a personal life, because (Scripture
mentions the Individual as a unit). There is a passage:
‘when one whole individual appears in the world, it is
born??39,

Vasubandhu. This is wrong! A unit may also be
used as a conventional substitute for a multitude, as f. i.
‘one?’ corn of sesame, ‘‘one’? corn of rice (for a multi-
tude of grains) and ‘‘one*? word (for a combination of
sounds).

And again, since you admit that the Self is some-
thing that is being born (into phenomenal existence)
you must admit that it cannot be something permanent.
(Elements that are subject to birth never are perma-
nent)?°.

Vatsiputriya. (It is permanent in a way, for ‘‘being
born” is here used in another sense). The elements are
(momentary) apparitions which did not exist in the
former moment, but the Self is not born in this way.

=== [page n51] ===
( 43)

Vasubandhu. How then ?

Vatsiputriya. (1t is born in the sense, that it acquires
new elements, casting away the previous ones), just as
by the acquirement of knowledge one becomes a priest
Or a grammarian, by (appropriate) distinctions*! one
becomes a Buddhist monk or a Brahminica] wandering
ascetic, and by a change in the physical condition one
becomes old or falls ill. (In all these cases new elements

are produced in something already existing).

Vasubandhu. This argument is wrong! It is con-
demned in Scripture. In his Sermon about the “Real
Void?>42 Buddha has spoken thus; ‘“‘O, Brethren! actions
do exist and also their consequences (merit and demerit),
but the person that acts does not. There is no one to
cast away this set of elements and no one to assume a
new set of them**. (There exists no Individual), it is
only a conventional name given to (aset) of elements“.
In the ‘‘Discourse with Phalguna??™ it is likewise decla-
red : ‘I do not say, O Phalguna ! that the same body
assumes a (new set of elements)*?. Therefore there is no
one whatsoever who assumes elements or throws them
off.

But first of all I should like to know : what are you
alluding to, when you refer to the (assuming of new ele-
ments by) the priest, (the grammarian) etc, ? Is it their

personality ? No, because its existence is not proved. Is

=== [page n52] ===
GMEL”.))

-¢ their mind and mental phenomena ? (No, because
there 1s nothing permanent in them), they appear anew
at every moment. Is it their body ? (No, because) the
same must be said about the body.

Further, (your examples prove the opposite of what
they are meant to prove. You maintain namely that the
Self and the elements are neither different, nor identical,
but) just as knowledge and other marks (are different
from the body), in like manner the clements must be
different from a Self. (If you admit) that the bodies of
‘the old and the sick (are different states), of the same
body, we answer that the old and the sick body are
altogether new bodies (different from the previous ones.
To deny it would mean to accept) the transformation
doctrine of the Sdamkhyas which has already been
dispensed with. Therefore your examples are not fit (to
prove your tenet that the Self and the elements are
neither different nor identical). Again if you admit the
elements, but not the Self, to be produced anew (in
every moment , then you clearly show that both are
different and that the Self is permanent. And when you
point to the fact that there are five sets of elements in
any personal life and only one Self, do you not main-
tain that the Self is different from the elements 2148 (How
can you at the same time maintain that it is not diffe-

rent and not permanent) ?

——————ooOoowre

=== [page n53] ===
(452. 5)

Vaisiputriya. Then I will ask you in my turn.
There are four primal constituents of matter, but matter
itself is regarded as something simple. Nevertheless is it
not taught that matter is not different from its consti-

tuents ?

Vasubandhu. This is a mistaken view held by some
persons.

Vatsiputriya. By whom ?

Vasubandhu. By those who (like Buddhadeva) admit

the existence of the primary constituents alone??,

[L$ 10. Questions supposed to have been left unsettled].

Vatstputrzya. If this be true, if an individual repre-
sents exactly the elements it is composed of and nothing
else, why then did the Lord decline to decide the ques-

tion, whether the “living being” is identical with-the
body, or not ?

Vasubandhu. Because he took into consideration the
intention of the questioner. The latter asked about the
existence of the Soul as a real living unit, controlling
Our actions from within. But as such a Soul is absolutely
non existing, how could Buddha have decided, whether
it did or did not differ from the body. Fancy someone
asking : is the hair of the tortoise hard, or smooth ?!
This question has already been analysed by quite

ancient teachers. (There lived once an Elder of great

=== [page n54] ===
(46. )

learning named Nd@gasena and a powerful King, Milinda
by name). This King Milinda came to the Elder Ndga-
sena and said: “‘O Venerable One! Very loquacious are
monks ! If you would answer my question, exactly
I have a mind to ask you something’. ‘“‘Please, do ask !”°
said the Elder. Thc King asked : ‘‘This living being,
what is it ? Is it the same as the body, or is the living
being one thing and the body another ??? The Elder
said: ‘“‘This question has not been answered !?? The
other said: “O most venerable One! did you not
condescend to promise at the outset not to give any
evasive explanation? Why then are you telling me that
this question has not been answered (by Buddha’. These
words are by no means ‘an answer to my question)’?.
The Elder spoke : ““O great King! Very loquacious are
Kings! If you would answer my question, exactly I
also have a mind to ask you something’’. “‘Please, ask !>?
said the King. The Elder asked : ‘‘Are the fruit of the
mango tree in your palace sour or are they sweet ?»?
“There is absolutely no mango tree in my palace !?? was
the answer. The Elder said again : *«O great King ! did
you not condescend to promise at the outset, not to give
any evasive explanation ? Whatfore then are you telling
me that there is no mango tree in your palace ? This
is by no means an answer to my question) !’? ‘The King

replied: ‘‘But how can I tell you something about the

=== [page n55] ===
(4a) »)

taste, sour or sweet, of the fruit of a nouexisting mango
tree 2’ “O great King! said the Elder, it is just the
same with this living being! If it does not exist, what-
fore shall I explain whether it does or does not differ
from the body >?»

Vatsiputriya. And why did not the Lord declare that
it does not exist at all ?

Vasubandhu. Because he took into consideration the
questioner’s state of mind. The latter could have under-
stood that the “living being’? is the same as the conti-
nuity of the elements of a life (and that this continuity)
is also denied. He thus would have fallen into a wrong
doctrine, (the doctrine of Nihilism). 7

Vatsiputriya, Why then did not Buddha declare, that
the ‘“‘living being’? is a conventional name for a set of

constantly changing elements ?)

Vasubandhu, Because his interlocutor was not capa-
ble of grasping the theory (of elements), since he had no
knowledge (of the manner, in which these elements)
appear in combinations, being mutually interdependent.
This (method of teaching in conformity with the mental
capacity of the listerer) can be clearly seen in the
following express words of Buddha. (After having refused
an answer to the questions of the wandering ascetic
Vatsagotra about the existence of the soul, he thus
adressed Ananda) : ‘Would it not have been improper,

=== [page n56] ===
(U4S.0))

O Ananda, to tell that there is a Soul, since among all
elements of existence threre is none. And if I did tell
him that it does not exist, Vaisagotrd might have fallen
out of one perplexity into a still greater one. He might
have thought: ‘I had a Soul precedently, now I have
lost it ! IfI tell that the Soul exists, O Ananda, there
is the danger of falling into one extremity in surmising
its Eternity. If I tell that it does not exist, there is the
opposite danger of falling into Nihilism !? This point
has been explained (by Kumaralabha) thus: ‘‘The Buddha
was pleased to construct his doctrine concerning the
elements of existence (with the greatest caution), like a
tigress who holds her young by her teeth, (her grasp is
not too tight in order not to hurt him, nor is it too loose
in order not to let him fall). Buddha saw the wounds
produced by the sharp teeth of the dogmatic (belief in
Eternity) on the one hand, and by the downfall of (every
responsibility for one’s) actions on the other. If (huma-
nity) accepted the ‘dea of an existing Soul it lay down
wounded by the sharp weapon of dogmatism. But if it
did cease to believe in the existence of a conditioned
Self, then the tender child of its moral merit would
perish’’. The same author goes on and says: ‘*Since the
‘living being” does not exist, the Lord did not declare
that it is different from the body. But he neither has
declared that it does not exist, fearing that this could

=== [page n57] ===
(oG49 52)

be understood as a denial of the empirical Self. There
is namely in the stream of elements a certain “‘living’’
in the sense (of action producing) good or bad results,
and if Buddha had said that there is altogether no
living being, (Vaisa) might have supposed that such a
‘“Jiving?? too does not exist. Nor did he declare that a
“living being’? is merely a conventional name given to
a set of elements, for in that case he had to deal with a
man incapable of realising the idea of Voidness (i. e.
the absence of a real personality in the stream of
elements appearing in mutual interdependence). Thus
it is that being questioned by Vaisa whether the Soul
did or did not exist, Buddha took into consideration the
intellectual level of his interlocutor and did give no an-
swer. But if a Soul did exist, nothing could have pre-
vented him to declare that it did |”

Vatsiputriya. And why did Buddha not settle the
questions about the Eternity of the World etc. ?

Vasubandhu. For the same reason! He took into
consideration the intention of the questioner. First of
all, the latter would have meant the (Universal) Soul to
be the World. But then as for Buddha no (such) Soul
did altogether exist, (every answer such as: it is eternal,
it is not eternal, it is partly eternal and partly non-
eternal, it is neither eternal nor non-eternal) would have
been out of place If again the questioner had meant by

4

=== [page n58] ===
(7590) }

Universe ‘the appearing and disappearing of all (its
elements’ every answer would have been out of place.
For if this (process of life) is eternal, there is no (hope
of putting an end to it in) Final Rescue. If it is non-
eternal, than it will break up altogether (by itself).
Supposing it to be doth : (partly non-eternal and partly
eternal ), then some living beings will naturally attain
Final Rescue (without any effot), and other ones will
never attain it. And lastly, supposing it to be neither
eternal nor non-eternal (we get a contradiction, namely
that) at toe same time there neither will be any Salva-
tion nor any absence of Salvation ! As a matter of fact
Salvation can be attained by the practice of the Holy
Path only, therefore every (direct) unqualified answer
would have been incomplete. Similarly (Buddha decli-
ned to answer the question of a) learned Gymnosophist
who taking a fledgling in his hand (asked, whether it
was living or not. If he had answered “‘it is living” the
gymnosophist would have squeezed the bird in his hand
and shown it dead. If he had answered ‘‘it is dead”? the
Gymnosophist would have shown a living fledgling and
thus proved to the audience that Buddha was not
omniscient. But the Lord guessed the hidden aim and
gave no direct answer. He only said: ‘‘as a matter of
fact, it can be living or dead, since this depends upon
your will’).

=== [page n59] ===
wi
~ - +,
Re ne eee

ae

> Pe, % ?

=

“se. oe

( 51)

For the same reason Buddha did not solve the four
questions regarding. the end of the Universe. These
questions have the same import as the preceding four
questions. |

V&isiputrzya. How do you know that these four
questions about the end of the world have the:same
meaning as the questions about its eternity etc.) ?

Vasubandhu. (I know it) because the wandering
ascetic Vatsa84 after having proposed (the first set of
four questions) proceeded again to ask : “Are you
maintaining that all ‘‘worlds” (i. e. all sentient beings)
are able to find escape or only a part of them (i. e. are

there “‘worlds’ eternal and non-eternal) ? Ananda the

Elder (who was present) made the remark “‘Vaisa | you
have already asked the Lord about these questions. Why

_ are you now repeating them, changing only the words ?”

(We know therefore that the second set of four questions

_have the same meaning as the first ).

(Vatsiputriya. And why was the question about the

_ existence of a Buddha after death refused an answer) ?

Vasubandhu. For the same reason ! Because taking
into consideration the intention of the questioner, a

(simple) answer was not possible. The latter, namely in

asking. his question, was surmising that the term
. “Buddha” denoted the (absolute) Soul liberated (from

_all bonds of transient existence. Since the existence of

=== [page n60] ===
( 52 )

such a Soul was not admitted, it was impossible to
answer whether it did not exist after the death of the
body).

Now we must (in our turn) ask those why are admitt-
ing the existence (of a Soul in the shape of ) an Indivi-
dual: why did Buddha, speaking about the living Indivi-
dual, declare that it did exist (meaning all its elements
existing at a certain moment ? Why did he refuse to

answer the question about its existence after death ?

Vatsiputriya. Because he feared to be misunderstood
as admitting the existence of eternal (elements).

Vasubandhu. How is that ? (Buddha has made
declarations regarding future and former existences
without fearing to be accused of admitting eternal life).
‘‘The time will come, O Maztreya, said he, when you
will become the absolute Saint, the perfectly accom-
plished Buddha !? And upon another occasion, when
one of his followers passed away, he made a declaration
about his former existence, saying : ‘‘He was born for-
merly as such and such a one’’. How is that ? Did he
in these cases admit an eternal continuation of life ? If
it be supposed that Buddha perceived a man’s (destiny)
previously to his entering the absolute state and ceased
to perceive it after that, then it would follow that he
did not answer (the question about the existence of a

Buddha after death), because he did not know of it, But

=== [page n61] ===
( 53)

this is a denial of our Great Master’s omniscience.
Otherwise (there is only one explanation possible,
namely, that he did not answer the question about the
existence of a Buddha i. e. an absolute Soul after the
death of the body because) there is altogether no Soul.
You are driven to accept (our, the Sarvastivadin’s view).
If on the contrary you admit that he perceived the exis-
tence of a Soul in this case, but was silent about it, then
it will be proved that a Soul is existing and is eternal,
Or (perhaps you will have recourse to your favourite
method and declare that) this also is something undefi-
nable, that Buddha does and does not perceive it at the
same time! But hush! hush ! do not give voice to such
(blasphemy) !

[§ JZ. A further argument in favour of a Soul stated

and answered].

Vatsiputriya. (Some kind of) Individual must exist,
since Scripture declares: ‘‘to maintain dogmatically “I
have no Soul’ is a wrong dogma”,

Vasubandhu. But it likewise declares : ‘‘to maintain
that there isa Soul is wrong degmatism”, Therefore
thisis absolutely inadmissible. The Abhidharmists declare
both these views to be inadmissible extremes. They are
included by them among the heresies as the belief in
Eternity and Nihilism. Their view is profoundly logical,

since it is just the same view that has been proferred in

=== [page n62] ===
Cae ©)

the Discourse with Vatsa : ‘‘O Ananda ! if we declare

that there is a (real) Soul, we shall fall into (the extreme

of ) Eternity; and if we declare that there is no (empiri-
cal) Self, we shall fall into (the extreme of ) Nihilism’’.

[§ 12. Is there any transmigration of Souls].

Vatsiputriya. If there were no Individual existing,
who is it that does migrate, (appearing and disappea-
ring in different existences), simce it is impossible to
suppose that the process of life is itself appearing and
disappearing ? Besides the Lord has declared in Script-
ure: “The living beings are migrating. Obscured by
Ignoranee (and bound by a craving for life) they are
wandering about (through birth and death)’.

_Vasubandhu. But how do they migrate ?

Vatsiputriya. By abandoning one set of elements and
taking up a new one.

Vasubandhu. This theory has already been disposed
of. (We have proved that life is going on like a moving
fire which is consuming a prairy). Although it is

disappearing at every moment it nevertheless is called a

‘wandering fire on account of its continuity. Just so does

a multitude of sets of elements conventionally called

“living beings’? wander (to future birth and death) on

~ account of (the element of) Craving for life.

Vaisipuiriya. If this (so called living being is a mere

“combination of elements (without any real Ego), how

=== [page n63] ===
( 58. )

could the Lord have declared: ‘‘At that time I have been
living as Sunetra the (venerable) teacher” ?
Vasubandhu. Why should he not ?
Vatsiputriya. Because the elements (of a former

existence) are not the same (as the present ones).

Vasubandhu. What is it then (that is now Buddha
and was formerly Sunetra) ? |

Vatsiputriya. The Individual.

Vasubandhu. (Impossible because it) would be eter-
nal! Therefore when Buddha says ‘‘I myself was this
(teacher Sunetra)’?, he means that (his past and his
present) belong to one and the same lineage (of momen-
tary existences, he does not mean that the former
elements did not disappear). Just as when we say “‘this
same fire which has been seen consuming (that thing)
has reached (this object)’, (the fire isnot the same, but
overlooking this difference we indirectly call fire the
continuity of its moments i. e. rebirths). Again suppo-
sing that a ‘real) Self is existing, (this Self being very
subtle) only Buddhas will perceive it quite clearly,
Having thus perceived it they will be imbued with a
very strong belief in it, and since according to Scripture
‘the idea of a Self is followed by the idea of ‘mine’,
they—the Buddhas—will pre-eminently believe that the
elements of their lives belong to them, and this will

constitute their heresy of Wrong Personalism. Further,

=== [page n64] ===
( 56 )

where the wrong idea of “‘mine’’ has found its place,
there arises a craving for all that is supposed to be
‘‘mine”. Thus it will happen that (these would be
Buddhas) corrupted by the strongest bonds of a passionate
love for their own persons and belongings will postpone
their Salvation into remote future! (i. e. will never be-
come Buddhas !)

Vaistputriya. On the contrary ! passionate love to-
wards the (real) Self is never experienced.

Vasubandhu. According to this opinion there can be
no love for the (pure) Self, this love appears only when
something which is not at all the real Self, is mistaken
for the Self. This you suppose to be logical! (But it is
impossible logically to prove such tenets. 'Therefore you
are grossly mistaken, when you suppose that the disease
of such wrong views reducing Salvation to nought might
appear in a natural way within the pale of the Holy
Doctrine of Buddha). To summarise : One category (of
thinkers, asf. i. the Vaistputriya) admit the existence
of an (undefinable) Individuality (along with the ele-
ments). Another category (as f. i. the Ma@dhyamikas)
declare that there is altogether nothing real, (i. e, the
elements themselves have no real existence). These two
wrong doctrines have appeared within the pale of
Buddhism. There are besides the heterodox teachers, who

maintain that the Soul is a quite independent substance.

=== [page n65] ===
CON)

All these wrong doctrines make Salvation impossible
and this is their irremissible fault !
[§ 13. Memory explained].

Vatstputriya. Now, if there absolutely is no Soul,
how is it then, that the detached moments of conscious-
ness can remember or recognise things which have been
experienced a long time ago ?

Vasubandhu. Consciousness, being in a special con-
dition and connected with a (previous) knowledge of the
remembered object, produces its recollection.

V dist putriya. What is this special condition of con-
sciousness which is immediately followed by rememb-
rance ?

Vasubandhu. It is a condition which includes 1)
attention directed towards this object, 2) an idea etc.
similar or otherwise connected with it and 3) absence
of bodily pain, grief or distraction etc., impairing its
capacity. But supposing all these conditions are realised,
consciousness nevertheless is not able to produce remem-
brance, if it is not connected with a previous experience
of the remembered object. If on the other hand it is so
connected, but the above conditions are absent, it like-
wise is not able to produce it. Both factors are nece-
ssary—(a previous cognition and a suitable state of
mind). Then only memory appears. Experience shows
that no other forces are capable (of evoking it).

=== [page n66] ===
O58.)

Vasubandhu. But (if there were absolutely nothing
permanent, it would mean that) one consciousness has
perceived the object and another one remembers it.
How is this possible ? In this case things experienced by
Devadatta’s consciousness would be remembered by the
consciousness of Yajnadatta.

‘Vatsiputriya. No! because there is no connection
between them. They are not mutually related as cause
and effect, as is the case between moments belonging to
the same stream of thought. Indeed we do not at all
maintain that one consciousness perceives and another
one remembers. (The stream of thought is the same).On
a previous occasion we have explained the manner in
which a complete change is gradually taking place in a
chain of consecutive moments. Thus it is that a consci-
ousness which did perceive an object formerly, is
(gradually) producing a consciousness which remembers

it now. What fault can you find with this argument ?

As to recognition it is simply the consequence of a
recollection, (and requires no further explanation).

Vatstputriya, If there is no Soul, who is it that
remembers ?

Vasubandhu. What is the meaning of the word ‘‘to
remember” ?

Vatstputriya. It means to grasp an object by
memory.

=== [page n67] ===
(159 4))

Vasubandhu. Is this ‘‘grasping by memory’? some-

thing different from memory ?

Vaisiputrtya. It is an agent who acts through

memory.

Vasubandhu. The agency by which memory is pro-
duced we have just explained. The cause productive of
a recollection is a suitable state of mind (and nothing
else) !

Vatsiputriya. But when (in common life) we are
using the expression ‘“‘Caitra remembers’? what does it
mean ?

Vasubandhu. In the current (of phenomena), which
is designated by the name Caitra a recollection appears,

We notice the fact and express it. It is no more !

Vaistputriya. But if there is no Soul, whose is the

recollection, ‘whom does it belong to) ?

Vasubandhu. What is here the meaning of the
Genitive ‘‘whose” ?

Vatstputrtya. It denotes proprietorship.
Vasubandhu. Is it the same as when somebody

enquires, of what objects who is the proprietor ?

Vatstputriya. It is just as when we say ‘‘Caitra is the
owner of a cow’.

Vasubandhu. What does it mean to be the owner of
a cow ?

=== [page n68] ===
(GRCON”)

Vatsiputriya. It means that it depends on him to
employ her for milking or driving purposes etc.

Vasubandhu. Now I should like to know to what
place must I dispatch my memory, since it is supposed
that I am the master of it.

Vatsiputriya. You must direct it towards the remem-
bered object.

Vasubandhu. What for shall I direct my memory ?

Vatstputriya. In order to remember.

Vasubandhu. Hallo! I must employ the very thing
I already possess in order to get it ! Indeed that is well
spoken ! Great is the merit (of such discoveries) ! And
then I should like lo know, in what sense memory is to
be influenced : in the sense of its being produced, or in

the sense of its being dispatched, like a servant) ?

Vatsipuirzya. In the sense of production, since
memory cannot move ‘like a servant).

Vasubandhu. In that case the proprietor is simply
the cause and the property will simply by its effect. The
cause has a rule over the effect, and this rule belongs to
the cause (only in the sense of its producing) a result.
Memory is the property of something which is its own
cause. As to the name of an owner given to the united
elements of Caitra with respect to those of the cow, this
name has been given only because it has been observed

that there exists a relation of cause and effect between him

—— — ay

=== [page n69] ===
—-

ae ee ee a ee

CG?)

and the movements and other changes in the cow, but
there is no real unity whatsoever neither in Caitra nor
in the cow, Consequently there is in this case no other
proprietorship than a relation of cause and effect. The:
same argument may be applied to the questions ‘‘Who
is it that perceives ???, ‘‘Whom does perception belong
to °°? and other similar questions : (Who feels, who has
notion, who acts etc. ?) The difference consists in the
fact that (instead of the described state of mind produ-
cing memory) the corresponding conditions for a percep-
tion are : activity of the senses, presence of the object

and aroused attention.

=== [page n70] ===
The Soul theory of the Buddhists.

[§ 14. Is there any cognising agent ?].

Vaisiputriya. There are others who argue as follows:
‘a Soul must exist), because wherever there is an activity
it depends on an agent. Every action depends on an
agent as, f. i. in the example ‘‘Devadatta walks’? there
is an action of walking which depends on Devadatta, the
agent. To be conscious is likewise an action, :hence the
agent who cognises must also exist?9.

Vasubandhu. It must be explained what this Deva-
datta is.

Vaist putriya. It is an Ego.

Vasubandhu. That is begging the question !

Vatsiputriya. \t is what in common life we call a
man.

Vasubandhu. This does not represent any unity
whatsoever. It is a name given to such elements (of
which a man is composed). The elements are meant
when we say “‘Devadatta walks”. When we say that

“consciousness cognises’’, it is just the same.

Vatsiputriya. And what is the meaning of the
expression ‘“Devadatta walks’, (if there is no individua-

lity whatsoever) ?

=== [page n71] ===
Geos)

Vasubandhu. It is an unbroken continuity of momen-_
tary forces (flashing into existence), which simple people
believe to be a unity, and to which they give the name
of Devadatta. Their belief that Devadatta moves is
conditioned (by an analogy with their own experience,
because) their own continuity of life consists in constantly
moving from one place to another. But this movement
is but a (series of new) productions in different places,
just as the expressions ‘‘fire moves’’, ‘‘sound spreads,”
have the meaning of continuities (of new productions
in new places). They likewise use the words ‘‘Devadatta
cognises’’ in order to express the fact that a cognition
(takes place in the present moment) which has a cause
(in the former moments, thrse former moments being
called Devadatta). But is it simple people alone whose
language is so inadequate ?. Great men have likewise
condescended to denote the (mentioned facts) by such
(inadequate) expressions, when they were pleased to use
the language of common life.

Vatstputriya. But we read in Scripture ; ‘‘conscious-

“ness: apprehends’?. What is consciousness here meant to
do?

Vasubandhu. Nothing at all ! (It simply appears in
coordination with its objective element, like a result
which is homogeneous with its cause’. When a result

appear in conformity with its own cause it is doing

=== [page n72] ===
ays" »)

nothing at all, nevertheless we say that it does conform
with it. Consciousness likewise appears in coordination
with its objective elements°°. It is (properly speaking)
doing nothing. Nevertheless we say that consciousness
does cognise its object.

Vatsiputriya. What is meant by coordination (bet-

ween consciousness and its objective element) 2

Vasubandhu. A conformity between them, the fact
owing to which cognition, although caused (also) by the
activity of the senses, is not something homogeneous
with them. It is said to cognise the object and not the
senses. (It bears the reflection of the objective element,
which is his corollary). And again the expression
‘consciousness apprehends”’ isnot inadequate, inasmuch
as here also a continuity of conscious moments is the
cause of every cognition. (‘“‘Consciousness apprehends”
means that the previous moment is the cause of the
following one). The agent here also denotes simply the
cause, just as in the current expression ‘the bell
resounds’’, (the bell is doing nothing, but every following
moment of sound is produced by the previous one). (We
can give) another (illustration) : ‘“‘consciousness appre-
hends’’ similarly to the way in which a light moves.

Vaistputriya. And how does a light move ?

Vasubandhu. The light of a lamp is a common

metaphorical designation for an uninterrupted produc-

\ a

=== [page n73] ===
(PISS

tion of a series of flashing flames. When this production .
changes its place, we say that the light has moved, (but
in reality other flames have appeared in another place).
Similarly consciousness is a conventional name for a
chain of conscious moments. When it changes its place
(i. e. appears in coordination with another objective
element) we say that it apprehends that object. And in
the same way we are speaking about the existence of
material elements. We say matter ‘‘is produced’. ‘tit
exists’??, but there is no difference between existence and
the element which does exist. The same applies to
consciousness, (there is nothing that does cognise, apart

from the evanescent tlashings of consciousness itself ).

[§ 15. SamEhya views discussed].

Samkhya. If consciousness is not a product of a Soul,
(if it has no other cause than consciousness itself), the
following moment springing up from the preceding one,
then how is it to be explained 1) that it does not remain
perpetually just the same, and 2) (if there be a change),
why not in a fixed order of succession, like a sprout,
a stem, leaves etc. (produced from a seed) ?

Vasubandhu..(As regards the first point, we answer

that) all elements which partake in the process of life

are characterised by a constant change, (they have no

-<duration). They constitute a stream in which the next

)

=== [page n74] ===
(G66)

moment is necessarily different from the preceding one.
Such is the inmost nature of every thing living !
(Samkhya. There are exceptions ! f. i. in cataleptic

states neither body nor mind undergoes any change).

Vasubandhu. If there really were exceptions (to the
principle of Universal Change), and if the ascetics after
being merged in transic meditation and having reached
the climax of it would really appear in a state of perfect
identity of body and mind, (without absolutety any
change in them), then there could be no difference bet-
ween the last and the first moment of such a state of
meditation, and there could be no spontaneous awaken-
ing from the trance in the last moment. (Therefore
there is an imperceptible constant change going on even
in such states as catalepsy).

(As regards the second point we maintain that in
the continuous stream of ideas) there positively is a
fixed order of succession; if one idea springs up from
another one, it does so with necessity. There is a
certain affinity (between ideas), in virtue of which there
are ideas somehow similar to others and having the
power of evoking them. As f. i. when the idea of a
woman is immediately associated (in the mind of an
ascetic) with the idea of an impure body, or (in the
mind of a married man) with the idea of her husband,

son etc., and if later on, in the changing stream

=== [page n75] ===
(S67) )

of thought, the same idea af a woman reappears, it has
the power of evoking these ideas of an impure body or
of a husband, son etc., because they are associated with
it, but it has not the power of evoking other (ideas, not
SO associated). Again the idea of a female may be
followed by various ideas arising one after another, (but
if we examine them, we shall find) that only such ideas
really appear as are either very common (in the
corresponding stream of thought), or most intensely felt
in it, or (at last) have been experienced at a very recent
date. The reason for this is that the Vital Energy®! of
such ideas has more power (to the exclusion of other
influences), except (of course) the influence of the present
state of one’s body and the immediate objects of cogni-
tion.

Samkhya. If this Vital Energy (inherent in ideas) has
so powerful an influence, why does it not produce per-

petually (its own, one and the same) result ?

Vasubandhu. Because (as we have said above) the
elements partaking in the process of life are characteri-
sed by a perpetual change. In conformity with this
principle of Universal Change the Vital Energy itself is
perpetually changing and so does its result (the idea).
This is only an abridged account of all the modes
(of association) between ideas. A thorough-going and
full knowledge of them belongs to Buddha. This has

=== [page n76] ===
( 68 )

been stated (by Rahula, the Elder) in the following

stanza ;

Every variety of cause

Which brings about the glittering shine
In a single eye of a peacock’s tail

Is not accessible to limited understanding.

The Omniscient knows them all !

(If this is true in respect of complicated material
phenomena), how much more is it with respect to

immaterial, mental phenomena !

[§ 16. Vaisestka views discussed].

Vasubandhu. Now there are some heterodox (Vaisesika)
teachers who maintain that ideas are the product of a
Soul. (The above mentioned two arguments which were
brought forth by the Samkhya philosopher against us)
will prove most strong against this Vazgestka doctrine.
Namely we shall ask: (if the different conscious ideas
are products of an eternal Soul) 1) why is the following
consciousness not constantly the same as the foregoing
one ? and 2) why do ideas not appear in a fixed order
of succession, as f. i. a sprout, a stem, leaves etc. (from

a seed ?

Vatsesika, (The change in the stream of thought)

depends upon a special contact between the Soul and a

(moving) Internal Organ ?

=== [page n77] ===
Oo")

Vasubandhu. No! (because we altogether do not
admit the existence of real conjuctions). Since there are
none in other cases, (neither can we admit any contact
between Soul and Internal Organ). (But supposing con-
junctions between elements to be possible), then two
objects coming into contact must occupy definite places.
The same consequence—namely that Soul and Internal
Organ must be definitely localised—follows out of your
explanation of what a contact is. (What indeed is your
definition ?)—*‘a contact is a conjunction of what pre-
viously was disjoined”®! Therefore if the Internal Organ
shifts its place, the Soul must shift likewise, or disappear
altogether, (when no contact between them is to take

place). (All this runs against your theory of a limitless,
eternal, unmoving Soul).

Vaisesika. The contact may be (between the Internal
Organ) and part of the Soul ?

Vasubandhu. It is not admitted that the Soul
(representing a unity) is divisible into parts. But
supposing the contact really takes places, it nevertheless
cannot account for a change in the stream of thought.
The Internal Organ itself is admitted by you to be
eternally the same (unchanging), how then could its
contacts be different (changing) ?

Vaigesika. But then (the change in the stream of
thought) may be produced by the change of cognition
(which we admit to be a quality of the Soul) ?

=== [page n78] ===
Ce

Vasubandhu. We will make the same Objection (as
above with regard to the Internal Organ) : how is the
change of cognition to be explained ?

Vaisesika. (The change of cognition) may be pro-
duced from a contact between the Soul and the Internal
Organ, which contact is influenced by a variety of
Forces (inhering in the Soul) ? (The variety of cognitions
is produced by the variety of these Forces, while the

Soul and the Internal Organ remain eternally change-
less).

Vasubandhu. In that case consciousness alone in-
fluenced by a variety of Forces will do! We do not
perceive the slightest influence of a (permanent) Soul !
This soul resembles magical formulas ‘“phut ! svaha !”?
muttered by a quack when the result is achieved by
(simple) medicine !

Vaisesika. But the existence of both these (Cognitions
and Forces) is conditioned by the existence of a Soul ?

Vasubandhu. Mere words ! (That is no proof of a
Soul’s existence).

Vaisesika. (It is a proof!) Soul is the (common)
support (for both Cognitions and Forces),

Vasubandhu. Support in what sense ? They cannot
be supported in the sense in which a picture is supported

on the wall, or a badara fruit is supported by a plate !

=== [page n79] ===
(89)

Nor can the Soul aftord them any such support. (Such
a relation of support and supported is only possible)
between material resisting objects, occupying a separate
place, and this is not admitted by you (with respect to
the Soul and elements it is supposed to support).

Vaigesika. But the Soul may be a support in another
sense ¢

Vasubandhu. In what sense ?

Vaigesika. In the sense in which the element ‘‘earth”
is deemed to be the substratum of odour and other
(sensible qualities).

Vasubandhu. Yes, of course ! This example is very
much to my satisfaction, because I hold to the principle,
that there is no Soul! Just as there is no earth apart
from odour and other (sensible qualities, just so is there
no Soul apart from consciousness and mental pheno-
mena). Who indeed has ever had any definite cognition
of earth ? (It is simply a special combination of sensible
qualities which in common life is called by the name
‘earth. A special combination of mental qualities is
likewise designated by the name ‘‘I1’).

Vaisestka. But how is it then that we use the expre-
ssion : ‘‘earth possesses odour etc.’, (i. e. we distinguish

between the possessor and the thing possessed) ?

Vasubandhu. We use it in order to distinguish (earth

from other substances). We say ‘‘earth has odour etc.’’

=== [page n80] ===
(eas2. 7)

in order to make it known that this very odour etc.
alone and nothing else is called ‘“‘earth’? just as we use
the expression “image of wood”, (i. e. the image is
wood, apart from the wood there is no image, but it is

thus distinguished from an earthenware image etc.).

Again supposing there is a Soul which produces
cognitions under the influence of a variety of Forces,

why then are all cognitions not produced at once ? »

Vaisestka. Because the stronger Force checks the in-
fluence of the others.

Vasubandku. Why then does not this stronger Force

perpetually produce the same result ?

Vaisestka. The nature of these (our) Forces is just the
same as that of (yours). Vital Energy, (it is not constant,

but always changing).

Vasubandhu. But then what is the use of surmising
the existence of a Soul ?

Vatsestka. The existence of the Soul must necessarily
be admitted (for the following consideration:) memory
and all other mental phenomena belong to the category
of qualities and these must necessarily be inherent in
some substance. Since all other substances cannot con-
stitute a substratum (for mental qualities, the special
substance in which they inhere must be the Soul. Its

existence is thus proved).

pom

=== [page n81] ===
—

=e ———_

(Gp? 3%)

Vasubandhu. No, it is not proved ! It is not proved
that these mental phenomenn belong to the category of
qualities. According to our system whatsoever exists is a
substance. And this is corroborated by Scripture declar-
ing : ‘the result of the pure life of an ascetic is six
substances*? (pure physics, feelings, ideas, volitions, con-
sciousness and the Absolute; they are all called “‘sub-
stances’®, not ‘‘qualities’?). Hence it is likewise not
proved that these (memory and other mental phenomena)
must inhere in some substance. The meaning of the
term ‘‘support’? (or substratum of qualities) has already
been analyzed above. Therefore this (whole argument)

is irrelevant.

Vatsesika. If there is no Self, what for are actions
(good or bad) undertaken ?
Vasubardhu. They are undertaken in the hope: “I

will be happy !?? “I shall escape misfortune !»
Vatsesika. And what is this so called ‘*I>> (in its true
nature) ?
Vasubandhu. It is (nothing else than) the objective
element with regard to which there arises selfperception.
Vatsestka. And what is this object of selfperception ?
Vasubandhu. (It is the continuous streaming of) the

elements constituling a personal life.

Vatsestka. How is that known ?

=== [page n82] ===
Ga»)

Vasubandhu. From two facts: 1) we feel attachment
towards these (elements, our physical frame, our ideas
etc.); and 2) (the notion of an ‘“I?) is the common
subject for such predicates as “fair complexion’? etc.
(which have an immediate bearing on the physical or
some other element of a personal life). Thus people
say “I am fair’, ‘I am dark”, ‘I am fat, “I am
lean’’, ‘‘I am old”? ‘I am young’’. We notice that these
ideas of ‘‘fair?? etc. are predicates connected with the
idea of a Self as their common subject. But you do not
admit (your) Soul to have such characteristics, (as fair
etc.). Thus we conclude that self-perception is simply a
perception of the elements.

Vatsesika. (This is only a metaphorical application
of the term ‘‘I*’, when it is spoken of as being fair etc.).
It is also metaphorically used to designate the body,
since the body is the guardian of the ‘‘I’’. Just as a
king when speaking of his minister might say : ‘the is
my (second) Self !??

Vasubandhu. Inded, a useful thing might be meta-
phorically called a Self, but not self-perception itself !

Vatsestka. If you admit that self-perception may have
the body for its object, why do you not admit that it
may also have the body of another person for its object ?

Vasubandhu. Because it has no (direct) connection

(with the body of another person). This self-perception

a

ap

yo

=== [page n83] ===
(ee)

appears exclusively with it, but not with respect to
another (body or mind). (Why ?) This is an inveterate
habit (to hold to these elements as if they were ‘‘mine’’),
a habit acquired in the beginningless process (of Life’s
Evolution).

Vaigestka. And what is here meant by connection ?
Vasubandhu. It is a relation of cause and effect.

Vaigesika. But if there is no Soul, whose is this

self-perception. (whom does it belong to) ?

Vasubandhu. This would be the place to repeat all
what we have said above on the question ‘‘whose is
memory, whom does it belong to ?»?, beginning with the
words ‘‘what is the meaning of the Genitive ‘“‘whose ?”
and concluding with the statement ‘‘it has the meaning
of a cause’’.

Vaisestka. And what is the cause of this self-percep-
tion ?

Vasubandhu. It is an idea imbued with Illusion, an
idea which has for its object the stream of elements
constituting one’s own personal life. Through the con-
stant former practice of this perception of one’s self it
has become an idea deeply rooted (in the habitual modes
of thought of mankind).

Vatsesika. And now, if there is no Self, who is it that
feels happy, who is it that suffers ?

=== [page n84] ===
Ge)

Vasubandhu. It is the substratum where pleasure or
pain appear, just as flowers grow on a tree and fruits are
grown in a garden, (this does not prove the tree or the
garden to be ultimate realities).

Vaisestka. And what constitutes a substratum for

pleasure and pain ?

Vasubandhu. The subjective elements of life, the so-
called six subjective ‘‘bases’. In what sense they are
constituting such a substratum has been explained (in
the first chapter).1®

Vaisesika. If there is no (permanent) Soul, who is
the agent that accomplishes actions and who the enjoyer
that enjoys their result ?

Vasubandhu. What is the meaning of the terms agent
and enjoyer ?

Vaisesika. The agent is the one who acts, the enjoyer
the one who enjoys.

Vasubandhu. This is a verbal explanation, it does
not explain the meaning.

Vatsestka. The logicians give the following definition
of an agent ‘‘what is endowed with a free will is an
agent’’.02 We see f. i. that in common life some people
are free to accomplish some aims, as f. i. we see that
Devadatta is free to perform his ablutions, to eat, to

walk (whenever he likes).

=== [page n85] ===
(R77 })

Vasubandhu. But who is this Devadatta you give
as an example? If you understand him to be a real Self,
it will be begging the question. But if you refer to the
elements, this agent is not free. Actions in general are
of three kinds. They are either bodily motions or speech
or thoughts. As regards the body and the speech, their
activity is going on under the influence of the foreign
will of thought. But thought also, in directing the body
and the speech, is operating under the influence of the
foreign will of its own causes. Since thought itself (in
its own activity) is in a similar condition, there is now-
here any free will. Whatever exists is living under the
foreign will of (inexorable) conditions. Neither do we
admit the Soul to be an independent cause, therefore it
cannot be proved that it is endowed with a Free Will.
It follows that such an agent as has been defined by the
logicians is absolutely not to be found. If among the
causes producing an event there is a principal one, we
may call it the agent producing this event. But in
(your) Soul we do not see the slightest productive

activity, therefore it cannot be admitted as an agent
even in this sense.

Vatsestka. And how are actions according to your
opinion produced ?
Vasubandhu. A remembrance evokes an inclination,

from. which a searching state of mind is produced. Then

=== [page n86] ===
(GS >)

comes (the feeling) of an effort and this feeling evokes
motive energy. The motive energy produces an action.
What (on earth) has a Soul to do in all that ?

Again there is no (permanent) Soul, that could
(really enjoy) the results (of former actions).

Vaisestka. But (there may be something else with
respect to which the Soul) can be metaphorically
understood to be the enjoyer ?

Vasubandhu. What is it ?

Vaisestka, Is it not our consciousness (of the results
of actions) ?

Vasubandhu. No! We have already dispensed with
_ the theory, that consciousness is a product of the Soul.
Therefore the Soul can have no power of producing a
knowledge (of the results of actions).

Vaisesika. But if there is no Soul, how is it to be
explained, that there is no accumulation of merit or
demerit in the inanimate world ?

Vasubandhu. Because it does not serve as a sub-
stratum for feeling. The six categories of subjective
elements alone can serve as a substratum (for feeling
etc.), but not a Soul. How this (serving as a substratvm
is to be understood) has been explained (just above).

Vaisesika. But if there is no Soul, how do you
account for the fact, that an action which no more

exists produces nevertheless a result at a later period ?

ee

=== [page n87] ===
(E797)

Vasubandhu. And if it did exist, how would you
sccount for it ?

Vaigesika. The results are produced from merit and
demerit, which are qualities inhering in the Soul, (and

which are the immediate products of actions).

Vasubandhu. This argument has been already (im-
plicitly) disposed of just above, when we analyzed the
idea of inherence (of qualities in a substratum) and
asked for examples illustrating this relation. Therefore
(your qualities) of merit and demerit do not at all inhere
in a substance, i. e. in your Soul. But neither do we
maintain that future results are produced from actions,
which exist no more !

Vaisesika. But from what ?

Vasubandhu. (They are immediately produced) from
a characteristic change (the ultimate phase) in the
uninterrupted stream of elements originating from these
(actions), just as the fruit is produced (gradually) from
a seed. If people f. i. say that the fruit is produced from
the seed, they dont mean that the fruit is produced from
a (non-existing) destroyed seed, neither do they suppose
that the fruit will be produced immediately from the
seed alone.

Vatsestka. But what do they mean ?

Vasubandhu. (It is the immediate product of the

ultimate) phase in the process of development, (which

=== [page n88] ===
( 80 )

begins by the seed), i. e. after the seed there arises a
sprout, a stem, leaves etc, till at last the series is closed
by a flower which immediately produces (the fruit).

Vaisesikr. But if the fruit is produced from the
flower, why do people say that it is produced from the
seed ?

Vasubandhu. Because the (seed) has indirectly in-
troduced into the flower its own capacity (influence). If
the flower were not imbued with this capacity, it would
not have the power of producing a fruit of the same
kind (as the seed). Similary if we say that actions have
results, this neither means that an unexisiting action
produces a result, nor does it mean that retribution
follows immediately on the action.

Vaisesika. And what does it mean ?

Vasubandhu. It simply means that the result springs
up from an ultimate phase in a continuity (of evolution
which begins with that action).

Vaigesika. What is meant by a continuity, what by

a change in it, and what by the ultimate phase of it ?

Vosubandhu. A continuity is a continually reverting
of (new moments of) consciousness which are following
on an action. Every following moment (being a more
or less modified combination of elements), is different
from the preceding moment. A change which has the

capacity of immediately producing the result is called

=== [page n89] ===
Oy Sen)

the characteristic (or ultimate) change, because it is
specially distinguished from other changes, as f. i. con-
sciousness in the moment of death (represents such an
ultimate characteristic change, since it is followed by
consciousness) assuming a new existence.°®

(Vaigesika. But a present condition of body and mind
may have been preceded by different kinds of actions.
Among them what are the actions which in the first place
will influence the subsequent evolution ?)

Vasubandhu. When many various actions are the
starting point (of one single stream of evolution), then
those among them that are weighty, near in time, or
grown into habit have a stronger power (of vitality),
they clearly manifest their results to the exclusion of the
remaining ones. Accordingly it is said (by Ra@hula) :

‘Among the actions going round (from birth to
death)

Those will be ripening first in order,

That are weighty, or are near,

Then those one’s got accustomed to,

And (lastly the remaining) ones.”

In a single continuity of a personal life, four kinds of
actions can be distinguished : actions of great weight,
actions near in time, actions grown into habit, and the
remaining preceding actions (of the same existence).

Among these four categories a weighty action ripens
5 |

=== [page n90] ===
( 82 )

first, 1, €. it ripens sooner than the three other categories.
Among those that are near, habitual, or simply preced-
ing (unqualified), those that are near ripen before the
two other categories. Among the habitual and preceding
ones, the habitual ripens first i. e. before the (remaining)
single (category of actions unqualified). When all these
categories are exhausted (i. e. all actions of the present
life have given their result), then come actions that will
bear their result (in the present existence though they
were committed in a previous birth, i. e. such former
actions the result of which has to be experienced in a

future existence).°4

[§ 17. Gradual extinction of all elements of life ].

Now, among the elements appearing in an existence
some have the character of retribution for previous
deeds. After having produced such retribution the force
of these former deeds vanishes, (and produces no further
result), Other elements again have the character of
homogeneous results, being brought forth by the force
of homogeneousness inherent in former deeds. These
_ latter elements, if they are associated with worldly
attachment, continue to reappear until an antidote for
them is produced (in the shape of transcendent Wisdom).
After that such elements only remain as are free from
worldly attachment, (which constitute the perfect Saint).
They also cease to appar for ever after Final Rescue has

=== [page n91] ===
been reached (since then the continuity of elements of

matter and mind ceases for ever).

Vazsesika. But the elements which have been pro-
duced as a retribution for former deeds, why do they not
produce retribution in their turn, just as some corn
produced from a seed has the capacity of producing new
corn ?

Vasubandhu, The example may not fit in every
detail. But even supposing it to be fitting, does it prove
your tenet ? Is the new corn produced from the old corn
directly ?

Vaisestka. From what then ?

Vasubandhu. The new corn is produced by a new
special process of maturation. When the corn produced
from the (first) seed combines with such conditions as
soil, moisture etc., a special process of maturation is
produced. Strictly speaking this corn may be called seed
only after having reached the state of decomposition
which immediately precedes the production of the
sprout. Previously to that, it may be so called only by
anticipation (because it may become a seed), or owing
to its similarity (with a real seed). What produces the
result is not the corn by itself, but the ‘‘special modifi-
cation’ it has reached under favourable conditions. Thus
interpreted the simile may be applied to the Elements
of life, which have been produced as a retribution for

=== [page n92] ===
(82%)

former deeds. Although | they by themselves have no
‘force of producing any further result, they might become
associated with such conditions as are able to produce
good. or‘bad results,.f. i,.a study of the right doctrine or
:a study of a false doctrine. In that case the result might
become capable of attracting elements either favourable
or unfavourable (to salvation). The neutral consciousness
arising from among these elements and getting con-
_tinuously-modified might become capable of attracting
-such elements as will constitute a ‘‘special modification”?
_in-this stream of thought, and from this special modi-
fication, not from anything else, a later result may be
produced. Thus the simile might be applied to the

Elements of life.

’ Or we may illustrate this process by another simile,
- where the new result is produced by introducing a new
~ element. If a kind of red dye is applied to the flowers of
a citron tree the result will be a pink citron fruit,
produced frorn a ‘‘special modification” in the constant
- change that the flowers will undergo. But such a pink
‘citron fruit will not produce another pink citron, its
“seed will produce only a normal yellow one. Just in this
manner it must be understood that when an action is
neutralised by retribution, this neutralisation must be
regarded as final, it is not capable of producing any

further result.

oe

=== [page n93] ===
C7485")

I have mentioned here only some rough character-
istics of actions and their results, as far as they are
accessible to my own limited understanding. But the
continuous stream of elements influenced by actions of
different force may attain different kinds of special
modifications which will produce corresponding results.
This is a field accessible to the knowledge of Buddhas
only. Accordingly it has been said : ‘‘Former deeds are
exercising an influence upon later events, this influence
manifests itself in various ways, the result of a former
deed appears in the course of the manifestations of 1ts
‘nfluence. To some extent this is generally known, but
no one else than a Buddha always precisely knows,
what has been the former deed, what influence it has
assumed, what is the course of events in which it

manifests itself and what will its final result be?’.°°

Mere Elements exist ! There is no Soul !
This stainless doctrine of the Buddhas,
In perfect argument exposed,

The Saint perceives in pure intuition.
Wrong, stubborn dogma he rejects,
Professed by blind heretics.

In perfect clearness of his sight,

He calmly wanders through these worlds
T’wards life’s Repose Eternal.

Like a broad way in broad daylight

=== [page n94] ===
( 86 )

By rays of sun illuminated,
So is this Soullessness disclosed
By words of sunlike Buddhas.
It is the only glorious path
*Twards Final Rescue’s City.
The path is open to the wise,
Tis trodden by saints in thousands.
But simple people nonetheless,
Their sight obstructed by delusion
Do not perceive the glorious path, |
Cannot conceive that there’s no Soul. |
Of this deep doctrine for the learned
I made a short exposure,
By their schooled mind they will pervade
The whole with strength unfettered.
Like poison are they, these learned men :
One only spot it enters,
And then pervades by its own force

All limbs without exception, 56

=== [page n95] ===
NOTES.

In the introduction to our translation of the Nyaya-
bindu of Dharmakirti (in Russian), we have expressed our
opinion about the manner in which complicated SAastra
works should be translated. A literal translation of
them can be used by those who are able to read the
Original, it would be rather a guide for reading the
text, than an independent translation. If the ideas, and
not the words, must be translated, the translator should
Strive to grasp the idea of the original as closely as
possible, and then express it in another language in the
way in which a modern thinker would have done it, if
he happened to have the same idea. A double transla-
tion, one quite literal and the other quite free, would
have met all demands. We have given such a double
translation of the tract of Dharmakirti on Solipsism
(Santanantarasiddhi). For want of space this method
cannot be applied everywhere. So we have adopted a
middle course giving a fairly free translation in the
main text, and subjoining a literal one in the notes in
such cases where the departure between the wording of
the text and its meaning, as expressed in the language

of the translation, is considerable, as f. i. in the con-

=== [page n96] ===
oS) **)

cluding § of this translation. The main difficulty in this
translation is to be able always to distinguish between
the words of one interlocutor and the other, for there
are no signs of division in the text. It often happens
that questions are understood without being expressed.
They have been added in brackets. Although ample use
of brackets has been recurred to, it has not been possible
to keep to it consistently. The titles of the §§ are of my
own device.

1. In the Tib. translation, these 3 stanzas are the
closing words of the bhasya. They are preceded by the
explanation of the last karika of the koga and followed
by a colophon. In the Chinese translation of Hiuen-
Thsang, the stanzas are understood to be the introductory
words of the Appendix (O R.) In our Ms. of Yasgomitra’s
vyakhya, there is no colophon after the stanzas and the
first question of the Appendix is interpreted as an
objection to the last words of the stanzas. The Appendix
is distinguished from the bulk of the bhdsya by the
absence of karikads. Samghabhadra closes his work with
the interpretation of the last karika and takes no notice
of the Appendix. That the latter is no later addition is
clear from its being mentioned in the course of the work,
fare under \V.825;

2. pun-po rgyud kho-na-las=skandhasamtandd eva.
The skandhas ‘groups of elements’? are here the

=== [page n97] ===
bets). )

equivalent of the samskrta dharmas, with the distinction
that some restricted reality is conceded to the skandhas
whereas the @yatanas and dhdtus are mere collections,
cp. koga I. 26. |

3. Yasom. refers to a stanza of a Stotrak@ra in
corroboration of the fact that Buddha alone among all
religious teachers denied the existence of a Soul :

sahamkdre manasi §amam yati Janmaprabandho
nahamkara§ calati hrdayad atmadrstau ca satyam,
anyah sasta jagati ca yato nasti nairatmyavadi
nanyas tasmad upasamavidhes tanmatad asti
margah.

4, six kinds of objects (d@yatanas or dhaius No.
7—12), Intellect (manas) is not an object, but an
organ of cognition (No. 6). It nevertheless can become
an object, inasmuch as the preceding moment of con-
sciousness is apprehended by the following one.
Yagom.: sSamanantaraniruddham ht mano °’nantarena
manovijiianena vijitiyate. Citta, manas and vijjidna are
synonymous (cmp. kofa II, 34. Cf), Yas.: cvttam mano
vijfianam ekdrtham iti yac cittam tad eva mdanas tadevd
vijiianam. ekartho’syety eka@rtham. It corresponds to the
nirvikalpakam jiia@nam of the Naiydyikas. cf. Kosa
I, 16 and Yaég.: vastumatra grahanam. But there is a
manovijiana (dhatu No. 18); it represents no different

dharma, but with respect to it the manas (i. ec. dhatu

=== [page n98] ===
Gag) )

No. 6), represents the preceding moment. Others take
intellect here to mean mental phenomena, such as
hatred, pleasure, pain etc.; they are cognised directly
by self-perception, contrary to cognition by tradition
(agama), fancy (vikalpa) and ecstasy (yoga) (Yasom.).

5. Yasom.: ‘‘How is it proved with precision that
the cause must be the organ of sense ? There must be
some cause—only this is proved, but not that the cause
is precisely the sense organ.?? The question is solved by
referring to the intuition (pranidhana) of great men
(maharsi) and to universal consent about the existence
of (invisible) organs of sense.

6. The Vatsiputriyas make apparently a distinction
between the terms pudgala and dtman, they are pud-
galavadinah, but not Gtmavadinah. But Vasubandhu
holds the fudgala to be a concealed diman and main-
tains that there is no difference between pudgala, atman,
sattva, jJlva, manuja, puruSa etc., as far as all these
notions are equally incompatible with the theory of
separate elements and their interdependent functions,
Cf. Kathavatthu p. a. p. 8 : puggalo, atta, satto, jivo.

7. Yasom.: Vatsiputriya adryasammatiyah (sic t).
Both these schools are mentioned as pudgalavadins
in the Kathavatthu-ppakarana-atthakatha, p. 8, and
by Vasumitra and Bhavya. In Hiuen-Thsang’s time

only one of them, the Sammitiyas, seem to have had

a

=== [page n99] ===
f On jy

practical importance, cmp. Khys Davids J.R.A.S. 189]
p. 411 f. Although there is a great difference in the
method of expounding a scientific disquisition, between
the Kathavatthu and Vasubandhu, still the arguments
pro and contra are very often the same. We may con-
clude that Vasubandhu’s exposition represents a fairly
adequate picture of the battlefield on which the first
dissentions raged at the time of the primitive schism.
According to YaSomitra the tenet of the Vatsiputriyas
represents the following argument :

Proposttion : an Individual is something really
existing, but it is neither possible to maintain that it

is quite the same.
Reason : for an Individual is a name applied to an
existence conditioned by the existence of its own causes—

the elements.

Example + just as fire is a name applied to a fact,

which is conditioned by the existence of its own cause—
the fuel.

General proposition : an existence of which it is
impossible either to say that it is different, or that it
is quite the same as another one which is its cause,
and which receives a special name as a product of its

own causes—such an existence is a reality.

Conclusion : Hence the Individual is a reality.

=== [page n100] ===
( 92 )

In the Katha@vatthu the argument of the Vatsiputriyas
and Sammitiyas in favour of the existence of Soul is
substantially the same, but the form in which it is
expounded, in accordance with the old system of
dialectics, is quite different. It begins thus (Kathavatthu
p. 1, cmp. atthakatha, p. 8) :

Sthavira. Do we have any real knowledge of a Soul
as a reality ? (saccikattho—bhuttattho, paramattho=

anussavadivasena agahetabbo).

Vatsi putriya. Yes |

Sthavira. Hence is it cognised in the (same) manner
(like all other) realities cognised by right knowledge ?

V atsjputriya. No }

In giving the first affirmative answer the Vatsi-
putriya has in mind that there is, in his opinion,
an intermediate category of being which is neither
transient, nor eternal, neither caused nor uncaused.
Soul belongs to this category, hence it is a kind of
Pealigy: In denying the second question, he means that
Soul is not included either in the skandhas, or in the
Gyatanas and dhatus.

8. It is clear from this passage that dharmas are
ultimate or absolute realities, taking the term ‘‘absolute”’
‘n the second meaning as settied by J. S. MILL., Exami-
nation of Sir W. Hamilton’s philosophy, 6 ed. p. 50.

=== [page n101] ===
(YS 9)

9. What has no cause has no practical efficiency, it
is practically non-existent. The Vaibhasikas admit of
3 kinds of uncaused or eternal (asamskrta) existence,
but for Vasubandhu they are conditioned existences
(prajnaptisat). Yasomitra refers to the celebrated stanza

of Dharmakirti about non-efficiency: of eternal sub-

stance : It can be rendered thus :
The sun and rain what can they do
Regarding Space eternal ?
Efficient towards our skin they are :
If Soul is similar to skin
It must be non-eternal,
If it be similar to space
It shall be inefficient.
Cf. Sarvad., chapter II.
10. This very important definition is not explained
by Yagom.: da-ltar-gyi nafi-gi zin-pai pun-po-rnams |

rgyur-byas-nas gan-zag-tu hdogs-so = grhita-pratyut-

panna-abhyantara-skandhan updadaya pudgalaprajna-
ptih. There is a division of the elements into inward
and ontward, cf Koga I. 40. The inward includes
ayatanas No.No. 1—6. The skandhas include elements
past and future. Hence the pudgala would comprise
only the elements of a personal life at a given moment.

11. In order to understand this, some idea must be

given of the Buddhist theory of matter. Matter is atomic.

=== [page n102] ===
Gat), |)

There are simple atoms (dravyaparam4nu) and combined
atoms (samghataparamanu). The first do not appear
separately. The combined ones include 4 atoms of
“universal elements”? (mahabhita) conventionally
termed earth, water, fire and air. But it is expressly
stated that these are only conventional names, they
denote respectively a hard stuff, a coagulating stuff,
heat and motion (or more properly levity, for there is
no moving substance, but only momentary apparitions).
It is expressly stated that these ‘universal elements of
matter’? are manifested in their actions or functions.
They are consequently more energies than substances,
This is seen in the circumstance that the fourth element
is motion, the third heat, the hard stuff in water f. i. is
manifested by its supporting a ship, the coagulating
stuff in a flame gives it its shape and prevents its Parts
from scattering asunder. They are called ‘“universa]>?
because “‘present everywhere, in every piece of matter,
always in the same proportion, but in some combina-
tions one or other energy may get greater intensity and
we accordingly get hard and liquid stuffs, warm and
moving bodies. Moreover, there are in every combined
atom at least four secondary atoms, what may be termed
atoms of quality (bhautika): of colour, of smell, of taste
and of touch, one of each. Consequently a combined
atom consists at least of eight simple atoms, When

=== [page n103] ===
C2995)

matter resounds an atom of sound becomes present in
every combined atom, it then consists of nine parts.
The number increases in organic matter, the organs of
sense being also a special atomic matter. Each secondary
atom always has as its support a combination of four
universal ones. According to other authorities the
number of primary atoms supporting each atom of
quality must be eight, two of each element. So it is that
in reality a combined atom has much more parts, but
it is usually spoken of as consisting of eight kinds of
matter at least. And this only in the spheres of defiled
matter (kamadhatu). In the higher regions of pure
matter (rupadhatu) smells and tastes are absent and
the combined atom changes accordingly. It is seen from
the preceding that there are no indivisible atoms in
nature as conceived by the Buddhists. Contrary to the
Vaisesika system they do not admit eternal atoms. Like
all the other realities (dharmas) atoms are momentary
existences, having no duration, momentary flashings
into the phenomenal world from an unknown mysteri-
ous real world. The problem of infinite divisibility is
solved by pointing to the character of an element
(dharma). These elements are supposed to be very
subtle, mysterious, rather forces than substances. Hence
the very usual confounding of the forces (samskdras
properly speaking) with the substances influenced by

=== [page n104] ===
(9)

them (samskrtadharmas). According to the Vaibhasikas
we have in the phenomenal world only manifestations
of these ultimate realities, the dharmas, but we do not
meet them themselves. About atoms cf. Koga II, 1],
about dharmas cf. Kosa V. 25, and O. ROSENBERG,
Ilpoorembi, ch. VII and XI.

12. Litt. (95. b. 2) : and if one must not say that
it is different from the skandhas, there would be five
kinds of cognizable (Ses-bya for zhes-bya) : the past the
future, the present, the asamskyta and the unspeakable.
‘This cannot be said. (brjod-par-bya-ba-ma-yin-pao-hzhes
brjod-par-mi-bya-bar-hgyur=avaktavyam na vaktavy-
am prapnoti). It must be spoken of as neither the fifth
with respect to the past etc., nor as the not-fifth.

13. We translate rlpa, when representing skandha
No. 1 ‘‘physical elements’? or ‘‘matter??, since it is
then opposed to citta and ctttaviprayuktasamskara. But
when it represents dyatana No. 7 it may conveniently
be translated by ‘‘colour and shape’, according to the
definition of this dyatana: ripant dvidha, samsthana-
varnabhedat, cf. Kosa I, 10 ond I, 24.

14. chos-rmans = dharmah 1. €¢. dyatana No. 12, the
greater part of it consists of mental phenomena.

Not to be confounded with dharmas as a general
term, it then includes all elements, matter as well as

mind. Dharma@h includes skandhas 2,3 and 4. Thus’ it

=== [page n105] ===
(Ot)

ist that samskaraskandha may conveniently be trans-
lated by volitions, for cetana is the chief among the
remaining samskaras, and Buddha himself has used it
instead of the whole skandha, cf. Koga I, 15.

15. hgal-bar instead of thal-bar (97. a. 1).

16. myon-ba-yin-gyi for yin yul-gyi (97. a. 6).

17. tib. 98. b. 2: brtags-pa-la (? gdags-pa-la) thun-
bar-zad-de. Yas. prajnaptim anupapattitah (anupatanti)
iti yatraiva prajnaptih krta atmeti vyavaharartham
tatraivabhinivista ity arthah.

18. litt. 98. b. 3 “there neither I nor mine exists,
but suffering being born is only born (skye-ba-na-skye-
bar zad-do). H. Th. has: ‘‘there is nothing but the
dharmas of pain, which are (to be born, or are being
born just now, or have already been born and so on”.
‘Suffering’? (duhkha) is in this $4stra a technical term
denoting the upadanaskandhas, which is the same as the
samskrtadharmas.

19. 98. b. 3. Hgra-bcom-pa drug-gis kyan (?) pro-
bably for dgra-bcom-ma brag-gis kyan. H. Th. has “the
bhiksuni-arhat Sila and the comm. explains ‘sila’ as
meaning “‘a little hill’. The pali text has Vajira comp.
Oldenberg, Buddha, 3 ed., p. 298.

20. 98 b. 3 bdud-las brtsams-nas,

21. These verses are found in Samyukt. Ag. 16-10
and also in the Pali Samy. Nik. I, 135, comp. Oldenberg,

7

=== [page n106] ===
Ger 5)

Buddha, 3 ed., p. 298. The tib. litt. means: a sentient
being. O Mara, what do you think (it is) ? You have a
(false) doctrine. This samskaraskandha (for samskrta-
dharm4h) is void, In it there is no sentient being. Just
as an aggregate of parts is given the name of a car, thus
having the skandhas as a basis, we give them the name

of a quite false sentient being’.

92. lun phran thsegs=ksudrakagama.

23. Or: I will explain the dharma which destroys
all bonds...

94. The Chinese has: ‘‘already we see that the
“inward” (i.e. that which is contained in the 5 skandhas)
is void, (how much more) can we see that equally void
is any ‘“‘outward” (which is not even enumerated among
the dharmas). According to Koga I, 39 the inward ele-

“ments are consciousness and the 5 senses, the remaining

ones, including all mental phenomena except conscious-
ness, are outward, i. e. outward with respect to cons-
ciousness, the central dharma.

25. nes-dmigs —adinava.

26, srog-tu Ita-bar-hgyur, but H. Th. has instead
‘‘leads to various erroneous paths’.

27. rnam-par grol-bar mi hgyur=na vimucyate,
but Yas. (yavan) nadhimucyate.

28. In all this passage the Vats. appear in the third

person : de-dag-gis...., .zhes zer-ro zhes drag-go.

SE A —E——

=== [page n107] ===
(4999)

29. dharmata.

30. manovijnana.

31. Cf. above § 3,

32. Litt.: if the pudgala had been viewed as

possessing rupa, then, in consequence of the deduction
of satkayadrsti, this would be the occasion for ‘“‘not

being read in the sutras’.

33. Litt. Bhasya. P. Bst. vol.64 p. 100. a. 5. : And
also because it would follow that ‘‘assuming the aggre-
gates of elements’? would not be comprised in the

aggregates.
Vas. comment. P. Bst. vol. 66, p. 389. b. 3-——6 : “*The

carrier’’——this is an example. Therefore after haying
said “it is inadmissible that the burden should be the
same as the carrier’’, he says: ‘“‘it would also follow
that ‘“‘assuming the aggregates’’, (sskr. bharadanasya
“taking up of the burden’, tib. phun-po len-pa=
skandhadanasya ‘‘assuming the groups, the Chinese has
trsna ‘‘craving”? (the definition of which (process) has
been given, would neither be comprised in the aggrega-
tes’, i.e. it would follow that it could not be com-
prised in the aggregates’? Just as the carrier (is not).
But this we deny. Therefore the carrier is not some-
thing differing from the aggregates, just as (the fact) of
assuming them is not,

=== [page n108] ===
(TOO),

34 Litt. Bhasya.. f. 100. a. 5—7 : The carrier has
been taught by the Sublime Lord for the express purpose
that just so much may be known: beginning with ‘‘this
venerable man having such a name’’ etc. ending with
‘‘after so long a life he will die at such an age’’,— that
he may not be conceived in a different manner, as
eternal, or as a personality. The former aggregates are
merely exercising a pressure upon the next ones, hence

they are called the burden and the carrier of the burden.

Yas. comment. p. 389. b. G6B—390. a. 3: ‘The carrier
(has been taught) by the Sublime Lord in order that (so
much may be known)” etc., after having stated all this
at length, it is stated that ‘‘he must not be conceived
as different’?. If the Individual had been something
really existing, then the Sitra would have declared
simply this : ‘‘who is the carrier ? We must answer it
is the Individual??. But the analysis (of this notion)
beginning with the words ‘‘this venerable man named
so and so”? and ending with ‘‘after so long a life he will
die at such an age”? would not have been given. And
besides the gist of declaring these details is to make it
known that the Individual is a conventional entity. It
means: he, namely (the Individual), must be conceived
as a conventional existence, the Individual must not be
conceived as something different, as a real entity, as

eternal, or aS something it is impossible to give a defi-

=== [page n109] ===
(S007)

nition of, ‘“The former aggregates etc.*? means : among
the (aggregates) there are some which do oppress and
are the cause of suffering, they are styled ‘“‘burden’?, the
next following ones, those who are oppressed, are styled

‘*the carrier of the burden’?.

The same passageas translated by Hiuen Thsang:

V dtst putriya. (la—4). If there are only the 5 groups
of elements, which conventionally might be called ‘‘I»,
then for what reason has the Lord said such (sentences
as follow) : ‘‘I shall now speak to you about the burden,
about the taking up and the laying down of the burden,
and about the carrier of the burden.

Vasubandhu. Why should Buddha here not have
said so ?

V Gtst putriya. Because one cannot call the burden the
carrier of the burden (i, e. the carrier cannot be con-
tained in the 5 groups). And why ? Because that has
never been seen before.

Vasubandhu. In that case you likewise should not
speak about some indefinable (fifth category of ele-
ments), because that too has never been seen before.
Likewise (you could object) that, just as the carrier, the
taking up of the burden cannot be contained in the
groups, since it never has been seen, (that a burden is
taking up itself). But in the Sutra by “taking up” the
tysn@ is meant, therefore it is contained in the groups.

=== [page n110] ===
( 102 )

The same applies to the carrier, i. e. to the groups (of
the present moment) the term pudgala (‘‘that which
takes different gati’s’?) is conventionally applied. But
Buddha was fearing that somebody might say : this
pudgala is some indefinable, everlasting, true reality.]
Therefore in the (same) Siitra Buddha after these words
gives himself an explanation, saying : ‘‘only following
the way of common speech one says that this venerable
man has such and such a name etc., as cited before in
the phrase of the ‘<Sitra about the man”? (Samyuktag.
13. 4). (He is saying so) to make it clear that this
pudgala can be said to be non-eternal, not having any
essence of true reality i. e. the five groups are themselves
troubling (P. destroying) each other and are therefore
called burden. The previous moments which are drawing
(Comm. the previous cause bears the result) the poste-
rior ones are therefore called ‘‘carrier’’. Therefore there

is no real pudgala.”

In H.’s conception the carrier of the parable repre-
sents the previous moments, and the burden the poste-
rior ones. But Yas, on the contrary, explains the former
ones as the burden, and the following ones as the carrier
of the burden.

35 sems-can skye-ba-pa-==upapadukah sattvah. Yas.
explains : upapadukatvad ity upapadena sadhukaritvad

ity arthah, this is translated into tib. thus : sems-can

=== [page n111] ===
(e105)

skye-ba-la (for skye-ba-pa) zhes-bya-ba ni skyes-bu-la
mdzes-par-byed-pai-phyir-ro. (P. Bst. v. 66, f. 390. a. 4).
In this way are born: gods, the inhabitants of hell and
all men in the intermediate state between death and a
new birth, i. e. without a seed, not from previous ele-

ments, as the Vats. believe.

The whole theory of apparitional or miraculous self-

births is expounded and discussed in the III section.

36 Litt. f. 100. a. 8 : just as by Buddha they have
been analyzed, so they exist, so (we) say. Therefore this
is a wrong view, (the view of) thus censuring (upavada =
skur-ba hdebs-pa) : ‘‘whatever being is spontaneously
born into another world, is not a being spontaneously
born in the stream of skandhas??, because the skandhas

are spontaneously born.

H. Th.: just as Buddha has explained them, so we
too explain them, namely if the five skandhas (of the
intermediate state) proceed to a new life, which begins
neither in the womb, nor in an egg, nor in warm
moisture, then the result is called trasfigurated being.
To deny such beings, saying that there are none, is one
of the false views, since the skandhas of the intermediate

state must certainly exist.

37 100. b. 1 has gan-la skur-pa hdi for gan-zag-la
skur-pa bdi.

=== [page n112] ===
( 104 )

Yag.: esd pudgalapavadika mithyddrstih. gan-la
skur-pa...... could mean: ‘‘what you condemn is the
wrong theory, the view namely that a spontaneous birth
consists of elements’’.

38 Litt.: ‘neither throwing away by the intuition
of truth will do, nor the practice of ecstasy will do,
because the pudgala is notincluded in the truths.”
The doctrine of the 4 truths (aryasatyani ‘‘the truths
of the Saint’’) is expounded at the beginning of Section
VI. In I, 39 it is stated that some elements (dhatu)
undergo extinction through rationalistic insight, others
through the practice of ecstasy, and others (the eternal
ones and prajna amala) do not undergo extinction
altogether. The principal element to be extinguished
by rationalistic insight is the error of ‘wrong per-
sonalism?? (satkayadrsti) and the 88 anusgayas, which
are conditioned by it. But there is no such error
as the “denial of a pudgala’’ included in the list
of elements, or in the ‘‘truths of the Saint». These
truths represent the elements of existence viewed from
the standpoint of their gradual extinction by the Saint
during his progress towards final Salvation. If the denial
of a pudgala had been a wrong view, it would
have found its place among the elements, and in the
first two truths (duhkha, samudaya), hence it would
have been disposed of by the Saint in one of the pres-

=== [page n113] ===
( #105) 7)

cribed ways. But we find the opposite view included in
the list of dharmas under drsti. Yas. mentions that the
second way, the practice of ecstasy, is not applicable
for the same reason, i. e. because the denial of a pudgala
is not included in the first two truths, ‘‘or because a
wrong view is never cleared up through the practice of
ecstasy”. H. Th. has included these last words in his
translation.

39 Litt.: “if in the world also one pudgala is born,
he is born’, because it is thus declared, it is not the
skandhas’?.

H. Th.: ‘“‘there is some one pudgala born into

existence, this cannot be identical with the skandhas.”’

40 Litt. “again you must say that the pudgala is
samskrta, because it is combined with birth’’, samskrta
is here the counterpart of asamskrta, i. e. eternal exist-
ences. Being combined with birth (utpattimattvam) is
a token of being not permanent, being momentary,
being involved in the process of phenomenal life.

41 linga, tib has brtags for rtags.

42 don-dam-pa ston-pa-nid kyi mdo=paramartha-
gliny atvasUtra.

4.3 Sc. in the embryonic state, mthsams-sbyor-bar
byed-pa = patisamdadhati.

44. chos-su brdar-brtags-pa ma-gtogts-pa gan-zhig...

Yas.: dharmasamketad iti pratityasamutpada-laksa-

=== [page n114] ===
Caalo6 >)

nat tenaha yad uta asmin satiti. The import of the tib.
would accordingly be, that the only personality existing
is the mutual interdependence of all the elements of
existence. H. Th. has: there is no agent, it is a con-
ventional designation.

45 bdo-las-skyes kyi mdo=PhAalgunasitra.

Yas. gives the reference at length : And if you ask
what is the acting person like ? I answer: he who throws
away, who abandons the skandhas of the next life,
somebody really existing. O Phalguna! I dont say ‘the
takes them’’, these words would afford thee pleasure, is
it not so, Phalguna ? Yes, master ! Therefore there is

no one who assumes the elements, or throws them off??.

46 H. Ths : (20—4a) “Again if you say that you
are supposing the new aggregates which appear to be
something ‘‘one’’ (i. e. simple) and which you Say are
identical with the Ego, being in number not more than
one, then positively you must suppose that the Ego is
different from the aggregates and permanent. (But you
the VAtsiputriyas are also saying that the Ego is not
different, and not permanent).

47 smra-ba hdi phyogs la-la yod-pa yin-no~eka-
desgiya eso vadah, H. Ths. ‘‘this is the mistake of that
school’??. What school ? Of the treatises of those who
suppose that the produced rupas coincide with the

primary constituents’’.

——— ee

=== [page n115] ===
(aiOzs)

48 Kun-tu-rgyu smra-byed-kyis “by the speaking
ascetic?’ (?)

49 Yas. supposes that the view of the grammarians
ss here alluded to: bhavasya bhavitrapeksatvad iti
vaiyakaranah, But Hiuen Thsang thinks that this con-
troversy about an agent is directed against a Samkhya
philosopher. The aim of Vasubandhu is to establish that
there are cognitions, but no real cogniser. This may be
directed against the Samkhya system where atman is
passive, not an agent. We retain the designation of
VAtsiputriya as adversary, because, us usual, he may
start questions not only in accordance with his own
‘views (svamatena), but also from the standpoint of an

other system (paramatam 4sSritya).

50 Sariipyam ‘coordination’? is here meant to
explain the connexion between consciousness and its
object. It is clear that there is no “orasping’? or
apprehending”? of the object by knowledge according
‘to Vasubandhu. The objective element is appearing
simultaneously with the flashing of consciousness, both
are independent, but there is a mutual correspondence
between them. This reminds us partly of the Samkhya
view according to which knowledge is not influenced
by its object, but merely reflects it. We meet this
theory of sariipya in a somewhat modified condition

in later ‘idealistic Buddhist systems, comp. Nydaya-

=== [page n116] ===
(GOs >)
bindu and tika, I,20,21 and II,4 in my edition. Bibl,
Buddh. VII.

51 We find, this definition in the Bhasya of Pra-
Sastapada : apraptayoh praptih samyogah. The defini-
tion of the Vais. Sutra VII, 2, 9 is different.

52 Cf. Panini I, 4. 54.

93 Litt. 108. a. 8: a continuity is citta (H. Th.

rupa and citta) following on an action and being pro-
duced later on; its change is its appearing always in
another manner; a change which is capable at the end
of bringing forth the result is @ spectal change, because it
is especially elevated above other changes, as f. i. con-
sciousness at death, which is combined with assuming

new existence.

54 Litt. 108. b. 1: Although there is precedence
of various actions the force created by those which are
weighty, or are near, or inveterate manifests itself,
others not. Accordingly it is said: ‘‘of the existing,
previously accomplished actions weighty, near, accusto-

med to, each first, does ripen’.

55 This concluding section has been rendered freely,
its closer translation would scarcely convey any definite
meaning without a previous knowledge of the very
complicated theory of different causes expounded in the
second kosasthana. Cf. O. PoZehoepr, Apoorembi, ch. XV

=== [page n117] ===
( 109 )

and L. de la Vallee Poussin, The way to Nirvana p. 88

etc. We subjoin a literal translation :

(108. o. 3). Here the force to produce a vipakaphala
which is produced by a vipakahetu disappears after
having produced the vipaka. And the force which pro-
duces nisyandaphala which is produced by a sabhaga-
hetu disappears after an antidote for klista-(dharmas)
has been produced. The continuity of consciousness of
the aklistas (—kuSala and anivrtavyakrta) is stopped
at the time of final Nirvana. (108. b. 5). But why does
another vipaka not arise from the vipaka, as from a
fruit’s seed-grain (another seed-grain) ? First of all every
thing is not like the example. And even in this case the
seed does not arise from the fruit directly. But how ?
It arises from a special change which is produced by
special decomposition. The form which is produced from
+t which is the achiever of the sprout, this is the seed of
it, not another. The previous course is called seed by
a future name or through similarity. (108. b. 7). Simi-
larly also in this case, if from this vipaka a sasravasu-
bha or agubha change of consciousness is produced by
such pratyaya as hearing etc. the good or not good law,
then if another vipaka is produced from this vipaka, it
is produced, in another way it is not, this is similar.
(108. b. 8). Otherwise this may be conceived so. Just
as from a matulinga-flower, after it having been chan-

=== [page n118] ===
( a0 )

ged in colour by the red lack juice, a red kesara-fruit is
produced, from a specially changed continuity in the
fruit, but from it no other one is produced, thus from
a vipaka produced by action, further no other vipaka
is produced. (109. a.2). This much I have expounded
as I understand it. The causes being the. influence
(bsgos-pa =bhiavan4) of different actions through (their)
different forces, having reached this state produce this
result—this is the domain of Buddhas alone, Again
-it has been said : ‘“‘action, the influence (bhavana) of
it, the manifestation of it (vrttilabha), the result of
it no one else than Buddha necessarily thoroughly
knows?’’. . )
56 The concluding verses are rendered according to

the interpretation of Yasomitra. Literally :

1. Having perceived this dharmata (—=nairatmyam,
buddhanugasani va), which is pure through the well-
arranged path of argument of the doctrine of Buddhas,
having rejected the doctrines of blind heretics which
consist in various machinations of wrong dogmatism,
those who are not blind proceed (from samsara to
‘ nirvana). Yas.: the aryasravakah are not blind, since
they have the prajnacaksuh, they have the knowledge of
Soullessness, they are contemplating nirvana with calm-
ness because they are no more afraid of annihilation

(atmoccheda).

=== [page n119] ===
(eelitien)

2. This Soullesness the only path to the city of
Nirvana is illuminated through the lustre of the words
of sunlike Tathagatas, it is trodden by thousands of
Saints, although open it is not perceived by the short-
sighted.

3. Ihave expounded this little bit for the very learned,
like a spot of poison of a wound it will diffuse by its
own force. (YaS.: there is an analogy between poison
and learned men, since both proceed by their own
capacity).

Hiuen Thsang gives the following translation of
these verses :

Thus well we have explained the Path

Which is the cause of pure (Nirvana).

Substantial Elements of Calm, (they are the
Path),
They are the highest Truth, as taught by
Buddhas.
We must destroy the dogma of heretics, dark
and blind,
(We must reject) the fruit of their wrong view, —
in search
Of Wisdom’s eye, (which sees that there is
no ‘‘I’’).
This one broad Path which to Nirvana’s palace

leads,

=== [page n120] ===
he FEDS.)

Is trodden by Saints in thousands. Substantial
Elements—
(Among them there is) no ‘I’, (they are the
Path).
(Innumerable) rays of sunlike Buddhas words
Illuminate (this Path), but they, heretics,
Are opening their eyes and—cannot see.
Now of this (Doctrine deep) rectangular,
I made a short exposition, which intends
To open in wise men a (littiec) gate, (a wound),
Through which might enter wisdom poison-like.
O might you all according to your strength’s
capacity
Become enlightened in all that may be known,
So that you might perform exalted deeds
(On all three paths that lead to Peace Eternal.)

of SIP 1DO~

=== [page n121] ===
Index of Sanskrit & Pali Words :

A

Abhayantara Skandhan 93

Abhidharma Koé§a 1], 8
Adinaya 97, 98
Agahetabbo 92

Agama 90
Aklistas 109

Alayavijnana : 6
Amitabha 6
Anivrtavyakrta 109
Anupatanti 97
Anupapattitah 97
Anyah 89

Anugaya |
Anyssavadivasena 92
Arya Pudgala 2
Arya Satyani 104
Asamskrta 93,96,105
Asti 89

Agubha 109
Atmadrstau 89
Atman 90
Atmavadin 90
Atmavadinah 90

Atmeti 97
Atmoccheda 110
Atta 90
Avaktavyam 96
Ayatana 92, 93, 96

B
Bharadanasya 99

Bhitattho 92
Bhautika 94
Bhasya 88
Bhavana 110
BuddhanuSsasanani 110
Buddhi 3
C
Ca 89
Calti 89
Cetana 97
Citta 96, 108
Cittamanas Vijnana 89
Citta Rup Yukta Samskara
10
Citta Viprayukta Samskara
D 10,94,96
Dharma 1, 92

=== [page n122] ===
Dharmah 9, 97, 98
Dharmata 99
Dhatu 10, 89
Dravyaparamanu 94
Drsti 105

E
Ekadharma 89
Ekanta Darsgana 3
Ekarthi’syety 89
Ekartham 89
Ekadesiya 106
Eso vadah 106

Eva 89

G
Grahanam 89
Grihit 93

H
Hrdayad 389
Hi 89

I
Ity Arthah 97

J
Jagati 89

Janma Pabandho 89
Jiva 90
Jnanam 89

(

114)

K
Karika 88
Karma 1
Kathavatthu 90
Klista Dharma 102
Koga 88
Kosasthana 108
Ksudrakagama 98
KuSala 109

M
Mahabhtta 94
Maharsi 90
Manasi 89
Mano 89
Manovijnana $9
Manivijnanena 89
Manuja 90
Margah 2, 89
Matulinga 109
Mithya Drstih 104

N
Nadhimucyate 98
Nahamkdiras 89
Nairatmyam 110
Nairaymyavadi 89
Namarupa 10

=== [page n123] ===
(eS am)

Nantarena 89
Nanyas 89

Nasti 89
Navimucyate 98
Navartavyam 96

Nihsvabhava 6
Nirodha 2
Nirvana 109, 110
Nisyandaphala 109
Nitya Parinami 3

P
Paramartha 8
Paramarthasunyatvasuta

105

Paramatamasritya 107
Paramattho 22
Patisamdadhati 105
Phalguna 43, 107
Phalguna Sutra 106
Prajna Amala 2, 104
Prajnaptih Krta 97
Prajfia Caksuh 110
Pranidhana 90
Prapnoti 96
PraSastapada 108

Pratitya Samutpada
Laksanat 105

Pratyaya 109
Pratyutpannah 93

Prayena 7

Pudgala 79,90,93,102,
104,105

Pudgala 93

Pudgalapvadika 104
Pudgalapvadinah 90
Pudgalaprajnaptih 93
Pudgallo 90
Purusa 90

R

Rupa 99, 108
Rupas 106

Rupa Jana 110
Rupa Dhatu 95
Rupani Dvidha 96
S
Sahamkari 87
Sahamkar 89
Samadhi 2
Saman 87
Samudaya 104, 2
Sambandhah |
Sabhagahetu

Samchataparamanu 94
SaMskaras 97

=== [page n124] ===
(Ge ltl.O eh)

Samskara Skandha 97 Tasmad 89

Samsara 110 Trsna 99,101
Samskara Dravya 10 U
Samantaraniruddham 89 Upadanskandhas 97
Samskrta 105 Upadaya 93
Samskara 110 Upapadena 102
Samskrtadharmah 96,97,98 Upapadukahsattvah 102
Samsthanavarnabhedat 96 Upapadukatvad 102
Santanantarasiddhti 87 Upasamavidhes 89
Sahamkare 89 Upavada 103, 109
Samantarranirudham 89 Utpattimativam 105
samkhya 3 V
Skandha 9,97,103,105 Vastumatra 89
Skandhadanasya 99 Vijnana 2,89
Skandhasamtanad 81 Vijnanam 89
Sarupyam 107 Vijnayate 89
Satkayadrsti 4,99, 104 Vikalpa 90
Samayukta 98 Vaktavyam 96
Sastapada 3,108 Vimucyate 98
Sastra 99 Vipaka 109
Sasti 89 Vipakaphala 109
Sarvam Anityam 3 Vipakahetu 109
Sarvam Nityam 3 Vettilabha 110
Sarvastivadins 5,5 Vivartad 6
Sasravasubha 109 Vyakhya 88
Stotrakara 89 Vyavaharartham 97
Sutra 100,101 Y
Svamatena Yat 89

T Yati 89
Tad 89 Yasom 90
Tadeva 89 Yoga 90

Tanmatad 89

=== [page n125] ===
Index of Proper Names

A
Abhidharmist 53

Abhidharmakosa 1,6,7

Ananda 47,48,51
Aryasammatiyas 5,90
ASavghosh 6
Atthakatha 92

B
Badarayana 32
Bimbisara 31
Bhavya 90

Cc
Caitra 59
Caroline (Mrs.) 4

D
Devadatta 58
Dharamkirti 6,86,93

E
E. Senart 8

G
Gyanosophist 50

H
H. Bergson 9

H. Jacobi. 6
H. Th. 99,108
Hiuen Thsang6,8,88,90,104

I
Ipoorembi 96

J
J. S. Mill 92

K
Kasmere 7
Kathavatthu (90,92,107,111
Kumarlabha 48

M
Maitreya 52
Mara 31
Melanges Hartez 6
Milinda 46

N
Nagarjuna 6
Nagasena 46
Nyayabindu 87

O
Oldenberg 97,106
O. Rosenberg 7,8,96

=== [page n126] ===
(niche)

P
Phalguna 106
Phalguna Sitra 106

R
Rahula 68,11
Rhys Davids 4,6,9 1

S
Samgabhadra 88
Samkhya 3,44,65,66,67
Sakya 33
Sammatiyas 90
Sarvastivadins 5,53
Sila 31
Sunetra 55

Vv
Vaisesika 7,68,69,70,7 =,
72,73,74,75,76,77,78,79,
80,381,328
Vasubandhu 1,7,9,11,,33
34,35,36,37,38,39,40,41,

42,43,45,48,49,51,52,64,

58,59,60,63,

Vasubandhu 64,65,66,67,
69, 7/07 4i8
72,73,74,75,
76,77,78,79,
80,8 1,83,93,

101

Vasumitra

Vatsagotra 47,48

Vatsiputriyas 13,14,15,17,

18519520; 29322°23.294,2 72

28333;34535.30.3,7.38,39)

40,41,42,43,45,48,58,59,
60,63,64,90,91,92,131,196

Vatsa 49,51,54

V. Hamilton 92

Y

Yasomitra 93

Yasomitras 6,8,88,93

Yogacaryas 10

Yajnadatta 58

=== [page n127] ===
Index of Tibetan Words

Bagos-Pa 110
Bar-zad-de 97

Bdo-Las-Skyes Kyi-Mdo 106

Brtaga-Pa-La 97
Brtags 105
Brjod-par-mi-bya-bar-
hgyur 96
Brjod-par-bya-ba-ma-yin-
Pao-hzhes 96
Bstan-hgyur 6
Byed-pa 105
Chos-su bddar-brtags-pa
105
Degag-gis 98
Don-dam-pa 105
Drug-gis-kyan 97
Gah-la-skur-pa 104
Gan-zag-la 103
Gdags-Pa-La 97
Grol-Bar 98
Hdi-Phyoga-La-La Yod-
Pa Yin-Ho 16
Hdogs-So 93

Hgal-bar 97
Hgra-bcom-pa 97
Ita-bar-ghyur 98
Kho-nalas 88
Kun-tu-rgyu 107
Kvi-mdo 105
Len-pa 99
Lun-phran-thges 98
Ma-gtogts.pa.gan-zhig 106
Mi ghugyur 98
Mthsams-sbyor-bor-
bued-pa 105
Myon-ba-yin-gyi 97
Nan-gi 93
Nes-dmgs 98
Phun-po 99
Puh-po 88
Pun-po-rnams 93
Rgyud 88
Rgyur-byas-nas 93
Rnam-par 98
Rtags 105
Sems-can-skye-ba-pa 102

=== [page n128] ===
(

Skur-ba 103
Skur-pa-dhi 103
Skye-ba-ia 103
Skyes-bu-la-gan-pa 103
Skye-ba-na 97
Skye-bar-zao-De 103
Smra-byed-kyia 107
Strog-Tu 98

20)

Ston-pa-nid 105
Thal bar 97
Yin-yul 97
Zhes-bya-ba-Ni 103
Zhes drag-go 98
Zhes-zer-ro 98
Zin-pai 93

=== [page n129] ===
Technical Words

Dharma: 1. Elements p. 1 It also means Doctrine,
Quality, The elements are 64 in number p.9

Karma © Anufsaya : Investigation into the general cause
which brings the world into move-
ment and the special causes that are
feeding the process of life. p. 1

Duhkha & Samudaya : The Statics & Dynamics of ordi-

, nary world process 2

Nirodha & Ma@rga: Purification of life or precisely
purification of its movements. 2

Arya Pudgala : Buddhist Saint 2
Praja Amala : Immaculate wisdom 2
Samadhi : Transic meditation 2
Vijfiana : consiousness 2

Pratitya Samutpada : ‘mutually inter-dependent origina-
tion’ or life considered as a play of
interdependent elementary forces.
Vasubandhu considers the negative
part of the whole system viz. the
negation of Soul. 2

Sastra : Indian science 3
Buddhi : unconscious intellect 3

Nityaparinamt : It was converted by Buddha into
separate elements which appear into
life-like momentary ftlashings without
being backed by any eternal substance.3

=== [page n130] ===
( 122 )

Sarvam Nityam : Eternal existence 3
Sarvam Anityam : Universal impermanance 3
Satkayadrsit : Wrong Personalism or Soullessness 4
Eternal Repose 4
Sarvastua@dins : Their idea of the world is an assembly
of co-operating elements. 5
Nihsvabhave : Denial of real substantial existence 6
Vivarta : developed voidness 6
Skandha : Elements I classified into five groups: m |
physical elements 2. feelings 3. Ideas 4. voli-
tions 5. general consciousness.
II classified into 12 bases of cognition
i. e. all things cognisable (Ayatnas) cont.
III Classifiotion into 18 component parts of
existence (Dhatu) is the same as the foregoing
one with addition of six (6) kinds of consci-
ousness. 1, Visual 2. Auditory 3. Olfactory
consciousness of tasre 5. tactie & 6. In-
tellectual 9-10
Nihilism : The wrong doctrine of extenction, the doct-
rine of Nihilism. p. 47,53
Vital Energy
Final Rescue 82
Santantrastddht : Soipsism p. 87
Wrong Personalism 29,36,43,55

~.
y

‘wall

=== [page n131] ===
EL

ERRATA

Page 9 last line write No. 1—5 and No. 7-11 in
place of No-No. 1-5 and 7-1]

Write Is for In, In line 3 from bottom p. 15
With for whith, last line p. 32

Opinion for Opinions, last line p. 54

Effort for Effot, line 8 from top p. 50

The for toe, line 11 from top p. 50

Cognised for Cognized, line 9 from top p. 21
Those for thrse line 14 from top. p. 63
APPEARS for appear last line p. 63

Naught for Nought line 11 from bottom p 56

=== [page n132] ===


=== [page n133] ===


=== [page n134] ===


=== [page n135] ===
SOME CONSPICUOUS PUBLICATIONS

( Appearing shortly )

. The Birth of Indian Religious
Tradition: or Studies in the
Indian Concept of Dukha
(suffering) -By Prof. Paul Younger, Canada.

- The Philosophy of Gaudapada
Mandukyakarika: —By C. Conio, Italy.

. Studies in Indian Religious

Philosophy: —By Dr. R. S. Misra

Teilhard De Chardin & Shri
Auribindo (An assessment of
Fundamentals) —By K. D. Sethna

5. Nature & Destiny of Man in
20th Century —By Dr Kumari Nilima Sharma

6. NAGARJUNA PHILOSOPHY:
—By Dr. V. K. Ramnana

7 Kashmir Saivism: —By Dr. L N Sharma

8. INDIAN IDEALISM: Episti-
mology & Ontology: -By Dr. P. §. Shastri

=== [page n136] ===
pabetatien\as ra Uae ert ae
— ~ erect. = A pe we ‘

.

oe --
ba -—* > se ~ “th,

Mi
ae Vu lt - *.! fi. By

; x . ne Py oe 1 he

. Bie eh ate tk cans “ ace xe os
rr y ‘< ; WERE ys Ey PPR s “

Pere eas aN

: wave 4 r fs

. 7 * .

et}
SeAdane -

nt vAv sak Gn 9s 48
SNE CRN AD Yh
8
edicts ON LAN 4
—* “=
vee)

a
ArAL AS , ‘he ‘ Pastas oe

*
Sone oy

a

Rt

s
Os 1 ’
A, A by yt
weet ye NN

yer ae ane
Ae es vette
se AN . :

nae

y s
t end ae maeveye .
; oe Oana e CY
; . ‘ , i Neh : Ai
: ’ 4 be ; i) L ( "s
SAN

SSL Soe
See ee
Sra cies Ak
‘ome. Nand Ld 9
- ar oe en

=>

oe Os a

AO

Sane

Ses
‘¢ ws - 5 " ~ -
OS aaieere sa goed

.

Pela stents ack
eo le eee oe
NOSE oe ee
— ~

a ey
State e
-

7 +e

ea heraas se oe
ree ate v *

+o veel ¥ + . +e .
ers i) buYS) re Vons
a ears ae
=
+. wer. 4
>

a

aes
-

SIAN KA ACE

—- —
—~ td
yr, ene
0 weeny
- =

view. -

eee

=== [page n137] ===
CONCEPTION OF BUDDIST NIRVANA
by Theod. Stcherbatsky

With Complete elaborate Analysis of the book and
exhaustive Introduction, edited by Thakur Jaidev Singh.

Formerly principal Y. D COLLEGE,
Lakhimpur, Kheri.

This classical work of Madhyamika Philosophy
by Professor Stcherbatsky is still unsurpassed in its
scholary depth and historical insight. Professor
Stcherbatsky presents a rare combination of subtle
and philosophical thinking and sound oriental
scholarship. In fact, he has paved the way for
further Philosophical study of Buddhism. The

present book, is perhaps, the best products from
his pen.

The book is written by eminent Scholar and
Philosopher of Russia, which was out of print for
several decades. The publishers have with great
pains brought out this new revised and enlarged
edition to which Sanskrit Text of Madhyamik Philo-
sophy has also been added to the extent given in
Roman characters in the original book. All the
Indexes of Sanskrit, Pali, Mongolian and Tibetan
words have been given at the end of the book
Moreover, the Technical words and subject dealt
with in the book have been also given to enhance the
utility of the treatise. All efforts have been taken
to make the book as useful to the Scholars and
general readers as possible.

Demy & Vo., Cloth Bound. Price Rs 30.00

BHARATIYA VIDYA PRAKASHAN
P, BOX 108, VARANASI-1 (INDIA )

